 GUIDE TO SAFETY
        AT
SPORTS GROUNDS




C $
      m




                        88
       v   . ...»   ___I-- --U—.   --
                                W M f>|i
                                           i /
Home O ffice/S cottish Office




     GUIDE TO SAFETY
            AT
    SPORTS GROUNDS




London: Her M ajesty's Stationery Office
© Crown copyright 1986
  First published 1973
  New Edition 1986
  Third Impression 1989

This booklet is a guide to measures for improving spectator
safety at existing sports grounds




ISBN 0 11 340840 4
CONTENTS
                                Chapter Paragraph
                                  no.      no.

INTRODUCTION                      1        1
 Scope and Status                          1
 Background                                2
 Historical Context                       3
 General Principles                       4
 Using the Guide                          11
 The Problems                             14
 Overcoming the Problems                  19

MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITY                  23


GENERAL FABRIC AND STRUCTURAL
 MATTERS                          3        30


INSPECTIONS AND TESTS             4        36

INGRESS                           5        44

EGRESS                            6        48
 Egress Time                               56
 Signposting                               57
 Exit Routes                               58
 Exit Doors                                62

STAIRWAYS AND RAMPS                        68
 Disposition                               69
 Construction                              70
 Access                                    79
 Discharge                                 85
 Fire Protection                           86
 Ramps                                     87
                                           Chapter Paragraph
                                             no.      no.

TERRACES AND VIEWING SLOPES                 8         89

  Terrace Steps                                       92
  Gangways                                            96
  Division of Spectator Accommodation                 101
  Crush Barriers                                      104
  Viewing Slopes                                      105
  Terrace to Touchline Distance                       108

CRUSH BARRIERS AND HANDRAILS                9         110

  Dimensions and Design                               110
  Spacing of                                     j    112
  Strength of                                         118

ROOFED STANDS WITH SEATED
 ACCOMMODATION                              10        120

  Balustrading                                        128
  Temporary Stands and Other
   Temporary Structures                               129


FIRE SAFETY                                 11       147
  M inim ising Fire Risk                             149
  Prevention or Retardation of
   Fire G row th/S pread                             156
  Fire W arning Systems                              162
  Emergency Lighting                                 166
  Fire-fighting Equipment                            170
  Emergency Procedures and Staff
   Training                                          176
  Means of Escape                                    178
  Fire Protection for Stairways/Passages             180
  Emergency Evacuation Time                          183
  Access for Emergency Vehicles                      189


COMMUNICATIONS                              12       192


                                2
                                          Chapter Paragraph
                                            no.      no.

STEWARDING                                  13       195

CROWD CONTROL                               14       202

 Policing                                            204
 Crowd M ovement                                     206
 Detention and Removal of Troublemakers              210
 Refreshments                                        212

PITCH PERIMETER FENCE/WALL                  15       214

ESTIMATION OF SAFE GROUND
 CAPACITY                                   16       212

 Terraces and Viewing Slopes                         221
 Exit Systems                                        229

RECOMMENDED FLOW RATES                      17       233

ANNEXES
 A. GLOSSARY OF TERMS
 B. STEWARDING
 C. TESTING OF CRUSH BARRIERS AND HANDRAILS




                               3
1. INTRODUCTION

Scope and statu s o f th e G uide
1.   This booklet provides guidance to ground management, local
authorities and technical specialists such as engineers on
measures for improving spectator safety at existing sports
grounds. It is a voluntary code and has no legal force.

B ackg rou nd to th e G uide
2.     Guidelines on measures for improving the safety of
spectators at sports grounds first became available on a more or
less comprehensive scale w hen the W heatley Report on Crowd
Safety at Sports Grounds was published in 1972. The recommen­
dations in the appendix to that Report w ere extended to include
fire precautions and means of escape from an emergency situation
such as a fire, and then form ed the basis of the Guide to Safety at
Sports Grounds (which became known as the "Green Guide"). The
application of those guidelines to football grounds over the few
years w h ich follow ed revealed a need for the advice to be
amended in certain respects. Furthermore, since the safety of
spectators can be affected w hen crowds are disturbed by hooligan
elements, the recommendations of the Working Party on Crowd
Behaviour were incorporated in a new version, published in 1976,
w h ich w as aimed specifically at football grounds. Following the
fire at Bradford City FC ground in 1985 in w hich 56 people died, a
w orking party, established under the aegis of M r Justice
 Popplewell's Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control at Sports
Grounds, reviewed the Guide and produced a series of recom m en­
dations w hich have been taken into account together w ith
com m ents from others in producing this revised and expanded
version.

H is to ric a l c o n te x t
3.     Serious accidents at sports grounds involving injuries on a
large scale to spectators are fortunately few. But as demonstrated
by those at Ibrox and Valley Parade, and before th a t at Burnden
Park, the potential scale of death and injury at a crowded sporting
event is such that it is essential fo r ground management to take
such steps as are necessary to ensure reasonable safety at their
grounds. This applies to all sports grounds irrespective of w hether
or not they are the subject of a safety certificate.


G eneral principles o f th e G uide
4.     The problem of crowd safety at sports grounds is complex
and cannot be solved sim ply by ensuring that each component of a
ground, such as stairways, passages or sections of terracing, is
satisfactory in itself. The inter-relation of these and the other
components is essential: none of them can be considered in
isolation w ith o u t consideration of its effect on the others, and they
should all be compatible and combine to form a balanced unit.


5.    The Guide is intended to cover grounds where sporting
events of all kinds are held and where the gathering of large
crowds is likely to present a safety problem. However, much of the
guidance has particular application to football stadia and this
should be borne in mind w hen applying the Guide to grounds used
for other sports and modifications may prove necessary, because
the measures to meet problems of stadia used for association
football may not always be necessary at other grounds used for
other types of sports. For example, if a ground has no terraced or
sloped viewing areas,, crush barrier requirements are unlikely to
be of concern. Indications are given throughout to those sections
of the Guide w hich are particularly relevant to football grounds or
stadia and to those w here close compliance w ith the guidelines is
desirable irrespective of the sport concerned.


6.     Deviations from individual guidelines are possible w ithout
necessarily detracting from the overall safety of the ground. The
variety of type, function and layout of sports grounds and the inter­
relationship of the different parts of them means that a flexible
approach should be maintained to take account of the particular
circumstances at individual grounds. For these reasons the Guide
does not attem pt to set a m inim um standard w hich w ould be
acceptable for a large w ell-attended stadium but excessive for a
smaller, sparsely-attended ground; or w hich w ould be an
appropriate standard for the latter but insufficient for the former.


                                    6
                                            \
7.      The Guide is aimed prim arily at advising on safety for
spectators in existing sports grounds and as such it attempts to
take account of the constraints and d ifficulties w hich are present
w ith in these grounds. A lthough it is not a design brief for new
construction w ork or reconstruction at sports grounds the
principles may w ell still be applicable. Such w ork should not be to
a standard low er than tha t set out here and the scope offered by
new design w ork should lead to better standards than can be
achieved at grounds already built.

8.    It should be borne in mind that, w hen using the Guide to
assess w hether existing circumstances provide adequately for the
safety of spectators, the criterion to be aimed for is that of a
reasonable degree of safety. It w ould be unreasonable, even if it
w ere practical, to seek the absolute safety of everyone attending
a ground.

9.    The Guide is not specifically aimed at risks to spectators
from the sport itself, but clearly m anagement have a duty to take
all necessary precautions to safeguard spectators against the
effects of accidents in, or originating from, the activity on the
playing area. Particular care is needed w hen the sport entails use
and storage of flam m able fuels.

10. The advice given in this Guide is w itho ut prejudice to the
operation of the Building Regulations, the Health and Safety at
W ork etc A ct 1974 and any other relevant legislation.


Using th e G uide
11. The principles referred to in paragraphs 4 -1 0 above should
be kept in mind by both ground management and, where
applicable, by the local authority w hen applying the Guide to an
individual ground. The Guide is an aid to, not a substitute for,
professional judgem ent and common sense.

 12. A lthough some of the safety standards are likely to apply to
 all sports grounds, however many spectators are present, it is
 nonetheless im portant to relate the Guide to the needs of the
 individual ground. It should be borne in mind that in most circum -


                                   7
stances, the required safety standard to be attained w ill often
relate to the maximum number of spectators w ho are liable to be
admitted to the ground (or parts of it). For example, a large football
stadium w ith a maximum spectator capacity of tens of thousands
is liable to pose significant crowd pressure risks. To accommodate
safely a maximum crowd at such a ground m ight entail substantial
remedial work; alternatively, consideration m ight be given to
accepting a much smaller number of spectators who, properly
dispersed, could be accommodated safely w ith o u t having to incur
costly repairs or alterations. The first step, therefore, is to assess,
using the Guide's criteria, how many people can be safely
accommodated in the different sections of the ground given the
existing condition of the ground (ie determ ine a safe spectator
capacity). This should be done w ith a proper, detailed plan,
preferably drawn to scale (1:200) of the ground (see Chapter 16).

13. It follow s that in general in a ground w here it is proposed to
retain a high spectator capacity, the measures needed to be taken
to accommodate safely such large crowds are potentially more
extensive.

T h e problem s
14. There are essentially four types of safety problem to be
considered w ith in a ground and in its immediate surroundings, all
of w hich are linked in some way.

15. The first concerns hazards affecting individuals w hich cause
tripping, slipping and falling, w hich in themselves can have
serious consequences for the individuals concerned, but can also
lead to a serious incident involving others. This type of problem
can be remedied by proper care and maintenance, and attention to
the general constructional features of the ground.


16. The second type is far more im portant and involves crowd
pressures. W hen large crowds are present and densities are high,
pressures build up w ith in the crowd either through motion or
swaying w hich make it difficult, or even impossible, for individuals
to control their own movements. Under these conditions crowd
pressures can escalate to a dangerous level and if a person


                                  8
stum bles or rails the crowd cannot adapt to avoid him or to stop to
help. Since this type oNdanger arises from crowd pressures its
remedy lies in their removal or restraint w ith in safe lim its. These
dangers arise in particular on terraces and in exit routes, and so
careful attention must be paid to restraining surges and sim ilar
pressures on the terraces and to ensuring free movement
throughout the exit systems. Such free movement is dependent
upon the capacity of all the various sections of the exit systems
and interactions between them.

17. The third type of safety problem cannot be divorced from the
second and in some w ays is an extreme version of it. The danger
arises from emergency situations w hich can develop follow ing, for
example, an outbreak of fire or hooliganism. The orderly
evacuation of large crowds may under emergency conditions
become a very serious problem.

18. The fourth problem is the risk from fire itself, particularly
w here there is a large crowd in a confined area of an elevated
covered stand w here spectators are in the upper tiers of a
building, the materials and construction of w hich m ight in
themselves constitute a fire risk. Measures should be taken w hich
as far as possible w ill prevent the outbreak and contain the spread
of fire; systems should be introduced to detect such an outbreak
early on; and provision must be made fo r means of escape and for
staff to be trained in emergency procedures.


O verco m in g th e problem s
19. The importance of good ground management cannot be
emphasised too strongly (see Chapter 2). Much of the safety
advice contained in this Guide can and should form part of the
general upkeep and maintenance of a sports ground. If these
guidelines are applied they should reduce or elim inate risks to
spectators and in the long term prove cost effective by preventing
serious defects. A w ell-m aintained and w ell-run venue may also
attract more events and a greater number of spectators.

20. As mentioned in paragraph 7 above, the scope in new
design w ork can give an opportunity to enhance spectator safety.


                                  9
w hich should be given a high priority when deciding upon the
design, layout, m aterials and loading of new buildings, or
alterations in a ground. Close attention should be paid to new and
existing exits and exit routes, slip-resistant surfaces, lighting and
ease of maintenance. All parts of viewing areas should always
have a clear unobstructed view of the playing area and designs
should take account of the need for effective stewarding, w hich
can play an im portant role in controlling crowd movement (see
Chapter 13).

2 1 . Although controlling crowd numbers may serve to reduce
 some risks to an acceptable level, remedial w ork is likely to be
 necessary to overcome others. Obvious defects such as trip
 hazards (especially at the head of stairs or steps), loose or weak
 handrails on stairs, and obstructed exits or exit routes, should be
 rectified as part of the general care and maintenance of a ground.
 Structures should be sound (see Chapter 3) and inspected by
suitably qualified persons (see Chapter 4). Design, layout and
signposting of exits and exit routes require particular attention to
ensure that they can safely cope w ith the number of spectators
w h o w ill use them at the end of an event or in an emergency (see
Chapter 6). Sim ilarly, the condition of terraces or viewing slopes
(see Chapter 8) and presence or otherwise of crush barriers,
correctly sited and meeting the strength tests of this Guide (see
Chapter 9), are im portant factors. Broken, uneven terracing causes
stumbling. Barriers not only serve to break up crowd pressures but
also assist in controlling movement off the terraces by regulating
the rate of arrival at exits to suit their capacity, and encouraging
the form ation of queues so that spectators arrive at exits in an
orderly fashion.


22. Proper precautions against the risk of fire are vital (see
Chapter 11). Good ground management is crucial in reducing or
elim inating the risk. Accum ulation of litter is a prime potential
source of fire but can be elim inated by regular and frequent
inspections, good housekeeping, ground m aintenance and by
taking particular care over the storage of flam m able materials. The
nature and type of materials used in the construction of covered
areas and stands w ill strongly influence the safety measures


                                 10
required in them; for example, in some circumstances consideration
may have to be given to restricting the number of spectators
a n d /o r to the provision of additional exits from the building if it is
to continue in use.
2. M ANAG EM ENT RESPONSIBILITY

Effective ground management is an important factor in
achieving proper safety and management should constantly
look to improve safety standards wherever possible.



23. The safety of the public inside the ground is the
responsibility of those w ho stage the event and adm inister the
ground in w hich it is held, ie the "m anagem ent". This responsibility
applies in both normal and emergency situations. Local authority
safety officers, fire and police officers w ill help management to
discharge this responsibility and in certain circumstances may
require measures to be taken in order to achieve reasonable safety
standards, but the management is not thereby absolved of its
responsibility for the safety of its customers.

24. Management should draw up a programme of checks,
inspections, tests, personnel training and remedial w ork pro­
grammes so as to elim inate or reduce risks to spectators.
M anagem ent is responsible for ensuring that such inspections are
carried out on structures and installations so that they are safe for
the purpose for w hich they w ere intended. The results of any
remedial action, as and w hen taken, should be recorded. W here
restrictions on crowd numbers to parts of the ground are required
for safety reasons they must be imposed and enforced. Similarly, if
a part of the ground is required to be closed because it is
potentially unsafe for spectators this must be done, and it must
not be opened up as a result of an "a ttra c tiv e " fixture or event,
unless measures have been taken beforehand to remove the
dangers w hich led to its closure in the first place,

25. The ground management should ensure that structural fire
protection of buildings is adequate, and that fire w arning systems
are correctly installed and properly m aintained in accordance w ith
manufacturers' instructions or British Standards. Similarly,
suitable fire-fighting equipment must be provided and maintained
to the standards specified in this Guide (see Chapter 11).


                                  12
26. Staff training, particularly for stewards, in carrying out both
their normal duties and ensuring that they are aware of their role
in an emergency situation, should be given high priority.
M anagement should not only inform all staff in w riting w ha t their
duties are, how to effect them and from w hom to seek advice if in
doubt, but also carry out active supervision and organise
emergency drills to maintain standards (see Chapter 13).

27. General repair and maintenance should be undertaken w ith
spectator safety in mind; litter should not be allowed to
accum ulate and management should see that m inor repairs are
quickly and properly carried out.

28. There should be an appointed safety officer w ho should be
of sufficient status and authority effectively to take responsibility
for safety at the ground and to be able to authorise and supervise
safety measures. He or an appointed deputy should be in
attendance at a central control point w hen an event takes place.
All staff should know the location of this control point and w h o is
in charge of safety on the day in question.

29. A summary of management responsibilities is contained
below.

      i.     To appoint a safety officer.
      ii.    To ensure compliance w ith the term s and conditions
             of a safety certificate or other notice covering the
             safety of spectators,

      iii.   To draw up and keep up to date records and plans of
             the ground; to m aintain the general fabric of the
             ground, and arrange an annual detailed inspection of
             the ground and regular testing of a representative
             sample of any barriers or rails, keeping a record of
             their location and results of the tests.

      iv.    To m aintain and test all electrical installations and, in
             accordance w ith the relevant British Standards, the
             systems for emergency lighting, com m unications and
             fire w arning/detection, and fire-fighting equipment.


                                   13
                                                                     1




v.      To draw up in consultation w ith the emergency services
        contingency plans, including arrangements w ith police
        for stopping an event, for:
        a,   various emergency situations including fire;
        b.   possible crowd trouble;
        c.   coping w ith exceptionally large numbers           of
             spectators arriving at the ground; and
        d,   the failure of any detection, w arning, lighting or
             communications system.

vi.     To devise a clear system of com m unications w ithin
        the ground.

vii.    To take necessary fire prevention and precautions
        measures.                            •

viii.   To consult the fire authority about emergency
        evacuation time; fire risk in stands; fire-fighting
        equipment; and access for emergency vehicles.

ix.     To store safely and away from public areas any
        hazardous and flammable materials, combustible
        items, and any accum ulations of combustible waste
        w hich cannot be cleared from the ground before the
        next event.

x.      To provide first aid facilities and first aid staff.

xi.     To consult w ith the police to arrange adequate policing
        and police facilities.

xii.    To recruit, train and deploy stewards and to organise
        and carry out emergency evacuation drills using those
        staff.

xiii.   To man any locked exit gates at all tim es w hen the
        public are in the ground, to ensure they can be opened
         immediately from inside by anyone in an emergency.

xiv.    To ensure that all gangways and exit routes are
         unobstructed and capable of being used to their full
        capacity at all tim es w hen the public are in the ground.


                              14
                                                                         f
                                                                         .Vti




xv.     To provide directional flow, exit and emergency exit
        signs.

xvi.    Before each event:
        a.   to test exit doors and gates, and their locks if they
             are to be locked;
        b.   to test lighting, com m unications and fire w a rn in g /
             detection systems; and
        c.   to check the ground for any accum ulations of
             combustible litter, especially below stands and in
             exit routes; and for any source of potential missiles.

xvii.   A fter each event:
        a.   to carry out a general visual inspection for signs of
             damage; and
        b.   to liaise w ith police so as to gain full benefit from
             any debriefing about crowd control.

xviii. To keep records of:
        a.   attendance figures; and
        b.   all inspections and tests, any defects noted and
             the rem edial/other action taken.




                               15
3. GENERAL FABRIC A N D
STRUCTURAL MATTERS

To meet safety requirements, all components, installations and
structures, eg terraces, stands, stairs, barriers and pylons,
should have the strength and durability, and be maintained in
such condition and arranged in such a manner as to perform
safely their required functions.

30. The design and construction of buildings and installations
should be in accordance w ith good engineering and building
practice, especially as set out in all relevant British Standard
specifications and codes of practice. They should be properly
maintained and repaired by appropriately qualified persons.
Specialist advice from an appropriately qualified engineer
belonging to a recognised Institution should be sought to assess
the safety and strength of load-bearing elements in buildings and
installations such as crush barriers (see Chapter 9) and brick/block
w alls (see Chapter 8, paragraph 103).

31. W hen walls, including perim eter walls, and fences are to
w ithstand crowd pressures, they should be designed to withstand
such pressures safely and allowance should be made for forces
sim ultaneously and independently induced by other factors eg
w ind forces or attached installations.

32. A ll parts of the ground used by the general public, and
especially the exit routes, should have m inim um headroom of not
less than 2 metres. Exit routes should w herever possible have a
headroom of 2.4 metres.

33. Precautions should be taken to prevent people from climbing
on to roofs, pylons, hoardings and other structures. W here
possible such structures should be fitted w ith unclimbable
devices eg stout barriers or close-boarded enclosures. Spikes,
barbed w ire etc should only be installed above the m inim um
headroom specified in paragraph 32 above and preferably at a
m inim um height of 2.4 metres from the base.

                                16
34. A ll electrical installations should comply w ith the current
edition of the Regulations of the Institution of Electrical Engineers,
or have been awarded a certificate of satisfaction from a chartered
electrical engineer. Emergency lighting equipment should conform
to BS 5266: Part 1.

35. W here the natural lighting in any section of the ground
accessible to the public is deficient, adequate artificial lighting
should be provided. If the ground is to be used after dark, all parts
accessible to the public should be provided w ith means for lighting
adequate to enable them to see th eir w ay into, w ith in and out of
the ground. These provisions are particularly im portant in relation
to exit routes and stairways used by the public. Advice on
emergency lighting is offered in Chapter 11, paragraphs 166-169.
4. INSPECTIONS A N D TESTS

Inspections and tests should be carried out by suitably qualified
persons on behalf of management to ensure that the safety
standards of the Guide are maintained.

36. A detailed inspection of the ground, including all components
and installations, should be arranged annually by the management.
It should be carried out by a person w ith a relevant and recognised
professional qualification, and experience of inspecting existing
structures.

37. Engineers commissioned to assess structural safety of
buildings may find the appraisal techniques recommended by the
Institution of Structural Engineers (ISE) in the "Appraisal of
Existing Structures", published in 1980, of assistance. Hard and
fast rules on the extent to w hich a structural appraisal is
necessary for individual buildings are difficult to lay down: much
w ill depend upon the type of installation, its size, condition,
materials used in construction and standard of maintenance. A full
appraisal is however unlikely to be necessary unless defects are
identified or in evidence from the analysis of inform ation on the
structure and visual inspection.

38. Testing of crush barriers (see also Chapter 9) should be
carried out in accordance w ith Annex C of this Guide. When the
guidelines are first applied to a particular ground, a representative
sample of barriers of all types from all areas of the ground should
be selected for testing. Thereafter testing of barriers should take
place every 4 years unless from visual inspection doubts are
raised as to their strength/integrity, in w hich case they should be
retested. Testing should be carried out by or under the supervision
of a suitably qualified engineer, ie a structural or civil engineer.

39. Following each event, a general visual inspection of the
ground should be made for signs of damage w hich m ight create a
potential danger to the public. Particular attention should be paid
to the condition of terraces, viewing slopes and stairways. Crush


                                 18
barriers and balustrades should be examined for deformation or
any other overt signs of weakness. The fire precautions measures
should also be inspected for damage, and alarm and other
electrical installations should be checked to ensure compliance
w ith the relevant British Standards.

40. W arning, detection, lighting and public address systems are
vulnerable to vandalism, and this should be borne in mind when
installing them. All automatic fire detection and fire warning,
emergency lighting and public address systems should be tested
24 hours before an event, in accordance w ith the methods laid
down in BS 5839: Part 1 and BS 5266: Part 1 respectively. There
is currently no British Standard for public address systems. In case
any of these systems is not operating properly and cannot be fixed
before the event, contingency plans should be form ulated, in
consultation w ith the emergency services, for the use of acceptable
substitute measures or (if necessary) the closure of any areas of
spectator accommodation until the fault is remedied.

41. Before an event, and at major soccer grounds in particular,
steps should be taken to ensure tha t the ground does not contain
any accessible items w hich could be used as missiles (eg piles of
bricks, stones etc).

42. The ground should be inspected before and after each event
to ensure there are no accum ulations of combustible w aste and
tha t any hazardous materials (if essential to be stored) are safely
stored well away from public areas.

43. Records should be kept and maintained of all inspections
and tests together w ith a record of remedial actions taken.




                                 19
5. INGRESS

Spectators should be admitted at a rate which is compatible
w ith the dispersal arrangements for them inside the ground.

44. Where admission to a ground or parts of it is controlled by
turnstiles, these, by their number and location, control not only the
rate of admission but, to a large extent, the dispersal of spectators
w ith in a ground to their particular sections. Turnstiles should be of
such numbers as to adm it spectators at a rate whereby no unduly
large crowds are kept w aiting for admission and yet at no faster
rate than the arrangements for distributing spectators w ith in the
ground permit.

45. Dangerous overcrowding can be caused if spectators are
able to force their way into a ground already full to capacity by
scaling or breaking through boundary w alls or fences or the gates
in them. To avoid this danger such walls, fences and gates should
be of appropriate height and strength, and hand- or foot-holds
w hich might assist climbing should be avoided. They should be
regularly inspected.

46. Contingency plans should be made to deal w ith situations
where the available entrances at a ground have proved insufficient
to stop unduly large crowds from gathering outside. This may, for
example, include opening additional entrances, but local knowledge
of the ground, crowd patterns and advice from the police should be
taken into account in drawing up contingency plans. Larger
grounds should have intercom m unication systems and metering
systems at turnstiles (see Chapter 12), and installation of a
centralised computer m onitoring system may be of assistance to
management in quickly identifying particular areas of difficulty.

47. The maximum notional rate at w hich spectators can pass
through turnstiles w ill depend upon a variety of factors; for
example, the design and age of the equipment, the ability of the
operator and the ticketing arrangements. The admission rate w ill
therefore depend greatly upon local circumstances but in general,


                                  20
based on observation and experience, it is unlikely tha t the
maximum notional rate per turnstile would exceed 750 persons
per hour.




                             21
6. EGRESS

There should be a smooth and unimpeded passage through an
exit route and a free flow of people from one element to the
next until they reach the boundary of the ground.

48     It is generally recognised that a period of great risk to crowd
safety is at the tim e of leaving. Pressures can be set up w ith in a
departing crowd by im patient people; such incipient pressures can
and must be contained and controlled by careful attention to the
detailed design of barriers, stairways, gangways and exits.

49. Recommendations relating particularly to egress from stands
are given in Chapter 10. Advice on the calculation of the capacity
of exit systems is contained in Chapter 16.

50. A smooth free flo w through an exit route to the outside is
best achieved by controlling the crowd flo w at the entrance to the
exit route, so that departing spectators are held back in a relatively
safe place eg on the terrace and gain access to the exit route at a
calculated rate. That is to say, the first part of the exit route
leading from the terrace (or other enclosure) should have a lower
capacity than any subsequent element. The exit route w ill then be
able to discharge people at a rate compatible w ith that at w hich
they enter into the route.

51. W here the system is not free flow ing, the w idth of any
restricting element should be increased a n d /o r the w idth of the
exit from the stand or terrace reduced to regulate the flow.

52. W here deviations in design or construction from the
recommended guidelines are such as to create a m anifest danger,
that section of the exit system should be closed until remedial
action has been taken, and a reduction made accordingly in the
spectator capacity of the section of the ground it serves, ie the exit
route should be excluded from the capacity calculations.

53. Care should be taken in the planning of exit systems to
ensure that in the event of an emergency w hich blocks the usual
exit route spectators w ill be able to use an alternative exit route


                                 22
(including, where appropriate, forw ard evacuation on to the pitch:
see Chapter 11, paragraph 186).

54. There should be no "fu n n e llin g " effect causing people to
converge on a narrow er means of access or egress. This w ill slow
down the rate at w hich people can pass through the entire exit
system and pack them more closely together. However, a
narrow ing in the exit route is acceptable w hen it is preceded by an
open space or "reservoir area" w here the holding capacity is
sufficient to contain safely the spectators held up because of the
difference in the flo w rate into and out of the reservoir area. The
capacity of reservoir areas should be calculated using the
appropriate flo w rate given in Chapter 17 and the recommended
exit tim e given in paragraph 56 below; a packing density of 54
persons per 10 square metres of the area available for standing
w ith in the reservoir area is the maximum for safety. Arrangem ents
should be such as to prevent this being exceeded.

55. Reservoir areas should be avoided w herever possible and
should not be permitted w ith in 45 metres of any combustible
building w ith in the ground eg a tim ber stand, or w ith in 15 metres
of any non-combustible building w ith in the ground.

Egress tim e
56. Some research has indicated that w hen it takes more than
about 7 m inutes to vacate an area of terraced spectator
accommodation, the crowd flo w tends to become turbulent. In
these conditions the rate of flo w may be reduced and individuals
can lose control over their own movements; there is thus higher
potential for accidents. Exits from each area of spectator
accommodation should be so designed that all spectators can
leave that area and if desired pass into a free flow ing exit route
system in 8 m inutes or less. The capacity of an exit route is the
num ber of people w h o could pass through restricting parts of it as
calculated in Chapter 16, paragraphs 229-232.


Note: This tim e is not necessarily the same as emergency
evacuation tim e, w hich is dealt w ith in Chapter 11, paragraphs
183-188, and w hich involves other considerations.


                                  23
S ignposting
57. A comprehensive system of signposting w h ich clearly
indicates routes to the various parts of the ground, and to the exits
from the ground, should be provided. Signs relating to fire safety
should be in accordance w ith BS 5499: Part 1: 1984, and other
safety signs (eg first aid facilities) should be in accordance w ith BS
5378: Part 1: 1980. Exit gates themselves should be clearly
signposted, preferably using illu m in a te d signs in accordance
w ith BS 2560 or BS 4218. Directional signs should be provided to
encourage crowds in any particular section to flo w in one direction
w hen leaving the ground.

E xit routes
58. Exit routes should be kept clear of obstructions. In particular,
no catering, sales or toilet facility should be situated in such a way
that it, or any queue it attracts, obstructs an exit route.

59. The m inim um w idth for any section of an exit route should
be 1.1 metres. However, the required w idth for any particular
section is dependent on the crowd flo w it w ill be required to carry.
(For capacities of exit routes, see Chapter 16, paragraphs 229-232).

60. W here there is a simple exit route, ie a direct passage from
the accommodation area to the exit gate from the ground, every
part of that route should be able to accommodate the flo w from
the terrace or stand exit.

61. For a more complex exit system w hich combines a number
of exit routes a n d /o r offers a choice of alternative routes to exits,
the system should be analysed in the form of a network in order to
check that the capacity of the exit from the terrace or the stand is
sufficient to ensure a free flo w of spectators to the various exits
from the ground. W here branching of routes gives spectators a
choice of paths, the proportion of the crowd likely to use each path
should be derived from local knowledge, eg the exit closest to a
railw ay or bus station may be likely to attract a higher proportion
of spectators.




                                   24
E xit doors
62. A ll doors on an exit route should always be capable of
opening outwards so that crowds can escape in an emergency.
This is particularly im portant for doors w ith in covered stands and
at the foot of stairways.

63. A ll doors on an exit route should be secured in the fully open
position before the end of play. W hen open, no door should
obstruct any gangway passage, stairway or landing.

64. A ll exit gates from the ground should also open outwards.
W here this is impracticable for existing doors, eg because it w ould
cause an obstruction on a public highway, the gates should be
resited (ie put fu rth e r back) w ith in the exit route they serve, or
provision made for tw o-w ay opening. W here practicable exit gates
should be sited adjacent to entrances. There should be no
obstructions eg no changes in level etc at exit doors.

65. Sliding or roller-shutter gates should not be used because
they are incapable of being opened w hen pressure is exerted in
the direction of crowd flo w and have mechanisms or runways
w hich are vulnerable to jamming.

66. Where exit gates have to be secured against outside intruders
they should be fitted w ith panic-type bolts, but all exit gates,
unless secured in an open position, should be manned at all tim es
w h ile the ground is used by the public and be capable of being
opened immediately from inside by anyone in an emergency.

67. Facilities should be provided to enable people to leave the
ground at any time. For this purpose a number of reversible tu rn ­
stiles or, preferably, pass doors, so operated as to lim it the opening
to the passage to one person at a time, should be considered.
However, reversible turnstiles are not acceptable as a means of
escape from a ground and should not form any part of, or be
installed into, the normal or emergency exit system of the ground.




                                  25
7. STAIRWAYS A N D RAMPS

The disposition and construction of stairways and ramps should be
such as to help provide smooth and unimpeded ingress and egress
for spectators under all conditions set out in Chapters 5 and 6.

68. The aim should be to provide stairways w hich m inim ise
hazards by such features as uniform going and rise, secure
footing, not too steep a gradient, and a w idth sufficient to allow
free movement but narrow enough to provide everyone w ith
access to a handrail. The head of the stairw ay should be so
designed that flo w is uniform across its w idth and crowd
pressures cannot easily be generated. In addition flights should
not provide long, unrestricted paths down w hich crowd pressures
and surges can be created. Adequate separation should be
provided between channels and m ulti-channel stairway arrange­
ments so that there is no overspill from one channel to another.


D isp osition o f stairw ays
6 9 . Stairways should be carefully positioned to take advantage
of natural light and ventilation. W here the natural lighting is
deficient the stairway should be adequately lit by artificial light
(see Chapter 3, paragraph 35).


C o n stru ctio n o f stairw ays
70. The w idth, rise and going of the steps should be uniform
w ith in each stairway, and should ideally be uniform throughout
the entire exit system.

71. Stair treads should be provided w ith slip-resistant surfaces
and durable edgings. Adequate drainage should be provided.

72 .   Open risers should not be used.

73. On any stairway the preferred going of treads should be
305 mm but not less than 280 mm; and preferred height of risers
should be 150 mm but not more than 190 mm.


                                 26
74.   Stairways should:

      i.     be w ithout winders;
      ii.    be in flights of not more than     16 or fe w e r   than 3
             steps; and
      iii.   not have more than 2 successive flights w ith o u t a
             turn, and, if there are more than 12 steps in a flight,
             should have not more than one flight w ith ou t a turn.

75. The going of the landing between flights should not be less
than the w idth of the section or channel of the flight.

76. Every person on a stairway should have access to a handrail.
Accordingly the minim um w idth of a stairway should be 1.1 metres,
stairways w ider than 1.8 metres being divided as far as possible
into channels having a w idth of between 1.1metres and 1.8
metres. The strength of the handrails (including supports) used to
divide a stairway into channels should be as described in Chapter 9.

77. Handrails projecting not more than 100 mm should be
provided on both sides of all stairways, steps and landings at a
height of not less than 840 mm (measured vertically from the
centre of the step, or the surface of the landing).

78. Protection should be provided on both sides of all stairs and
landings. W here next to open w ells, or spaces, such protection
should be enclosed and should be not less than 1.1 metres in
height (measured vertically from the centre of the step, or the
surface of the landing). The protection should have a strength
equivalent to that of the crush barriers of the weaker type,
described in Chapter 9.


A ccess to stairw ays
79. Access to the head of the stairways should be controlled
along the follow ing lines to ensure a free flo w of spectators.

80. W here a stairw ay is divided into channels the access should
be designed to secure a uniform flo w down each channel.


                                    27
81. The approach to the head of the stairs should be level and
should be so arranged th a t the spectators converge on the
stairw ay from the fro n t a n d /o r the sides only. There should be no
approach from behind, involving movement around the ends of the
balustrades or side w alls of the stairway, except w here this
approach is already controlled by physical means such as by the
gangways in the seated areas of the stand.

82. The extent of the approach in the direction of the stairway
should not be less than 1.1 metres and preferably not more than
3 metres.




                                 B a rrie r




                                              H andrails




                                     down



              T h e w id th o f A and B to be n o t less th an 1.1m
        T h e a g g re g a te w id th o f A + B to be n o t m o re th a n 3 m
                                     2(A +B ) = % C
T h e capacity o f this s ta irw a y w o u ld be calculated fro m th e w id th C

Figure 1      Example of an approach to the head of a staircase


                                       28
83. W here restrictive elements such as barriers or gateways are
installed in the approach to a stairway in order to meet the
foregoing provisions, the total w idth of the passage form ed by
these elements should not be more than tw o -th irds the m inim um
w idth of the stairway. This is to accommodate the slower flo w rate
down a staircase as compared w ith the flo w rate on fla t areas and
through portals (see Chapter 17).

84. For an application of these principles to a m ultiple stairw ay
leading direct from a terrace, see Figures 1 and 2 .




                               DOWN




F ig ure 2   Exits attracting spectators from higher up the
             terrace should be protected by barriers so that
             spectators are forced to pass around them and
             approach from the side.

D ischarge fro m s tairw ays
85.   All exit stairways should discharge either:
      i.    at ground level and lead directly to a place of safety* in
             the open air; or
      ii.   on to w alkways or concourses of adequate dimensions
             at any level provided these also lead directly to a place
             of safety in the open air.
*'place of safety' is a defined term in the Scottish Building
  Regulations.


                                 29
Fire p ro tectio n
86 .  This is dealt w ith in Chapter 11, paragraphs 180-182.

Ram ps
87. The gradient should preferably be constant and not broken
by steps.

88.   The maximum gradient acceptable w ill depend on the
particular ramp's length, purpose and usage but a ramp subject to
heavy crowd flo w should preferably not exceed a gradient of
1 in 10.




                                30
8. TERRACES A N D VIEW ING
   SLOPES

Arrangements should be made to encourage the even
distribution of the crowd on the terraces to provide ease of
access and egress; to control and facilitate movement,
particularly if a local emergency should arise during the event;
and to contain pressures before they reach dangerous
proportions. The provisions set out here will assist in achieving
these conditions.

89. In addition to the incidental dangers of standing for long
periods on steep terraced slopes, crowds are subject to excessive
pressures generated by spectators straining to see the event, by
excitement, or by surging deliberately induced by a certain type
of spectator.

90. Failure to provide spectators w ith an unobstructed view
invites them to stretch and strain, and so generates dangerous
pressures w ith in the crowd.

91. Terraces are recognised as presenting a special safety
problem especially at football grounds. The follow ing guidance is
therefore aimed m ainly at football stadia but can be applied to any
ground w here standing terraces or view ing slopes are used for
accommodating spectators.



T errace steps
92. A terrace step should not be less than 280 mm or more than
380 mm wide. The preferred dimension is between 355 mm and
380 mm.

93. The height of risers should be between 75 mm and 180 mm.
75 mm is related to the m inim um w idth of 280 mm. If the riser
height is greater than 180 mm, a crush barrier should be provided
at the top of the riser.


                                 31
94. Excessive variations in the gradient of a terrace should be
avoided. Gradients steeper than 1 in 2 could be dangerous.

95. The surface of terrace steps should be even and of a slip-
resistant material. Adequate drainage should be provided to
prevent rainwater causing deterioration.



G ang w ays (see Annex A)
96    The aim should be to ensure th at every spectator on the
terraces is w ith in 12 metres of a gangway or exit, so that
spectators can move quickly on to exit routes at the end of an
event or in the event of emergency. This may be achieved by a
pattern of gangways (not less than 1.1 metres wide) linked to the
exit system.

97. Spectators should be discouraged from standing in lateral
qangways because this disrupts free movement about the ground
(or w ith in sections of it). Also, spectators on the terrace steps
behind the gangway may have their view obstructe , w |C w i
cause them to stretch and strain, and so generate dangerous
pressures w ithin the crowd. Spectators w ould be discouraged
from standing in these gangways if they w ere sunk fromi 100 mm
to 200 mm and if crush barriers were provided behind but not
 immediately in front of them.

 98. Similarly, spectators should be discouraged from standing in
 radial gangways. These are relatively long and uncontrolled
 dow nw ard paths through terraces, and are d ifficu lt to keep clear
 especially w hen sited in popular view ing areas, eg behind the goal
 area at a football ground. It is helpful to sink them 150 mm to
 200 mm and to interrupt an otherwise continuously descending
 gangway by turns along, say, lateral gangways.

 99. W here sinking gangways, lateral or radial, is not thought to
 be practical, their boundaries should be highlighted w ith paint and
 spectators advised by signs not to stand there. Stewards may be
  needed to enforce this instruction.


                                   32
100. As w ith other form s of stairways, the going in radial
gangways should be uniform , the step dim ension as defined in
paragraph 92 and the surfaces slip-resistant.

D ivision o f sp e c ta to r a cco m m o d atio n
101. A ground should be divided into sections to prevent
potentially hazardous m igrations by spectators. Each section of a
ground has its own lim it of safe capacity (see Chapter 16), and a
m.ajor m igration can cause dangerous overcrowding. Each section
of the ground, for example, each end or side, should be self
contained w ith its own entrances, exits and to ilet/re freshm e nt
facilities. For soccer grounds in particular there should be no
access from one such major section to another except in an
emergency. A t other sporting events such as greyhound racing
spectators may need to move freely between different parts of the
ground and this should be borne in mind w hen considering access
to and from the sections of the ground and w hen considering the
 need for subdivisions of sections in paragraph 103 below.

102. Each of the major sections should be subdivided by such
means as gangways and crush barriers, arranged so as to
minim ise the sway and surge of spectators.

 103. Railings, fences etc dividing sections of the ground should
 be of the strength of the crush barriers, as should handrails
 dividing stairways into channels as appropriate, described in table
 2 of Chapter 9. B rick/block and sim ilar solid structures lacking
 sufficient mass or tensile strength are poorly suited to w ithstand
 horizontal pressures, and where used to divide spectator accommo­
 dation, should be subject to regular structural appraisal by
 appropriately qualified persons (see Chapter 3).

 Crush barriers
 104. Detailed advice on crush barriers is given in Chapter 9.

 V ie w in g slopes (ie non-stepped sloping areas pro vid ing
 stand in g a c c o m m o d a tio n fo r spectatprs)
 105. The surface of this form of terrace should be covered w ith a
 slip-resistant material, eg packed ash, and should be even and
  properly drained.


                                  33
106. The desirable maximum gradient for a viewing slope is 1 in
6 (ie 9.5°). (Note: this is different to the stepped terrace gradient
quoted in paragraph 94). Viewing slopes w ith any steeper gradient
should have continuous crush barriers between gangways.

107. The spacing of crush barriers should be the same as for
those on normal terracing (see Chapter 9).

Terrace to to u ch lin e distance
108. To prevent undue crowd pressures generated by spectators
stretching and straining for an unobstructed view, it is desirable to
provide a m inim um distance between the front of the terrace and
the playing area of the pitch.

109. The m inim um recommended distance between the tw o is 3
metres w here the terrace gradient is 3 0 ° or steeper. W here the
gradient is shallower than this, it may be advisable to increase this
distance so as to enable spectators to obtain a clear view.




                                 34
9. CRUSH BARRIERS AND
   HANDRAILS

Many of the hazards arising from crowd pressure on terraces
can be eliminated by provision of well constructed, correctly
positioned and properly mounted crush barriers.




D im ensions and design featu res
110. In order to locate the top rail against that part of the body
most able to tolerate pressure the height of crush barriers should
be between 1.02 metres and 1.12 metres above the nosing of the
step immediately behind the barrier, w ith a preferred height of
1.1 metres.

11 1. Crush barriers should be designed so that there are no sharp
projections or edges. A lthough a barrier w ith a top rail of 50 mm
internal diameter tube has been favoured at many sports grounds,
research has shown that there w ould be advantage in the use of a
flat rail of 100 mm vertical depth.



Spacing o f crush barriers
112. The m aximum spacing of crush barriers w ill be dependent
on the g ra die nt of the terrace or v ie w in g slope. Paragraphs
113-119 below give recommendations for the spacing and
strength of crush barriers.

113. Ideally, crush barriers should be provided along the full
w idth of a terrace, w ith gaps only at the radial gangways.

114. Where barriers are not continuous between radial gangways,
the alignm ent of gaps in successive rows of barriers on a terrace
should form an angle of less than 60° to the barriers. There should
be no more than 2 consecutive gaps in any line of gaps. (See
Figure 3 overleaf).


                                35
                                                     T
                                                    /
                              Barriers
                  \
                 -fc
                      %                      /
                       \                     /
                          \
                                              6 0 ° m ax
                   6 0 ° A



                                                           Barriers
                                         /
Figure 3   A rrangem ent o f gaps between crush barriers

115. W here there are gaps in the line of crush fa rrie rs these
should be at least 1.1 metres and not more than 1.4 metres
in width.

116. Column A in Table 1 opposite provides the maximum
distances between barriers conforming to the greater strength
requirem ents of crush barriers as described above; column B
provides the maximum distances between barriers conforming to
the lesser strength requirements. Interpolation may be made
between these figures.

117. A distinction is made between barrier intervals required in
"p e a k" viewing areas. The term "p ea k" viewing areas describes
the most popular parts of the terraces w here there is a tendency
for spectators to crowd together and become so emotionally
involved in the occasion that their reactions can cause additional
pressures to be set up in those sections of the ground. The peak
viewing areas are particularly associated w ith football grounds and
are typically behind the goal areas, although other parts of the
terraces known locally may come w ith in this category.




                                    36
TABLE 1

                                                  Maxim um horizontal distance
                                                  between barriers

 Terrace Gradient                                 Peak Viewing      Other Areas

                      Step riser :   Step width   A       B         A        B

05°              ie      1     in       11.4      5.0m    3.3m      8.4m     5.6m

 10°                     1     in        5.7      4.3m    2.9m      6.7m    4.5m

 15°                     1     in        3.7      3.8m    2.6m      5.6m     3.7m
      O




                                                                    4.8m     3.2m
Csl

       O




                         1     in        2.7      3.4m    2.3 m

 25 °                    1     in        2.1      3.1 m   2.1m      4.2m     2.8m

 30°                     1     in        1.7      2.9m    1.9m      3.8m     2.5m




  S tre n g th o f crush barriers and handrails
  118. Existing crush barriers and handrails should be capable of
  resisting the forces indicated in the existing test load colum ns of
  Table 2 overleaf w hen applied in a test as described in Annex C.
  W here existing crush barriers and handrails fail to meet these test
  conditions, they should be replaced or strengthened in such a way
  as to do so. Barriers and handrails so strengthened should be
  retested in accordance w ith Annex C.

      119. New crush barriers or handrails should be designed to resist
      safely a horizontal force as indicated in the "n e w design force"
      column in Table 2 applied as a static load acting on the top rail of
      the barrier or handrail at right angles to the longitudinal axis. The
      foundations of new barriers or handrails should be designed to
      resist the overturning movements and sliding forces, induced by
      the forces described in the "n e w design force" colum n overleaf,
      w ith a factor of safety of 2.


                                          37
TABLE 2
      T ab le o f stren g th s fo r crush barriers and handrails

                                   New Design Force           Existing Test Load

Crush barriers spaced in           5.0 KN/m etre width        6.0 KN/m etre width
accordance with the distances      (340 lbs f/fo o t width)   (400 lbs f/fo o t width)
in column A of Table 1

Crush barriers spaced in           3.4 KN/m etre width        4.3 K N /m etre width
accordance with the distances      (230 lbs f/fo o t width)   (290 lbs f/fo o t width)
in column B of Table 1

Handrails at right angles to the   3.4 KN/m etre width        4.3 KN /m etre width
direction of flow                  (230 lbs f/fo o t width)   (290 lbs f/fo o t width)

Handrails parallel to the          2.189 KN/m etre width      2 .74 I^N/metre width
direction of flow                  (150 lbs f/fo o t width)   (188 lbs f/fo o t width)




                                         38
10. ROOFED STANDS WITH
    SEATED ACCOMMODATION

The general safety considerations for stands are similar to those
for other parts of the ground but w ith the additional need to
safeguard spectators against the risk of fire (see Chapter 11).

120. Stands may consist of seated accommodation only or may
contain a mixture of both seated and standing areas. The follow ing
advice can be applied to all sports grounds w here spectators are
so accommodated.

121. There is generally a less hurried departure from the seated
accommodation in stands at the end of an event. Moreover,
spectators are induced by the layout of the seats to form orderly
queues. Even so, attention should be paid to the points below as well
as the other structural considerations in respect of stairways, exits,
egress and, where appropriate, density levels and crush barriers.

122. Fire safety is particularly im portant and is dealt w ith in
Chapter 11. Every stand should be provided w ith sufficient exits to
allow for the orderly evacuation of all the spectators to be
accommodated. Evacuation tim e w ill depend to a large extent on
the fire hazard present in the stand (see Chapter 11, paragraphs
183-188). Egress tim e (see Chapter 6, paragraph 56) should be no
longer than 8 m inutes using the calculations in Chapter 16, but
the emergency evacuation tim e is an overriding criterion w hen
calculating the allowable capacity of a stand (see Chapter 11,
paragraph 183).

123. Seats and gangways should be so positioned as to provide
ready access to exits. No person in any part of a stand should have
to travel more than 30 metres to the nearest exit from a stand.

124. A ll seats should be securely fixed in position. The use of
tip-up seats allows more circulation space, the automatic type
being preferable.


                                  39
125. The m inim um area allotted to each seated person should be
460 mm w ide and 610 mm deep; but for com fort these
m easurements should be 550 mm and 760 mm respectively. To
enable people to move freely between rows of seats, there should
be at least 305 mm between perpendiculars from the foremost
projection of one seat and the back of the seat in fro nt of it. (The
m inim um of 305 mm is included in the 610 mm or 760 mm depth
measurement of the seating area.)

126. The number of seats in a row should not normally exceed:
      a.    14 seats where there is a gangway at one end only; and

      b.    28 seats w here there is a gangway at both ends.

127. Gangways should be of sufficient w idth for the seats served,
but in no case less than 1.1 metres w ide (ie 2 unit widths) w ith ou t
projections.

B alustrading
128. Those sections of balustrading at the foot of stairw ays or
gangways w ith in stands should be as strong as crush barriers of
the stronger type (see Chapter 9).

T em p o rary stands and o th e r tem p o ra ry stru ctu res
129. The nature of tem porary stands and other tem porary
structures, w hether or not covered, used to accommodate
spectators at a sports ground is likely to vary considerably as w ill
the materials used in their construction. Some may be erected for
a single event only. Even so there is no justification for accepting a
lower standard of safety in such structures than elsewhere w ith in
the sports ground, and the design and construction of temporary
structures should be in accordance w ith good engineering and
building practice, should pay particular regard to public safety and
should satisfy all relevant British Standards.

130. The principles of this Guide are applicable to tem porary
stands and structures and particular attention is drawn to:
      Chapter 3   - General Fabric and Structural M atters
      Chapter 6   - Egress


                                  40
      Chapter 4 - Stairways and Ramps
      Chapter 11 - Fire Safety
      Chapter 17 - Recommended Flow Rates

131. A ll temporary stands should be capable of w ithstanding any
load or force to w hich they may be subjected and account should
be taken of any external factors such as w ind forces. Failure of any
one support member or connection should not render the
structure unstable. As far as practicable the area around supporting
frames should be secured to prevent unauthorised access, and
fram es should be so designed that they are firm ly locked into
position and cannot be tampered w ith by unauthorised persons.

132. Consultation w ith the local authority and building authority
(if different) should take place at an early stage prior to the erection
of any temporary stand.

133. Siting. Choice of location may be lim ited but factors which
need to be considered include: load-bearing capability of the
ground, its slope or unevenness, drainage, availability of mains
services, access/egress for spectators and for emergency vehicles,
overhead power lines, and the proxim ity of surrounding buildings
in relation to the risk of fire. The condition of the site should be
regularly checked to ensure its load-bearing capabilities have not
deteriorated; settlement of ground may cause instability and so
require repacking and re-levelling. The site should be prepared and
maintained so as to provide an even surface for those parts to
w hich the public have access.

134. Assembly/dismantling. The assembly and dism antling of
stands should be carried out by or under the supervision of
persons experienced and trained in the proper performance of
such w ork and in accordance w ith the m anufacturers' instructions
whenever available, or in accordance w ith drawings and plans
made by a competent engineer.

135. W ork should be carried out only w here lighting is sufficient
to allow it to be safely and properly performed and checked. No
assembly or dism antling w ork should be carried out to the danger
of members of the public in the vicinity.

                                   41
136. The w ork should be carried out in a proper manner, using
correct parts, and tools of a proper size and design. Care should be
taken w ith the handling of components to avoid damage or distortion.

137. All components should be closely examined during assembly
and dism antling for signs of wear, deformation or other damage,
and where necessary replaced by sound components of matching
material properties and dimensions. Temporary repairs using
makeshift components should be avoided.

138. Care should also be given to ensure all components are
correctly aligned; they should not be bent, distorted or otherwise
altered to force a fit.

139. On completion, assembly w ork should be; checked w ith
particular attention given to fastenings and connections.

140. Tents/marquees and other such structures. These types of
structures can present special fire safety problems and guidance
w ill be contained in the Home O ffice/S cottish Office publication
"G uide to Fire Precautions in Existing Places of Entertainm ent"*.

141. A ll tents should be capable of w ithstanding any forces,
particularly w in d (including uplift so caused) and those caused by
the build up of snow or heavy rain, to w hich they may be subjected.
Emergency arrangements should be made for the dismantling,
either partial or total, of a tent should conditions arise that could
lead to any collapse or distortion. W here such w ork in any way
affects the stability of the tent or the safety of members of the
public, the w ork should not commence until the immediate area
has been cleared of all but essential staff.

142. Supporting poles, guy ropes and stays should be used as
necessary and correctly formed, and secure anchorages made to
the ground to ensure that the tent is stable and m aintains its
correct shape.


*Expected to be available in 1987.


                                 42
143. The stability of the main te nt poles and supporting structure
should be independent of the sheeting fabric, ie any tearing or
defect occurring in the fabric should not result in the collapse of all
or any part of the main structure.

144. Particular attention should be paid to the main supporting
poles and top braces of large tents w here they have to be raised to a
considerable height. Damage or distortion to these members could
considerably weaken the structure. W here such damage does
occur, the members should be replaced or repairs or modifications
carried out so as to bring them up to fu ll working strength.

145. W here solid fram es or units, eg doors, are linked to a tent
structure they should be rigidly formed and adequately braced, and
care should be taken th at they do not overstress local areas of
the tent.

146. Foundations to poles or frames should be properly prepared
and subjected to regular checks as should w ire bracing or guys,
the tension of w hich should be re-adjusted as necessary.
11. FIRE SAFETY

Safety from fire is achieved by measures which will restrict
initiation, rate of early growth and later spread of fire; provide
and protect escape routes; segregate higher fire risk areas;
provide warning (and where necessary detection) of fire; and
assist fire-fighting operations.

147. The type of accommodation which represents the greatest
hazard in the event of fire is the covered stand w here spectators
sit or stand. New structures w ill conform to Building Regulations
requiring them to have a reasonable degree of structural fire
protection. Existing structures w ill vary considerably in age and
materials used in construction. The qualities of com bustibility and
ability to propagate and spread fire of the materials used in
construction have an im portant effect on the standard of fire
precautions required to ensure reasonable safety. It may be
difficult in some cases to improve the fire resistance of an existing
structure to any significant extent but it should be done wherever
practicable even though in some cases substantial alterations may
be needed to provide reasonable protection from fire.


148. W ith new stands there is much more opportunity to
incorporate from the start comprehensive measures for fire safety,
considering properly the impact of each measure on the others.
Design features for new stands should include the following:

      a.    internal finishes w hich have low flammability;

      b.    seating, partitioning and any other fixed or removable
            contents including seat cushions w hich possess low
            flam m ability characteristics and fire risk potential and
            are limited in amount;

      c.    contents w hich    are   not capable of being       easily
            dismantled;

      d.    no inaccessible places where litter can collect;

      e.    adequate structural resistance to fire;


                                44
     f.    fire resisting separation from any spaces below or
            com m unicating w ith the stand;

     g.    as far as possible, no storerooms or other spaces
           com m unicating w ith the stand. W here this is unavoid­
           able, storerooms or other spaces com m unicating w ith
           the stand should be provided w ith fixed fire extinguish­
            ing systems appropriate to the fire risk posed by the
            materials to be stored or contained;
      h.   escape routes w hich are planned to keep people well
           clear of the smoky gases produced by a fire (which in
           general means that initial movement of people should
            be downwards);
      i.   later stages of escape routes w hich are incapable of
            being significantly threatened by continuing fire;
      j.   the provision of alternative, w idely separated escape
            routes; and
      k.   a roof geometry w hich should restrict smoke and
            flam e travel along the underside of the roof.




M in im isin g fire risk
149. One potential cause of fire arises from the accum ulation of
waste paper, programmes, food and drink cartons etc dropped by
spectators. Such waste can be easily set alight by smokers'
materials and the resulting fire may then spread to the structure,
especially the ones that are constructed of more combustible
materials. Every effort should be made to reduce this hazard.
Accum ulations of litter, for example near catering facilities, should
be cleared from the ground as quickly as possible or kept in a safe,
fire resistant container or room pending clearance.

150. All parts of buildings should be inspected before and after an
event (see also Chapter 4, paragraph 42) and any accum ulation of
litter cleared away as described above. It is particularly im portant
to ensure th a t litter does not accum ulate in escape routes or
under stands.


                                  45
151. Smoking should be discouraged in stands containing
combustible or flammable products, either loose (eg cushions) or
fixed (eg seating), or in the fabric of the building.

1 5 2 A common feature in construction of stands w h ich is a fire
risk is the existence of voids under the seating and under the
flooring itself. These voids can become a resting place for paper,
cartons and other combustible materials w hich can be ignited,
unnoticed, by carelessly discarded cigarette ends etc. Seating
arrangements should, w herever possible, be such tha t floor
surfaces are accessible for the removal of litter. W here voids
below flooring exist they should if practicable be excluded; for
example, w here a stand is built into a natural slope the
underneath area can be filled in w ith concrete. W here this is not
practicable they should be completely sealed off, to stop litter
accumulating in them , or be entirely open to allow ^asy access for
inspection and removal of combustible waste.

153. Other items, such as cushions filled w ith cellular foams or
other synthetic materials are a fire risk because they are
combustible, and w hen set alight can give off large quantities of
smoke and fumes. Also, the use of large quantities of plastics in
seating should be reviewed carefully, particularly w here cellular
polymers may be proposed. The fire authority should be consulted
about the fire risk in stands.


154. Cushions and other flam m able materials represent in bulk a
risk of a sw iftly developing fire. They should be stored in a fire-
resistant container or room well away from spectator accommodation
as should paper items such as programmes. Similarly, hazardous
materials, for example fuels (whether in containers or w ith in fuel
tanks and machinery) fertilizers, weed killers and paints should be
kept (if at all) w ell away from public areas and stored in a room
w hich has fire resistance of at least 1 hour. Other high fire risk
areas, eg enclosed or underground car parks situated under stands,
should also have fire resistance of at least 1 hour.

155. Where catering facilities are provided, special care should be
taken to ensure that any fuel or power supply used for cooking, for


                                46
example LPG cylinders, is safely stored and used, in accordance
w ith the advice of the authority responsible for enforcement of the
Health and Safety at W ork etc Act 1974. Useful guidance is given in
Health and Safety Executive Guidance Notes CS4, "The Keeping of
LPG in Cylinders and Sim ilar Containers" and CS8, "S m all Scale
Storage and Display of LPG at Retail Premises".

P reven tio n or re ta rd a tio n o f fire g ro w th /s p re a d
156. Where, despite all precautions, a fire has started, it is vital to
ensure that the rate of grow th in its early stages is restricted to
proportions w hich w ill not overwhelm the arrangements provided
for safe escape. This is best achieved by controlling the am ount and
nature of the materials (especially the combustibles) in a stand,
both in term s of the contents (loose and fixed) and in those parts of
the fabric of the stand to w hich a fire w ould have access (especially
internal linings). An im portant additional line of defence is prompt
action by ground staff using the fire-fighting equipment available at
the ground to tackle the fire and keep it in check ("firs t-a id " fire ­
fighting) until the fire brigade arrives. These measures are crucial
because the quicker a fire develops, the less tim e there is available
to escape from it. A fire should not be able to develop unnoticed
anywhere underneath or adjacent to the spectator area of the
stand, so tha t its spread w ould be likely to break through into the
spectator accommodation.

157. The spectator area in the stand should be separated from any
other adjacent circulation space or void by a construction having
fire resistance of not less than half an hour.

158. W alls and ceiling l;nings w ith in stands and ceiling linings
beneath the stand seats should have a flam e spread classification
of not less than Class 1 w hen tested in accordance w ith BS 476:
Part 7.


159. Restricting the extent and speed of the spread of fire in its
later stages is also im portant in order to reduce the possibility of
escape tim e being further threatened. Most measures which
reduce the rate of fire grow th in the early stages w ill also serve to
restrict the fire spread in the later stages. The follow ing measures


                                   47
w ould m ainly affect the later spread. For some roof configurations
venting systems may offer a means of reducing the spread of fire
(including movement of flames along the roof) and hot smoky
gases. The science of fire and smoke venting is however complex
and advice from the fire authority should be sought on w hether
this would be advantageous in a particular case.

160. W here the roofs of buildings are so connected that smoke
and flam e could travel essentially tw o or more sides of the playing
area, a w ide break in the roof should be made of sufficient w idth to
prevent spread from one side to the other, unless the flam e travel
could be eliminated by the prevention measures mentioned above.

161. Use of flam m able roof materials should be avoided. W here
they do exist they should be replaced w here practicable by non­
combustible materials or should be underdrawn w ith non­
combustible board.



Fire w a rn in g system s
 162. A ll buildings in the ground (including stands) to w hich public
or staff have access should be provided w ith an electrical fire
w arning system to alert staff. An indication of the w arning and its
location should be given to a central control point (see Chapter 12,
 paragraph 193). The system should conform w ith BS 5839: Part 1
 in term s of its components, installation and maintenance. The
c e n tra l co ntro l po in t and, w h e re necessary, o th e r selected
positions in the ground should have facilities to call the fire
brigade and other emergency services. Stewards and other
officials should be trained in w hat they should do if they discover a
fire (see paragraphs 176-177).

163. The area underneath the spectator accommodation should
have a system for detecting a developing fire. In order to give an
early warning in an unoccupied area an automatic fire detection
(AFD) system should be considered, conforming to BS 5839: Part 1
in term s of its components, installation and maintenance. It should
be connected so that any alarm w ill be communicated to the
central control point.


                                  48
164. A n y fire detection equipm ent should be tested regularly in
accordance w ith the advice given in the British Standard
specification.

165. W here areas of high fire risk such as large storerooms and
enclosed or underground car parks are situated under stands,
consideration should be given to the installation of an automatic
fire extinguishing system, eg sprinklers, instead of an AFD system.
Here again any such system should be connected so tha t w arning
of fire is communicated to the central control point.

E m ergen cy lig h tin g
166. Emergency lighting, for use in the event of failure of the
general lighting, should be provided in all parts of the premises
accessible to the public and along all exit routes, w ith exit signs
clearly illuminated. Installation should be in accordance w ith
BS 5266: Part 1. The system should be completely separate from
the general lighting system, although a one-circuit system
incorporating staggered sub-circuits would be an acceptable
alternative. Unless exceptionally tw o entirely independent supplies
can be obtained from outside sources, the emergency circuit
should be connected to a source of power located on the premises,
for example storage batteries or a diesel generator, w ith a delay of
not more than 5 seconds.

167. The system should be capable of m aintaining the necessary
level of illum ination for a period of 3 hours from the tim e of failure
of the normal supply.

168. The emergency lighting should operate automatically on the
failure of the main lighting.


169. Emergency lighting systems should be tested regularly in
accordance w ith BS 5266: Part 1.

F ire -fig h tin g e q u ip m e n t
170. Advice should be sought from the local fire authority on the
type, the am ount and siting of fire-fighting equipment. The
succeeding paragraphs give general guidelines.


                                   49
171. In major grounds it may be necessary to provide a suitable
w ater supply for fire fighting in the form of hydrants.

172. For "firs t aid" fire fighting by members of the staff, hydraulic
hose-reels should be provided to BS 5306: Part 1. These should be
sufficient to provide adequate protection to the w hole floor area,
and should be installed in a suitable position by entrances, exits
and stairways.

173. Where hose-reels are not provided, portable fire extinguishers
should be installed in sufficient numbers to give adequate cover.
The number and type w ill depend upon the size, layout, fire
separation and risk in each structure. Fire extinguishers should
conform to BS 5423 and be sited and m aintained according to
BS 5306: Part 3.                                    )

174. Fire blankets and fire extinguishers of a type appropriate to
the cooking facilities used should be kept in all catering facilities.

175. It should be borne in mind when considering location of fire ­
fighting equipment that it may need to be sited so that it cannot be
vandalised but yet is readily accessible to staff in the event of fire.



E m ergency procedures and s ta ff train in g
176. It is essential tha t plans should be made for dealing w ith
emergencies, including fire. The onus to do this lies w ith ground
management. Joint consultation between management, police,
fire, ambulance and other emergency services should take place in
order to produce agreed plans of action for all foreseeable types of
emergency. W hile the public are in the ground the num ber of staff
on duty should be sufficient to cover entrances, exits and other
strategic points and to fulfil other essential duties (see Chapter 13).

177. A ll such staff should be trained in the use of the fire-fighting
equipm ent provided, and in the action they should take in the
event of fire. This is m anagement's responsibility but the local fire
authority's advice should be sought on w hether the content of the
proposed training programme is adequate.


                                  50
M eans o f escape
178. "M eans of escape" is the structural means whereby a safe
route is provided for people to travel from any point in a structure
to a place of safety w ith o u t outside assistance. In a sports ground,
the means of escape in the event of an emergency w ill usually be
the same as the normal egress routes plus any additional "ro u te "
of forward escape on to the playing area. The kind of emergency
most likely to occur at a sports ground is fire but other types of
emergency, such as bomb threat, may arise w hich might
necessitate the evacuation of spectators from all or part of the
spectator accommodation. It is the managem ent’s responsibility to
ensure that all exit routes for use in an emergency are capable of
being safely and effectively used at all tim es w hen the ground
is occupied.

179. It is vital th at the emergency exit routes are sited so that
people using them w ill be least affected by the fire or its products,
for example smoke, toxic gases, heat etc. Initial travel should if
possible be downwards. This is because in the event of fire, its
dangerous products w ill travel upwards and accumulate densely at
the highest points. Further stages of the exit routes should be so
arranged as to take people progressively fu rther away from the
fire, along a route w here they cannot be significantly affected by
the fire or its products. There should be more than one emergency
exit route from a stand or a terrace in case one becomes blocked.
The emergency exits w ith in any one structure should be as widely
separated as practical planning considerations w ill allow, to
m inim ise the risk of them all being blocked by the same cause.

Fire p ro te c tio n fo r sta irw a y s and passages
180. W here a stairway, passage or any other part of an
emergency exit route passes up, down or through a stand or other
building used by spectators, it should be in a fire resistant
enclosure separated from the remainder of the stand by a
structure having fire resistance of not less than one hour. Such
exit routes should discharge to a place of safety in the open air
(which may be inside or outside the ground).

 181. The surface finish of w alls and ceilings of all emergency exit


                                    51
stairways should be of a standard corresponding to Class 0 (as
defined in the guidance issued in connection w ith the Building
Regulations 1985 for England and W ales and the Building
Standards (Scotland) Regulations 1981-84).

182. A n y door form ing part of the enclosure to a stairway should
be self closing and have a fire resistance of not less than half an hour.


E m ergency evacu atio n tim e
183. The emergency evacuation tim e is the notional tim e it would
take spectators to leave their viewing positions and reach a place of
safety in the open air or a protected stairw ay or emergency exit
route w ith fire resistance in accordance w ith paragraph 180. It is
calculated from the spectator capacity of the accommodation (see
Chapter 16) and the flo w rate (see Chapter 17) through restricting
parts of the exit system used for evacuation purposes.

184. The emergency evacuation tim e should not be confused w ith
the egress tim e of 8 minutes (referred to in Chapter 6, paragraph 56)
w hich is the maximum tim e it should take spectators to enter into
the normal exit system from their view ing positions at the end
of play.

185. The emergency evacuation tim e w ill depend largely on the
fire hazard present in the accommodation in question. A ny stand
w hich has a potential for rapid fire spread because of its interior
use and contents a n d /o r the nature of its internal surfaces w hich
would be exposed to fire should have an emergency evacuation
tim e of no more than 2 1/2 minutes. An increase in this tim e may
however be acceptable where the interior use and contents, and
the nature of the internal linings, are such as to elim inate the
possibility of rapid fire spread, and the emergency exit routes are
not vulnerable to a fire occurring w ith in the accommodation. In
setting an emergency evacuation tim e longer than 2y2 m inutes the
advice of the fire authority should be sought.

186. W here the playing area or perimeter track is accessible to
spectators and is considered suitable as a place of safety,
evacuation onto it can be taken into account in calculating the


                                  52
emergency evacuation tim e. W here there is a pitch perimeter
fence or w all it should have access points in accordance w ith
Chapter 15, paragraph 215 w hich can serve as exits and w hich
can be taken into account in the calculation of the emergency
evacuation time.

187. W here the playing surface of a pitch is made of synthetic
materials, advice from the fire authority should be sought to
establish if it can be properly considered a place of safety in a fire.
This is because it is possible that some form s of artificial tu rf
m ight in themselves constitute a hazard in the event of fire
because of flamespread and fum es etc caused by decomposition of
the material as a result of heat radiation.

188. The playing area may not be a place of safety, eg if it is
w h olly surrounded by covered accommodation w ith no breaks in
the roofing (see paragraph 160) and the advice of the fire authority
should be sought in such circumstances.

A ccess fo r em erg ency vehicles
189. Adequate roads for emergency vehicles such as fire
appliances and ambulances should be provided so that speedy and
direct access can be obtained to all buildings w ith in the ground;
wherever possible these access routes should be separate from
those used by spectators entering and leaving the ground.

190. The local fire authority should be consulted about the width,
clearance, height and supporting strength required of these access
roads. W herever possible access roads should provide for the
parking of emergency vehicles so that exit routes used by crowds
are not seriously obstructed.

191. W herever practicable and w here necessary roads w ith in 1/4
of a mile of the ground should be kept entirely free of parked
vehicles so as not to delay or obstruct the access of emergency
vehicles.




                                   53
12. COM M UNICATIONS

There should be a communications system capable of clearly
relaying essential messages to all parts of the ground in both
normal circumstances and in an emergency.

192. Precise requirements for communications w ill depend on the
sort of ground and the numbers of people th at attend there. In
general the com m unications system should be determined after
consultation w ith the police and emergency services. It should be
available for use and capable of coping w ith all emergencies.

193. A central control point, preferably a room, should be set
aside for the use of the supervising police officer aipd the ground
safety officer.


194. A t larger grounds the follow ing arrangements are likely to
be needed:

      i.    There should be inter-com m unication between the
            central control and all turnstiles or banks of turnstiles
            and all entry and exit gates used by the public.

     ii.    Metering systems to record all admissions should be
            installed at turnstiles and, to ensure that ground
            capacities are not exceeded in any section, arrange­
            ments should be made for central control to be
            informed immediately a predetermined number of
            spectators has been admitted through each turnstile.

     iii.   Public address equipment should be installed so that
            broadcast messages can be heard under reasonable
            conditions (including emergencies) by all persons of
            normal hearing in any part of the ground to w hich the
            public has access. The system should be capable of
            being controlled from the central control point and
            should ideally be capable of addressing messages to
            each major section of the ground. The power supply to
            the system should be such as to enable it to continue


                                 54
      to operate in an emergency such as fire or a failure of
      the mains supply.

iv.   Loud hailers should be available for the use of
      stewards and police in directing or instructing
      spectators.

v.    Any police radio facilities available for the maintenance
      of law and order should augment and not supersede
      the ground communications system.

vi.   Installation of closed circuit television is considered
      likely to be of significant value in assisting emergency
      evacuation.
13. STEWARDING

Effective stewarding should prevent overcrowding in sections
of the ground, reduce the likelihood and incidence of disorder,
help disperse spectators in such a w ay as to reduce crowd
pressure and provide the means to investigate, report and take
early action in an emergency.

195. Manning levels and stewarding requirements w ill vary
depending upon the size and configuration of the ground, the
nature of the event and crowd levels, but there are five basic
duties which stewards are called upon to carry out. These are:

      a.    controlling or directing members of the public w ho are
            entering or leaving the ground, to help achieve an even
            flo w of people to the viewing areas and safe dispersal
            of spectators on the terraces or viewing slopes.
      b.    patrolling the ground to deal w ith any emergencies eg
            raising alarms or extinguishing fires;

      c.    manning entrances, exits and other strategic points,
            especially exit doors and gates w hich are not
            continuously open w h ilst the ground is in use;

      d.    assisting police as appropriate or as requested w ith
            crowd control; and

      e.    undertaking specific duties in an emergency.

1 9 6 A more detailed check list of the kind of duties w hich
stewards are liable to undertake is at Annex B. It should be borne
in mind th at this is only an example and not necessarily an
exhaustive list of duties.

197. Stewards should be fully capable of carrying out the duties
allocated to them. Every steward should be fu lly appraised in
w ritin g of his duties and responsibilities and should carry on him a
general check list of them. W here a ground such as one used by
an association football league club has a high police presence,



                                 56
duties and responsibilities of stewards should be agreed w ith the
police. Stewards should attend pre-match briefing and should be
made aware as necessary of the arrangements and any
contingency plans to deal w ith the arrival of away supporters,

198. Effective training and supervision should be provided by man­
agement so that all stewards, w hether regular or casual, know not
only w hat their duties are but how to carry them out and why. This
is especially im portant in emergencies w hen it is essential that
stewards and their supervisors are fully aware of and practised in
the part they are to play in the plans drawn up w ith the emergency
services (see Chapter 11, paragraph 176).

199. Exercises should be carried out so as to ensure that
emergency procedures operate smoothly, and a record kept of the
duration of the exercise, details of the instruction given and by whom.

2 0 0 . M anagem ent should appoint a chief steward responsible for
coordinating responsibilities of all stewards. Control of stewards
should be from a central point w ith an efficient means to
comm unicate w ith the stewards (see also Chapter 12).

2 0 1 . A ll stewards should be readily identifiable eg by the wearing
of distinctive clothing (including armbands).




                                  57
 14. CROWD CONTROL

Where there is a disorderly element among the crowd intent on
violence, additional safety measures are needed to contain and
minimise the potential disruption, to isolate quickly, identify
and remove the offenders and to prevent their re-entry on
future occasions.

2 0 2 . Although the problem of crowd disorder at sporting events is
one w hich affects prim arily professional association football, other
sports are not im m une from it. Therefore, w hilst the follow ing
advice is directed m ainly at those grounds where professional
association football is played, the general principles should also be
borne in mind by management at other grounds where major
spectator sports are played.

2 0 3 . The 'European Convention on Spectator Violence and M is­
behaviour at Sporting Events and in particular at Football Matches'
(HMSO, Cmnd 9649), w hich came into force on 1 November 1985,
sets out in general term s the measures to be taken to prevent and
control violence by spectators. Additionally, some sports' governing
bodies have issued their own guidance on crowd control. For
example, the Football Association has issued a 'M em orandum to
Football League Clubs On Crowd Managem ent' w hich sets out the
measures that must be taken at all League grounds, and UEFA has
issued binding instructions in their document 'Order and Security
in the Stadia' (Third Edition, 1985) w hich apply to matches in their
competitions. The follow ing paragraphs cover some of the main
areas that require the attention of ground management. The
advice they contain is not comprehensive and is intended to
supplement rather than replace existing instructions, codes of
practice etc.

Policing
2 0 4 . As in other areas of safety, management is responsible for
the crowd control arrangements and ground conditions. They
should ensure that spectators are safe bearing in mind th at a game




                                 58
can lead to a build-up of tension or excitement. The safety
measures described elsewhere in this Guide w ill help to achieve
reasonable spectator safety, but for management to discharge its
responsibility properly a special police presence inside the ground
may be necessary to deal w ith any problem of disorder w hich may
arise, as w ell as to provide support and leadership in an emergency.
The num ber and disposition of the police must be determined by
Chief Constables w ho have the sole responsibility for the direction
of police operations. To aid the police in their duties, a police control
room should be provided w ith in the ground.

2 0 5 . Proper advance planning w ith the police is essential to
counter potential crowd disorder. There must be an effective
liaison between club and police for this purpose to including not
just the arrangements inside the ground but also the escort of
visiting supporters, their likely numbers, their separate entry to the
ground and their departure at the end of the match. There should
be debriefing meetings as necessary to evaluate existing
arrangem ents and provide the flexibility necessary to deal w ith
different circumstances.

C ro w d m o v e m e n t
2 0 6 . Crowd movement on terraces should be strictly controlled in
order to give the police the fullest opportunity for crowd control.
Less problems occur w hen terraces are subdivided as far as
possible into sections by use of both radial and lateral barriers or
railings w hich should comply w ith the strength requirem ents set
out in Chapter 9. Each section should ideally be self contained and
should be serviced by its own entrance/exits, refreshment facilities
and toilets (in keeping w ith the principles of general ground
division described in Chapter 8, paragraph 101). Special care is
needed to ensure th at sections and subdivisions are provided w ith
sufficient exits for use in an emergency.

2 0 7 . Home and visiting supporters at professional soccer matches
should norm ally be segregated but segregation is not advocated
for other sports w here crowd disorder is not a problem. This
should be borne in mind when considering barriers at grounds
used for other sports as well as association football.



                                    59
208. W here possible a neutral or sterile zone should be provided
w ith in a ground so that home and visiting supporters are not
physically close to each other. The arrangements for adm itting
spectators into th e ground, w h e th e r by tickets purchased in
advance or through payment at the turnstiles, should be drawn up
in consultation w ith the police, and must be carefully controlled to
ensure as far as possible that segregation is effective and known
troublemakers are excluded.



 2 0 9 . Access to the pitch must be made as difficult as possible in
 normal circum stances w h ile at the same tim e ensuring th at the
police have effective access to the terraces for the purpose of crowd
control and enabling the pitch to be used (where appropriate) in the
event of serious emergency (see also Chapter 11, paragraph 186).
Where a pitch perimeter barrier fence is installed to keep spectators
off the pitch, care is needed to ensure th a t it does not impair the
visibility of the playing area from the terraces. If spikes or barbed
w ire are installed they should if possible be at a height of no less
than 2.4 metres (see Chapter 3, paragraph 33). One alternative to
fencing is the construction around the pitch of a w all w ith a smooth
surface w hich should not be less than 1.22 metres in height on the
terrace side. This boundary w all should have gates or access points
to the pitch w hich could be manned by the police or stewards. A
walkway between the boundary wall and the terraces, w hich would
be solely occupied by the police, first aid and official club personnel,
has been found to be effective as regards safety and security. In
order to achieve th is it m ight be necessary to remove one or tw o
rows of terracing and to protect the w alkw ay from the terrace by a
continuous line of barriers, so designed as to discourage access to
the walkway except at authorised points. The access points from
terrace to w alkw ay should be directly linked w ith the access points
from the walkway to the pitch. W here a w alkw ay system is in use,
sliding gates may be installed at the access points from the
w alkw ay to the pitch, ie w here there can be no crow d pressure
against them (see Chapter 6, paragraph 65 regarding the use of
sliding gates elsewhere). A barrier to the pitch is usually
unnecessary where seating extends to the level of the playing area.



                                  60
D e te n tio n and rem o val o f tro u b le m akers
2 1 0 . A t larger soccer grounds, particularly where there has been
a record of frequent crowd trouble, secure detention rooms may be
necessary for use by the police.

2 1 1 . There should be adequate vehicular access for the
unobtrusive removal of detainees (see also Chapter 11, paragraphs
189-191 on access for emergency vehicles).

R efresh m ents
2 1 2 . Hard containers such as glasses, bottles or cans can make
dangerous missiles and should not be used for the sale of refresh­
ments. A ll refreshments should be served in soft containers.

2 1 3 . Alcohol should not be on sale for consumption on the
terraces or in the stands.
Note: The Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) A ct 1985
applies to any ground in England and Wales used for an in te r­
national association football match or a match involving a football
league club. In Scotland the Criminal Justice (Scotland) A ct 1980
applies to grounds used by clubs in the Scottish Football League,
Highland League and to the international stadia used for
association football and Rugby Union.




                                 61
15. PITCH PERIMETER
    FENCE/W ALL

A pitch perimeter fen ce/w all may not only delineate the playing
area from the spectator accommodation but may have to serve
as a crush barrier, or in some situations as a barrier to discourage
or prevent access to the playing area except in an emergency.

2 1 4 . The type, strength and height of a pitch perimeter fence or
w all w ill vary according to its location and required function. A t one
extreme, at a certain type of ground or small stadium used by very
fe w spectators, there may be no need for a perimeter fence or wall
at all; or if such a w all or fence exists it may need to ccsnsist of little
more than a rail to mark the playing area. A t the other extreme, at
some major soccer stadia, where restriction on crowd movement
form s a necessary part of the safety measures, it may be necessary
to have a fence w hich prevents access to the pitch in normal
circumstances (see also Chapter 14, paragraph 209) but allow s for
access in emergency. Even at these grounds however specification
of the pitch fence may vary for different parts of the ground.

2 1 5 . For most major stadia, w hether used for association football
or other sports, the pitch perimeter fence w ill be required either to
prevent access to the pitch as mentioned above, or at least to
discourage attem pts by spectators to enter the playing area. Gates
or other access points (m inim um w idth 1.1 metres) should
nonetheless be provided for use in an emergency and, at those
grounds w here a perimeter track is used as part of the exit system,
for the departure of spectators at the end of an event. Provision of
such gates or access points is particularly important to allo w full
access to the playing area (or track) where it is likely to be used as a
place of safety in an emergency. Such gates or access points should
be properly stewarded and clearly marked so that immediate access
to the playing area or perimeter track can be ensured.


2 1 6 . If spectators can lean on the perimeter fence it should be
deemed a crush barrier and fu lfil the conditions of height and
strength specified in Chapter 9 although if the fence is of solid
construction its height may be more than 1.12 metres. This is
because the pressures acting on a person forced against such a
fence are distributed over a large area of the body, unlike the
situation w ith a normal crush barrier, where the pressures
are localized.




                               63
16. ESTIMATION OF SAFE
    GROUND CAPACITY

To assess the number of spectators which can be safely
accommodated account should be taken of the features of the
individual ground, its configuration, general condition, use and
any deviations from the Guide's provisions.

217. The previous sections of the Guide give guidelines and
safety considerations for individual features of a ground. This
section suggests a method of calculating the num ber of people
that can be safely accommodated w hen taking into account
interactions between these individual features and w here there
are deviations from the guidelines. The follow ing paragraphs
contain as of necessity generalised guidelines in view of the wide
variety of types, sizes, configurations of sports grounds, their use
and general condition.


218. To facilitate the calculations a plan of the ground should be
available w ith such details as exits, stands, terraces, stairways,
passages, kiosks, seats and barriers. A scale of 1:200 is
appropriate for this purpose.


219. The method assesses:

      a.   the holding capacity of a terrace or view ing slope (that
           of a seated area generally being determined by the
           number of seats when it conforms to guidelines); and

      b.   the capacity of a given exit route from a terrace or stand.


220. The number of people that can be safely accommodated on a
terrace or in a stand (or other covered accommodation) is either its
holding capacity, or the capacity of the exit system to be used in
normal circumstances at the end of an event (assessed in
accordance w ith paragraphs 229-232 below) or the emergency
exit system whichever is the smallest.


                                 64
T erraces and v ie w in g slopes
2 2 1 . W here crush barriers meet the strength and spacing guide­
lines of Chapter 9 the capacity of a terrace or viewing slope should
be assessed from the area available fo r standing by allow ing a
packing density of between 54 and 27 persons per 10 square
metres depending upon the condition of the terrace or slope. Only
those parts of the terrace or viewing slope from w hich the w hole
of the playing area can be seen, excluding gangways, should be
included in this calculation.


2 2 2 . The extreme allowances for packing density are as follows:
      a.   54 persons per 10 square metres w hen the terrace or
           viewing slope is in good condition (as set out in Chapter 8);
           and
      b.   27 persons per 10 square metres w hen it materially
           deviates from the recommended guidelines, so as to
           constitute a possible hazard to individuals closely packed.


2 2 3 . It may be necessary to interpolate between these figures
w here conditions fall between the tw o extremes. W hen the
positioning and w idth of gangways do not meet w ith the
recom mendations of Chapter 8, paragraphs 9 6 -1 0 0 , an appropri­
ate reduction should be made in the area available for standing.


224. Even distribution of spectators on the terrace may be difficult
to overcome notw ithstanding the measures in this guide because
spectators may prefer to gather in a certain part or parts of a
terrace. Ground management should therefore take such factors
into account w hen assessing safe capacity levels.

2 2 5 . The capacity of the terrace is calculated by m ultiplying the
area available for standing by the appropriate packing density. The
following form ula may be used:
      Capacity (Number of persons) ^ x (27 to 54)
                                       10
where 'A ' is the area available for standing in square metres.


                                  65
Example A

Peak Viewing Terrace

Barriers and pitch perimeter w all conform to Guide's recom m en­
dations on both strength and spacing.

Area for standing 700 m 2 (100 m x 7 m) (excluding designated
gangways)

Condition and drainage of terraces good.

Dimensions: steps 375 mm (Guide recommends 2 8 0 m m -3 7 5 mm,
            see Chapter 8, paragraph 92)
            risers 70 m m * (Guide recommends 75 m m -1 80 mm,
            see Chapter 8, paragraph 93)

C o rre c tio n not possible w ith o u t major reconstruction so accepted
in view of only m inor deviation of 5 mm and good condition of
the terrace.

Capacity: 700 x 54= 3780
                 10


2 2 6 . W hen the strength of crush barriers conforms w ith the
guidelines but the spacing of such barriers does not, the capacity
is calculated from the provision of crush barriers in the area
available for standing (as defined in paragraph 221) as follows:

      a.   W here a terrace contains either "peak viewing areas"
           only or "other viewing areas" by m ultiplying the total
           length of the crush barriers by the appropriate distance
           between barriers (as given in Chapter 9, paragraphs
           116-117) or the existing distance, w hichever is less,
           and m ultiplying by the appropriate packing density.

Example B

Peak Viewing Terrace.

Barriers and pitch perimeter wall comply w ith greater strength
requirem ents (see Chapter 9, paragraph 119, Table 2) but not the
spacing requirements of the Guide.


                                   66
Area available for standing 700m 2 (100m         x 7 m) (excluding
designated gangways).

Terrace condition and drainage good: dimensions conform to
Guide's recommendations in Chapter 8.

Gradient 10%: therefore maximum appropriate distance 4.3 m (see
Chapter 9, paragraph 117, Table 1).

Number of barriers: 6 at 5 m = 30 metres

Perimeter w all (see Chapter 15, paragraph 216): 100 metres

                Total = 130 metres

Capacity: 130 x 4.3 x 54        = 3019
                      10
      b.   W here a terrace contains both "peak viewing areas"
           and "o th e r viewing areas", by m ultiplying the total
           length of barriers by the appropriate distance between
           barriers in a "peak view ing area" or the existing
           distance, w hichever is less, and m ultiplying them by the
           appropriate packing density.

Example C
View ing Terrace w ith "peak" and other viewing areas: or terrace
w ith other areas only. Barriers and pitch perimeter w all comply
w ith strength requirem ents but not spacing requirements of the
Guide.

Terrace details as in Example B.

Calculations as in Example B.




2 2 7 . Crush barriers w hich do not meet the guidelines on the
strength set out in Chapter 9 should in general be discounted for
calculation purposes, although w here crush barriers are well
constructed consideration may be given to allowing a lower
packing density figure for the purpose of the calculation.


                                   67
2 2 8 . Note: In small grounds attracting fe w spectators and low
density crowds, and w here a terrace contains no crush barriers or
where most or all of those installed have to be discounted for
calculation purposes the restrictions on the crowd capacity may be
unrealistic. A more flexible approach may be appropriate taking
account of the recommendations of the Guide to assess the
terrace holding capacity. In such cases the permissible packing
density is however likely to be much lower than the 27 persons
 per 10 square metres referred to in paragraph 222 and the overall
terrace capacity w ill be severely limited.

Example D

Peak or other Viewing Terrace. Perimeter w all and crush barriers
do not comply w ith strength or spacing requirements of the Guide.

Area available for standing 700 m2 (100 m x 7 m) (excluding
designated gangways).

Terrace condition and drainage good: dimensions as recommended
in Chapter 8.

Gradient 10%: maximum appropriate distance 4.3 m
              Barriers: 6 at 5 m = 30 m
              Perimeter wall:      100 m
                                         T30m

Appropriate test load 6K N /m etre w idth (Chapter 9, paragraph 119,
Table 2).

Condition of 2 barriers poor and discounted. Remaining 4 barriers
sound but found to have safe working load (established by test) of
4.5 K N /m etre width.

Pitch wall sound but found to have safe working load (established
by test) of 4.0 K N /m etre width.

Capacity: Barriers4 x 5 x 4 ^ 5 x 4 . 3 x 5 4 = 348
                             6           10

Pitch wall: 100 x 4 x 4.3 x 54 = 1548                 T   , 1896
                   6         10                           -------


                                    68
E xit system s
229. General considerations to be taken into account w hen
assessing the adequacy of exit systems are set out in Chapter 6.

230. The capacity of an exit system can be calculated by
assessing for each element in the system (ie each gangway,
doorway, stairway, exit etc) the number of persons w ho can pass
in 8 minutes (ie egress time, see Chapter 6, paragraph 56) or, the
emergency evacuation tim e appropriate to the accommodation
(see Chapter 11, paragraphs 183-185), w hichever is the shorter
tim e. This calculation is made by m ultiplying the w idth of the
element by the appropriate flo w rate in Chapter 17.

231. W here an elem ent in the exit system is less than 1 metre
wide that element should be omitted from the calculation.

232. Flow restricting elements of the kind described in Chapter 6
should be ignored for the purpose of these calculations.




                                69




                   ■t
17. RECOMMENDED FLOW RATES

233. From stands and stairways a flo w rate of 4 0 persons per
minute per unit of exit w idth (ie 550m m ) should be used.

234. From terraces (including covered terraces) and the ground
generally a flo w rate of 60 persons per minute per unit of exit
w idth should be used.




                              70
A nnex A

G LO S S A R Y OF T E R M S

Lateral   -Channel for the passage of spectators through a
gangw ay: terrace running across the slope.

Radial    Channel for the passage of spectators through a
gangw ay: terrace running w ith the slope.

S ta irw ay:   Part of a building comprising one or more flights of
               steps and including landings at head and foot of the
               stairway, and any intermediate landings between
               flights.

Fire           Consisting of a construction of a type w hich, if tested
resistant:     under the prescribed conditions of test appropriate to
               such construction, in accordance w ith BS 476: Part 1:
               1953 or Part 8: 1972 w ould satisfy the criteria relating
               to stability, integrity and (where appropriate) insulation
               for not less than 30 m inutes or for such longer period
               as may be required in the case of that construction.




                                    71
A n n ex B

S T E W A R D IN G

1.   A ll stewards should be capable of carrying out their duties
and should be properly trained to do so (see Chapter 13).

2.    Stewards must be informed in w riting of all tha t they are
expected to know and do. The follow ing list gives examples of
typical tasks and duties w hich stewards should be expected to
carry out and for w hich they should be prepared. Stewards should:

      i.      Prevent overcrowding by ensuring the crowd lim its in
              various parts of the ground are complied jwith.

      ii.     Prevent spectators, as far as possible, from climbing
              fences and other structures eg floodlight pylons, and
              from standing on seats. W here by virtue of the scale of
              the incident stewards are unable to prevent this, they
              should im mediately report the m atter to the nearest
              police officer or, if no police officer is present, to the
              chief steward or the safety officer.

      iii.    Ensure that gangways and exits are kept clear.
      iv.     Identify and investigate any incident or occurrence
              among spectators, reporting their findings to the police
              or to management.

      v.      Know the location of and be able to operate effectively
              the fire-firefighting equipment at the ground.
      vi.     Know the location of the first aid room and any first
              aid equipment kept elsewhere.
      vii.    Be fu lly conversant w ith any methods or signals used
              to alert staff that an emergency has arisen.
      viii.   Be capable of recognising potential fire hazards and
              suspect packages, reporting such findings immediately
              to the nearest police officer or, if no police officer is in
              the immediate vicinity, the chief steward or the safety


                                    72
      officer.

ix.   Comply prom ptly w ith any instruction given in an
      emergency by a police officer, the chief steward or the
      safety officer.

x.    Remain at their allocated posts as instructed unless
      authorised or ordered to do otherwise by a police
      officer, the chief steward or the safety officer.

xi.   Report to the safety officer any damage or defect
      w h ich is likely to pose a threat to spectator safety eg a
      damaged crush barrier.




                            73
A n n ex C

T E S T IN G OF C R U S H B A R R IE R S A N D H A N D R A IL S

1.    For crush barriers the test is to consist of the application of
an evenly distributed force of either 6.0 K N /m etre w idth
(400 lbs f/fo o t w idth) or 4.3 K N /m etre w idth (290 lbs f/fo o t w idth)
of barrier as mentioned in Chapter 9.

2.    For handrails the test is to consist of the application of an
evenly distributed force of either 4.3 K N /m e tre w idth (290 lbs f /
foot w idth) or 2.74 K N /m e tre w idth (188 lbs f/fo o t w idth) of
handrail as mentioned in Chapter 9.

3.    The force is to be in the form of a static load acting on the
top rail of the barrier or handrail at right angles to the longitudinal
axis and applied in about ten equal increments.

4.    The force to be applied for three consecutive periods, the full
force being maintained for 5 m inutes each period. The interval
between applications to be as short as possible, ie to enable
complete unloading and reloading only. A record should be kept of
any deformation during the loading periods, during the periods of
maintained loading, or during the recovery period.

5.    If on the removal of the force for the third tim e the recovery
of deformation is at least 75% the barrier or handrail may be
deemed to have satisfied the loading requirements.

If this requirem ent is not met but the recovery is more than 50%
then the test should be repeated and if on retest the recovery is at
least 75% the barrier or handrail may be deemed to have satisfied
the loading requirements.

If the recovery is less than 50% on the firs t test or less than 75%
on the retest, the barrier or handrail shall be deemed to have
failed to meet the loading requirements.




                                    74
6.      If during any test, even though the barrier or handrail
satisfies the above loading requirements, doubt should arise for
any reason (including such matters as cracking of the terracing or
distortion of connections) as to the safety of the barrier or handrail,
a detailed investigation should be carried out. Unless the results of
th is investigation remove the doubt as to the safety of the barrier
or handrail, the barrier or handrail, as the case may be, should be
deemed to have failed the test.

7.    A record should be kept of all the barriers and handrails
tested and of their performances during the tests.




                Printed in th e United Kingdom for Her M ajesty's Stationery Office
                           (3181/89) Dd290096 11/89 C15 G3390 10170




                                              75
This booklet provides voluntary guidance to ground
management, local authorities and technical specialists on
measures for improving spectator safety at existing sports
grounds. It can be applied to all types of sports grounds
w here spectators are likely to be present.




HMSO
BOOKS
HMSO publications are available from :

H M S O Publications Centre
(Mail and telephone orders only)
PO Box 276, London, SW 8 5DT
Telephone orders 01-873 9090
General enquiries 01-873 0011
(queuing system in operation fo r both numbers)

H M S O Bookshops
49 High H olborn,'London, WC1V 6HB 01-873 0011 (Counter service only)
258 Broad Street, Birmingham, B1 2HE 021-643 3740
Southey House, 33 W ine Street, Bristol, BS1 2BQ (0272) 264306
9-21 Princess Street, Manchester, M60 8AS 061-834 7201
80 Chichester Street, Belfast, BT1 4JY (0232) 238451
71 Lothian Road, Edinburgh, EH3 9AZ 031-228 4181

H M S O 's Accredited Agents
(see Yellow Pages)

A n d th ro u g h g o o d bo oksellers



£2.95 net



                                                            ISBN 0 - 1 ' - 3 4 0 8 4 0 -




ISBN 0 11 340840 4


                                                        9    7801           408405
              M e ld Archives Ref:   lo p p *' I




   West Midlands Police




DOCUMENT SECTION
     (88 —     108 )




HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY


        Part II
                                                                    TnclOfciiL Repur t-


                          HEALTH AND SAFETY

                   RESEARCH AND LABORATORY SFRVTCre DIVISION

                          Broad Lane, Sheffield S3 7HQ


                    The Hillsborough Incident 15 April 1989:
                     A compendium of the Technical Aspects
                      of the Incident Investigation by the
                          Health and Safety Executive

                                         by

                         C E Nicholson    PhD     CEng MIM

                                                   HytyME/MM/89/2




Distribution                                  Issue authorised by: Dr A Jones
                                              Date: 21 December 1989
The Court of Inquiry (5 copies)
ACC M Jones West Midlands Police
Hr D C T Eves
Dr J McQuaid
Dr A Jones
Hr A Barrell TD
Hr P G Jones TD
Hr M S Nattrass FAID Area
Hr J P Giltrow HFS (N)
Hr M R Stephenson NE FOG
Hr M Fountain TD3
Dr J H Foley
Dr C E Nicholson
Hr P F Heyes
Hr I R Price                                  TO RISD/DIAS STAFF ONLY: NOT TO
Hr D Waterhouse                               BE OCMMUNICATED OUTSIDE HSE
Hr G A C Games                                WITHOUT THE APPROVAL OF THE
Hr G Norton                                   AUTHORISING OFFICER
Hr M James TD3
Hr C J Pertee NE FOG
Hr J B Hibbs NE FOG
RPS                                           8^343/235/01
Library (2)
Registry File                                 S80.02.0TH.814
                                                            Document No.   89     C O N T ’D



1     INTRODUCTION

1.1     Following an incident on 15 April 1989, I visited Steffield Wednesday
        Football Club's (SWFC) Hillsborough Stadium on 16 April 1989 at the
        request of Mr M S Nattrass, Area Director of South Yorkshire and
        Humberside Factory and Agricultural Inspectorate of the Health and Safety
        Executive (HSE). Subsequently I was appointed to head the HSE team
        investigating the incident following correspondence between the Court of
        Inquiry and the then Deputy Director General of the HSE, Mr J D G Hammer.

1.2     The HSE's Research and Laboratory Services Division (KLSD) consists of
        3 laboratories, one of which, the Safety Engineering laboratory (SEL), is
        based in Sheffield. As a Deputy Director in the Sheffield laboratory, I
        was able to assemble a team of scientists and engineers from various
        specialist sections to tackle the various technical problems which arose.
        I was also assisted by members of HSE's Technology Division in much of the
        on site investigation at the Hillsborough ground. They produced site
        reports, which are reproduced in the Annexe, and which have been utilised
        by HSE staff throughout this investigation.

      In considering collapse load calculations of barrier 124A, Professor
      R A Smith of the University of Sheffield Department of Mechanical and
      Process Engineering, acted as a consultant and in conjunction with RISD
      staff produced a report on this topic.

1.3    A few days after the incident, the West Midlands Police were appointed to
       assist the Inquiry and all the initial stages of the investigation were
       carried out in close collaboration with ACC M Jones of the West Midlands
       Police. When the Inquiry assessors were appointed, the direction of
       technical aspects of the investigation was then planned with Professor
       L Maunder of the University of Newcastle Department of Mechanical
       Engineering, but still in collaboration with ACC Jones.

1.4    A summary report of HSE's findings ’’The Hillsborough Incident
       15 April 1989: An Investigation into Various Technical Aspects prepared
       for the Court of Inquiry" by C E Nicholson, Report No IR/l/ME/MM/89/1 was
       written and presented to the Court of Inquiry in June 1989.

1.5    This compendium of reports contains details of examinations performed on
       site and in the laboratory. The work was carried out by me, by other
       staff of HSE and by the consultant Professor Smith, working on my
       instructions and under my general supervision.

2   REPORTS

    The following is a list of reports contained within this compendium.    All
    authors are staff of HSE's Research Division except where noted.

2.1    Examination of Crush Barriers from Pens 3 and 4
       by P F Heyes and J G Tattersall
       Report No IR/I/MM/89/11

2.2    Collapse load Calculations for Barrier 124A
       by Professor R A Smith, University of Sheffield and G A C Games
       Report No HyI/ME/89/3 6

2.3    An investigation into the number of people in Pens 3 and 4
       by G Norton
       Report No IR/I/ME/89/32
                                                             Document No.   89   CONT’D


    2.4   An estimation of the maximum allowable capacity of Pens 3 and 4
          by A L Collins and D Waterhouse
          Report No IB/I/ME/89/35

    2.5   An investigation of the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane entrance to the
          stadium
          by G A C Gaines and D Waterhouse
          Report No IR/I/ME/89/33

    2.6   An investigation into the number of people entering the stadium through
          turnstiles A to G and through Gate C
          by G A C Gaines
          Report No IR/I/ME/89/34

    2.7   Audibility of the Public Address System at Hillsborough Football Ground
          by I R Price
          Report No IR/I/NV/89/17

    3   ANNEXE

        These are three Field Consultant Group (FOG) Inspector reports produced by
        specialist inspectors from HSE's Technology Division (TD) following their on
        site investigations of barriers, turnstiles and a perimeter brick wall.
        Also included is an interim report on the measurement of crowd densities and
        pressures. These four reports were prepared in the immediate aftermath of
        the incident and contain the best information available at the time.

    3.1   Condition of outer perimeter wall by C J Pertee   TD

    3.2   Examination of turnstiles A-G by J B Hibbs   TD

    3.3   Examination of Crush Barriers, Leppings Lane End, Central Pen by J B Hibbs
          TD

    3.4   Interim Report (Minute to Dr C E Nicholson)
          Crowd densities and pressures by M James TD.




t
                                                                                       483
                                                        Document N a   89     C O NT’ D


                                                                   Incident Report


                       HEALTH AND SAFETY EXECUTIVE

                RESEARCH AND LABORATORY SERVICES DIVISION

                       Broad Lane, Sheffield S3 7HQ



               Examination of Crush Barriers from Fens 3 and 4

                                   by

                      P F Heyes and J G Tattersall

                                                  IR/L/MM/8 9/11




Distribution                                         Issue authorised by: Dr A Jones

The Court of Inquiry (5)                             Date: 11 December 1989
ACC M Jones West Midlands Police
Mr D C T Eves
Dr J McQuaid
Dr A Jones
Mr A Barrell TD
Mr P G Jones TD
Mr M S Nattrass FAID Area 14
Mr J P Giltrow HFS(N)
Mr M R Stephenson NEFCG
Mr M Fountain TD3
Dr J H Foley
Dr C E Nicholson
Mr P F Heyes
Mr I R Price                                         TO RLSD/DIAS STAFF ONLY:
Mr D Waterhouse                                      NOT TO BE COMMUNICATED OUTSIDE HSE
Mr G A C Games                                       WITHOUT THE APPROVAL OF THE
Mr G Norton                                          AUTHORISING OFFICER
Mr M James TD3
Mr C J Pertee NEFCG
Mr J B Hibbs NEFCG
RPS                                                  SMR/343/235/01
Library(2)
Registry File                                        S80.02.0TH.814
                                                      Document No.   89     CONT’D


1 INTRODUCTION

Following the incident on 15 April 1989, staff of the Health and Safety
Executive visited Hillsborough Football Ground. The crush barriers in
Pens 3 and 4 (central pen), at the Leppings Lane end of the ground, were
examined on 16 and 17 April 1989 and identified with a paint marker in
accordance with a drawing supplied by Mr Paul Jackson, Sheffield
Environmental Health Department. On each barrier the support locations
were numbered sequentially from left to right when viewed from the pitch.

Barrier 124A appeared to have collapsed and a length of the horizontal
tube had become detached. This detached length of tube had been found on
the pitch in front of gate 3 in the perimeter fence at the Leppings Lane
end on 16 April 1989 by Dr Nicholson. It was kept in a secure place by
Club Officials and was placed in Pen 3 on 17 April 1989 so that it could
be examined in conjunction with the rest of the barrier. Subsequently on
17 April 1989 it was taken to the Sheffield Laboratory of the Health and
Safety Executive together with another small piece of tube found by Dr
Nicholson on 17 April 1989 (see 2.1, page 3 below).

On 24 April 1989 the damaged parts of barrier 124A, consisting of two
lengths of tube and two supports, were removed from Pen 3, under the
supervision of the authors of this report, and taken to the Sheffield
Laboratory of the Health and Safety Executive for metallurgical
assessment. The remainder of barrier 124A was removed by Mr P F Heyes
and HSE staff on 7 July 1989.

This report contains details of examinations performed both on site and
in the laboratory. The work was carried out by the authors and by other
staff of HSE working on their instruction and under their general
supervision.

2 ON SITE EXAMINATION

2.1 BARRIER 124A

Barrier 124A was located on the seventh, eighth and ninth steps of Pen 3
adjacent to Pen 2. The overall length of this barrier before collapse
was estimated to be 7.5m including a tube overhang of 0.6m near the
radial fence adjacent to Pen 2. The horizontal distance from this
barrier to the perimeter fence at the front of Pen 3 was approximately
3.5m, and the distance of the tube end from the radial fence, separating
Pens 2 and 3, was 28mm. There were no other barriers between barrier
124A and the perimeter fence. A sketch of this barrier, showing our
opinion of its appearance before the incident, is shown in Figure 1.

The evidence suggested that, prior to the collapse, barrier 124A had
consisted of four vertical supports with a horizontal tube between them.
HSE staff numbered the supports 1,2,3 and 4, beginning at the end nearer
Pen 2.




                                 -1-




                                                                                     485
                                                         Document No.   89     CONTD



    Each vertical support had consisted of two lengths of 52mm wide metal
    angle, having a thickness of 6mm, inclined at an angle of 20 degrees to
    one another. During manufacture each front support leg had been curved
    near the top to form a horizontal surface and had been joined to the
    rear support leg by a triangular gusset plate. The latter had been
    rivetted to the two lengths of metal angle. The horizontal tube had been
    made from hollow circular section metal with an outside diameter of
    60mm. An inverted U-shaped strap, approximately 50mm wide, had been
    bolted to the top of each support, and this was presumably intended to
    retain the horizontal tube.

    Figure 2 shows barrier 124A viewed from the pitch as it appeared on the
    morning of 17 April 1989. The detached length of tube had a transverse
    fracture at either end. One of these fractures matched the fracture on
    the length of tube in contact with support 2 and the other matched the
    fracture on the length of tube in contact with support 3. Hence it was
    possible to locate this detached length of tube in the correct
    position between supports 2 and 3. This detached length of tube had
    been bent symmetrically about its mid-point where the maximum deflection
    was 133mm.

    Support 4, shown in the foreground of Figure 1, had been moved forward
    and twisted towards the front left-hand corner of Pen 3, viewed from the
    pitch. The lower portion of the front leg had remained straight,
    although by comparison with the front legs of other barriers, it
    appeared to have moved forward through an angle of 25 degrees
    approximately. In so doing the front leg had broken away from the edge
    of the concrete step in which it had been supported. Several pieces of
    detached concrete were observed nearby, two of which matched the
    fracture on the step, shown in Figure 3. The upper portion of the front
    leg had suffered localised bending and it had been twisted inwards with
    respect to the other supports on this barrier.

    The rear leg of support 4 had been deformed and kinked at the lower end
    near the junction with a piece of reinforcing steel angle which had been
    bolted on top of the original angle section. The latter had been thinned
    by corrosion in the area where this deformation had occurred. The rear

9   leg also exhibited localised deformation and cracking in the vicinity of
    the lowest gusset plate attachment hole. The gusset plate appeared to be
    relatively undeformed but had been moved inwards towards the other
    supports. The tube retaining strap appeared to be intact and still in
    position.

    Support 3 had been deformed extensively and flattened so that it was
    almost horizontal. The general direction of deformation was towards the
    front left-hand corner of the pen, viewed from the pitch. At its lower
    end the front leg had been deformed adjacent to a piece of reinforcing
    angle, but both the latter and the surrounding concrete were
    undisturbed. The rear leg had been bent forward and the majority of the
    deformation had occurred at the junction with the concrete step. The
    step itself was intact. The gusset plate was undeformed but it had been
    torn from the upper part of the rear leg and moved forward. The strap
    retaining the tube at support 3 had been straightened partially but the
    tube appeared to be captive at this position. A transverse fracture of
    the tube, in the vicinity of some tube wall corrosion, was visible under
    the strap.


                                    -2-


                                                                                       486
                                                      Document No.   89    CONT’D


The length of tube in contact with support 3 had been bent by 200mm at
midspan and it had a ragged fracture in a corroded region near the end
further from support 3, i.e. the free end. The latter had presumably
been located under the strap on support 4 before collapse occurred. The
fracture in the tube corresponding with support 4 was partly transverse
and partly longitudinal, the original manufactured end being deformed
but not fractured. At some stage the tube had also been partially
crushed at this location.

During the visit on 17 April, a small piece of metal, roughly
semi-circular in section, was found in Pen 3 by Dr C Nicholson amongst
the debris near gate 3 in the perimeter fence. The fracture on this
small piece matched that at the end of the tube corresponding to support
4. This end of the tube had apparently moved a distance of 1.4m in the
horizontal plane before coming to rest on the steps. In total, the
collapsed part of barrier 12AA occupied an area measuring 4m along the
terrace and 1.6m down the terrace in Pen 3.

Supports 1 and 2 were free from damage and the length of tube between
them had not been deformed significantly. This length of tube contained
two circumferential welds positioned as follows when viewed from the
pitch side: one approximately 0.2m left from the strap on support 2; the
other 0.05m right from the strap on support 1. The tube had fractured
transversely under the strap on support 2 and a smaller diameter tube
insert was observed protruding a distance of 25mm from this fracture.
There was evidence of considerable corrosion of the original tube under
this strap. The tube insert appeared to be approximately 150mm in total
length. The strap on support 2 had been welded to the tube on the left
side only. This was the only location on barrier 124A where a strap had
been welded to the tube.

Support 1 had a piece of reinforcing angle attached to each foot and the
rear leg had been braced by an additional piece of angle acting as an
outrigger. Support 2 had a piece of reinforcing angle attached to the
front foot only with an outrigger on the rear leg.

2.2 OTHER BARRIERS IN PENS 3 AND 4

The remaining barriers in Pen 3 and those in Pen 4 were examined. The
layout of all the barriers in Pens 3 and 4 is shown schematically in
Figure 4. On each barrier the supports were numbered sequentially from
left to right as viewed from the pitch. Several barriers had been
fabricated with rectangular hollow section supports and these appeared
to be somewhat newer than the rest. Most of the old-style barriers had
been modified in some way, for example by reinforcing of the support
legs and welding of the horizontal tubes. Corrosion was evident at all
joints and intersections, and rust "jacking" had occurred at many of the
gusset plate/support leg junctions.

Most of the horizontal tubes on the older barriers were open-ended and
in two cases (barrier 125 near support 1 and barrier 128 near support 1)
holes in the tube wall, caused by corrosion under the support strap,
were clearly visible. An example of this is shown arrowed in Figure 5
which depicts the end of barrier 125 adjacent to barrier 124A in Pen 3.
The hole is approximately 25mm in diameter and its centre is 60mm from
the end of the tube.




                                                                                487
                                                      Document No.    89   CONT’D



2.3 EXCAVATION OF BARRIER 124A SUPPORTS 3 AND 4 ON 24 APRIL 1989

It was agreed by the Inquiry that supports 3 and 4 on barrier 124A could
removed for laboratory examination. Three cylindrical cores, measuring
0.1m in diameter and 0.4m in length, were cut from the concrete steps at
positions specified by Mr C Pertee, a Principal Specialist Inspector in
the Technology Division of HSE, before excavation of the supports
commenced. These cores, from steps 7, 8 and 9, were identified by the
letters P,Q and U respectively. After cutting, core P was found to
contain a piece of the front foot from support 4 and core U was found to
contain a piece of the rear foot of support 3.

It became apparent during excavation that each support leg had been
flattened and shaped to form a foot which had been positioned
horizontally in the ground and bolted to a base plate. The supports were
freed by unscrewing, or grinding off the nuts in contact with the feet
of the supports. In all cases the boundary between the support and the
concrete was marked using yellow paint.

When the front foot of support 4 was exposed, considerable thinning and
loss of metal was observed in the vicinity of the bend between the
upright and the foot. This area was further weakened during core
drilling and the remaining ligament of metal, approximately 5mm wide and
0.8mm in thickness, became detached during removal of the support. Part
of the front foot was found to be in contact with a reinforcing wire in
the concrete and a length of this wire was removed for possible future
examination.

The pieces of reinforcing angle, noted previously on the rear leg of
support 4 and the front leg of support 3, were observed to extend below
the surface of the concrete to the bend at the start of the foot.

The length of tube remaining in contact with support 3 slipped out of
the strap during lifting of the support. It was apparent that this
length of tube had not been fixed intentionally to the strap and it had
been held temporarily in position by accumulated rust and debris only.

2.4 REMOVAL OF INTACT PART OF BARRIER 124A ON 7 JULY 1989

The feet of supports 1 and 2 were excavated to a depth of 50mm
approximately and subsequently cut using an angle grinder. This
permitted both supports, and the length of tube between them, to be
removed in one piece.

3 LABORATORY ASSESSMENT

3.1 ITEMS RECEIVED

The following items were taken from Pen 3 on 17 April 1989 and
transported to HSE's Sheffield Laboratory:

Exhibit No                        Description

CEN/1        A piece of metal tube found by Dr Nicholson in Pen 3 near
             gate 3 in the perimeter fence


                                  -4-



                                                                                    488
                                                       Document No.     8 9   C O N T ’D



CEN/2       a    length of metal tube found by Dr Nicholson on the pitch
                in front of gate 3 in the perimeter fence

The following items were taken from Pen 3 on     24April 1989 and
transported to HSE's Sheffield Laboratory:

PFH/1        a    length of metal tube, one end ofwhich had been located
                in the strap of support 3 on barrier 124A

PFH/2       Support 4 from barrier      124A

PFH/3       Support 3 from barrier      124A

PFH/4       Items from the front foot of support 4 on barrier 124A
             comprising: two nuts; a slice of metal from the foot and a
             piece of reinforcing wire.

PFH/5       Two nuts from the rear footofsupport       4 onbarrier    124A

PFH/6       Two pieces of concrete found by MrHeyes     near thefront
             foot of support 4 on barrier 124A

PFH/7       A concrete core, identified as "P", cut from step 7 in
             Pen 3 near the front foot of support 4 on barrier 124A

PFH/8       A concrete core, identified as "Q", cut from step 8 in
             Pen 3 between the feet of support 4 on barrier 124A

PFH/9       A concrete core, identified as "U", cut from step 9 in
             Pen 3 near the rear leg of support 3 on barrier 124A

The following item was removed from Pen 3 on 7 July 1989 and transported
to HSE's Sheffield Laboratory:

PFH/10      A piece of barrier 124A consisting of supports 1 and 2 and
             the length of tube between them.

Exhibits PFH/4,5 and 6 were not included in the present examination.

3.2 CONCRETE CORES

The three cores are shown schematically in Figure 6. They were taken at
different positions along the terrace but, for convenience, they are
shown here in the same plane. Core P was extracted in three pieces: a
cylindrical upper piece, approximately 85mm in length, which was
composed of an upper layer (27mm in thickness) containing relatively
fine aggregate, typically a few millimetres in section and a lower layer
(52mm in thickness) containing coarser aggregate, typically 5-10mm in
section; an irregular shaped intermediate piece, with a maximum length
of 120mm, which contained the coarsest aggregate, typically 20-30mm in
section, and bore an impression of a section of barrier support foot; a
cylindrical lower layer, 180mm in length also containing the coarsest
aggregate (20-30mm in section)

Core Q was extracted in two cylindrical pieces: an upper piece,
approximately 138mm in length, which was composed of an upper layer (23mm
in thickness) containing relatively fine aggregate, typically a few


                                  -5-


                                                                                           489
                                                    Document No.   89     C O N T ’D




millimetres in section, a middle layer (65mm in thickness) containing
coarser aggregate, typically 5-10mm in section, and lower a layer, 50mm
in thickness, of loosely bound coarse material; a lower piece, 245mm in
length containing the coarsest aggregate, typically 20-30mm in section.

Core U was extracted in two cylindrical pieces: an upper piece,
approximately 141mm in length, which was composed of an upper layer
(26mm in thickness) containing relatively fine aggregate, typically a
few millimetres in section and a lower layer (115mm in thickness)
containing coarser aggregate, typically 5-10mm in section; a lower
piece, 200mm in length, containing the coarsest aggregate, typically
20-30mm in section. The lower layer contained a slice through a barrier
support foot consisting of, in descending order, a nut, a piece of foot,
a piece of bolt and a piece of base-plate.

3.3 LENGTHS OF TUBE FROM BARRIER 124A

3.3.1 Visual examination

The two detached lengths of tube (CEN/2 and PFH/1) are shown in Figures
7 and 8 respectively. The length of tube which had been between supports
3 and 4 was designated "tube 3/4" by the authors and the length of tube
which had between supports 2 and 3 was designated "tube 2/3". Each
length measured 2.3m and had an external diameter of 60mm. The length of
tube between supports 1 and 2 was designated "tube 1/2" and its overall
length was approximately 3m. The outside diameter of this tube was 60mm.

Bottom dead centre of tube 2/3 and 3/4 was located by examination of
paint runs and an accumulation of dried paint. It was deduced that both
lengths of tube had been deformed towards the pitch in a horizontal
plane.

Visual examination of the fractures indicated that in general the
failure of the tube had occurred in a fibrous, ductile manner. On the
two matching fractures which had been coincident with support 3 there
was however a region of bright crystalline fracture, shown arrowed in
Figure 9, consistent with a more brittle failure mode. This crystalline
fracture had occurred where the remaining wall thickness of the tube was
at a maximum.

In general the appearance of the tube fractures was typical of wrought
iron which had fractured in a single-stage bending/tensile mode.
Fracture of the tube adjacent to support 3 appeared to have initiated on
the uphill side of the barrier at a position at right angles to top
dead centre. The other tube fractures had suffered some post-failure
damage and the origins were not readily identifiable.

At all the fracture positions much of the wall thickness of the tube had
been reduced, mainly by external corrosion. The corrosion had occurred
under the locating straps in areas, approximately 65mm wide, which were
unpainted. The end of the tube at the position of support 4 had been
open to the environment and additional corrosion at the internal surface
of the tube had occurred. This had resulted in the formation of two
holes through the wall approximately 10 and 20 mm in diameter under the
strap. One of these holes, shown arrowed in Figure 10, appeared to have
initiated the fracture and led to the detachment of the small piece of
tube (arrowed in Figure 11) found on the steps, item CEN/1. These holes


                               -6-
                                                                                       490
                                                      Document No.    89   CO N T’D



were location at the 4 o'clock and 8 o'clock positions and their centres
would have been approximately 50mm from the open end of the tube at
support 4 before failure.

The extent of corrosion of tube 1/2 under the strap at support 2 was
disclosed when the strap was removed (Figure 12). Tube 1/2 was removed
subsequently from supports 1 and 2 to permit closer examination. This
revealed that two pieces of tube had been joined beneath support 2 by a
part circumferential weld which also served to join the strap to the
tube at this support. A 150mm long tubular insert (arrowed in Figure
12), with an outside diameter of 49mm and a wall thickness of 5mm, was
located inside the main tube at a position corresponding with support 2.
This reinforcement was retained by means of a tack weld on the inside of
the main tube between support 2 and the adjacent circumferential weld in
the main tube, which had been noted on site. Hence, neglecting the
insert, the tube between supports 1 and 2 apparently consisted of three
pieces joined by: a circumferential near support 1; a circumferential
weld near support 2; a part circumferential weld beneath support 2.

An oval hole, shown in Figure 13 and measuring 35 x 15mm, was revealed
in the tube under the strap on support 1, at the 4 o'clock position when
viewed from the end nearer support 1. This hole had apparently been
formed by external corrosion of the tube under the strap.

A rolled-up newspaper was found inside tube 2/3. This was part of a copy
of the "Yorkshire Telegraph & Star", dated Saturday 24 October 1931. A
piece of another newpaper, "The Star" dated Saturday 26 September 1959,
was found in tube 1/2. Various other items of debris were found
elsewhere in the lengths of tube.

3.3.2 Tube wall thickness measurements

The wall thickness of the tube at the fracture positions was measured at
various locations around the circumference. The thickness range recorded
at each fracture is shown below:

Support 2      0.4 to 4.4 mm

Support 3      1.6 to 4.5 mm

Support 4      1.1 to 4,5   mm (ignoringthe edges   of the   holes)

Measurements taken along the lengths of tube using anultrasonic
instrument showed that the wall thickness remote from the fractures was
in the range 3.2 to 4.9 mm. Corrosion was confined to regions about
70-75mm wide, centred on the support straps, and there were no areas of
pronounced thinning elsewhere. The ultrasonic thickness reading was
5.0mm throughout the length of tube between the circumferential welds on
tube 1/2.

3.3.3 Microstructural examination

A transverse ring section was cut from tube 3/4 at a distance of 65mm
from the fracture corresponding to support 3. Microexamination showed
that the tube had been manufactured from wrought iron and that it
contained a longitudinal, forged lap weld.
                                                          Document No,   8 9   CONT




A microsection of a sample of paint removed from a similar position
showed that the paint consisted of 13 coats plus an initial metal loaded
primer coat. The total thickness of these coats was approximately 0.5 mm.
Various microsections from tube 1/2 indicated that this length of tube
consisted of both wrought iron and low carbon steel as follows: the
length between the end nearer Pen 2 and the circumferential weld near
support 1 was wrought iron; the length between the circumferential welds
was low carbon steel; the length between the circumferential weld near
support 2 and the part circumferential weld beneath the strap on support
2 was low carbon steel; the length between the part circumferential
beneath the strap on support 2 and the fracture was wrought iron.

3.3.4 Tensile tests

Two longitudinal tensile test pieces, identified as T343/1 and T343/2,
were machined from tube 3/4 near the end corresponding to support 3. Two
further longitudinal tensile test pieces, identified as T1221 and T1222,
were machined from the central portion (low carbon steel) of tube 1/2.
In order to minimize the effects of previous work hardening, all test
pieces were taken as near as possible to what would have been the
neutral axis during bending.

These test pieces were tested in accordance with BS 18:1987 "Method for
tensile testing of metals (including aerospace materials)", and the
following results were obtained:


             Elastic Limit     Rp0.2         Rp0.5          Rm           A%
    (limit of proportionality)

  T343/1       142 MPa       255 MPa        271 MPa        371 MPa       17
               9.1 tsi       16.6 tsi       17.5 tsi       24.0 tsi

  T343/2       159 MPa       261 MPa        269 MPa        358 MPa       17
               10.3 tsi      16.9 tsi       17.4 tsi       23.2 tsi

   T1221       282 MPa       342 MPa        360 MPa        488 MPa       27
               18.3 tsi      22.2 tsi       23.3 tsi       31.6 tsi

   T1222       301 MPa       356 MPa        372 MPa        499 MPa       27
               19.5 tsi      23.1 tsi       24.1 tsi       32.2 tsi

None of these test pieces exhibited a yield phenomenon.

3.3.5 Hardness testing

Hardness tests were carried out on the ring microsection from tube 3/4
and on the microsections from tube 1/2 in accordance with BS 427:Part
1:1961 (1981) "Method for Vickers hardness test: Testing of metals". The
following results were obtained:

Tube 3/4, wrought iron                 142 - 145 HV 10

Tube 1/2, low carbon steel             146 - 132 HV 10

Tube 1/2, weld metal at support 2       161 - 171 HV 10
                                                      Document No.     89   C O N T ’D



3.4 SUPPORTS FROM BARRIER 124A

3-4.1 Visual examination

Supports 1 and 2 had not been deformed. Supports 3 and 4 are shown after
excavation in Figures 14 and 15 respectively. Although the extent of the
deformation of supports 3 and 4 was noted on site (see section 2.1 of
this report), a number of additional features became apparent in the
laboratory.

The legs of supports 3 and 4 had been corroded, particularly at the
junctions with the concrete step and/or additional reinforcing angles.
At these locations the residual thickness was in the range 3.1mm to
5.9mm, compared with a nominal thickness of 6.3mm elsewhere. A
considerable amount of metal had been lost by corrosion from the
sub-surface region of the supports. For example, on the rear leg of
support 4, a ligament of metal 8mm wide and 2mm in thickness was all
that remained of the original nominal 50 x 50mm angle section at a
distance of 150mm below the surface.

The front leg of support 3 and the rear leg of support 4 had been
reinforced with additional sections of steel angle. Both these
reinforcements spanned areas of corrosion on the sub-surface region of
the supports. In general on the collapsed supports, the most severe
sub-surface corrosion was located at a distance which varied from 50mm
to 170mm below the surface depending on which step the barrier had been
located.

3.4.2 Dimensions

In general, the width of the steel angle from which the support legs had
been made was in the range 49 - 52mm and the thickness remote from
corroded regions was in the range 6.0 - 7.4 mm. In some above surface
regions of supports 3 and 4 the thickness of the angle had been reduced
by corrosion and buckling had occurred during collapse. This can been
seen in Figures 14 and 15 in which the thickness of the angle at the
positions indicated was:

           Support 3       (a)     4.6   to 5.9 mm
                           (b)     5.9   mm
           Support 4       (c)     1.5   mm
                           (d)     5.6   to 5.8 mm

The thickness of the steel angle in the sub-surface regions of supports
3 and 4 varied from zero, where through-thickness corrosion had
occurred, to 6.4mm.

3.4.3 Microexamination

Microsections were cut and prepared for examination from each of the
legs on supports 3 and 4 only. The following microstructures were
observed:

    Support 3   Front leg - 100% ferrite
                Rear leg - small amount of pearlite in ferrite in central
                            region; ferrite at edges.
                                                      Docum ent Mo.   09   C O N T ’D




    Support 4   Both legs - small amount of pearlite in ferrite in central
                            region; ferrite at edges.

These microstructures were typical of low carbon or rimming steel.

3.4.4 Tensile tests

One tensile test piece was machined from each leg of support 3. The test
pieces were identified FL3 and RL3 and were tested in accordance with BS
18:1987 " Method for tensile testing of metals (including aerospace
materials)", and the following results were obtained:

                         ReH           Rm        A%

    FL3                267 MPa      343 MPa      32
                       17.3 tsi      22.2 tsi

    RL3                308 MPa      376 MPa      31
                       19.9 tsi      24.3 tsi

Both test pieces exhibited yield phenomenon and hence the upper yield
stress (ReH) was determined.

3.4.5 Hardness tests

Vickers hardness tests were carried out on the microsections taken from
the support legs. These tests were conducted in accordance with BS 427:
Part 1:1961 (1981) "Method for Vickers Hardness Test - Testing of
metals" and the following results were obtained:


    Support 3    Front leg     105 - 109 HV
                 Rear leg      113 - 125 HV

    Support 4    Front leg     112 - 140 HV
                 Rear leg      121 - 141 HV

These results are typical of low carbon steel.

4 ASSESSMENT

Barrier 124A had consisted originally of a horizontal tube and four
vertical supports. The barrier had failed apparently by partial collapse
and fracture of supports 3 and 4, and by fracture of the horizontal tube
at supports 2, 3 and 4. The length of tube which had been located
between supports 2 and 3 (tube 2/3) had been bent uniformly to give a
maximum permanent deflection of 133mm at midspan. The portion of the
tube which been located between supports 3 and 4 (tube 3/4) had been
bent uniformly to give a maximum permanent deflection of 200mm at
midspan. Tubes 2/3 and 3/4 had been deformed in a horizontal plane
towards the pitch. Tube 1/2 and supports 1 and 2 had noC been deformed.

Laboratory examination showed that most of the tube had been made from
wrought iron and each support had been made from two lengths of steel
angle section joined at the top by a steel gusset plate. Part of the
original wrought iron tube between supports 1 and 2 had been replaced at
some time by a 2m length of low carbon steel. In addition, the tube had
been strengthened at support 2 by insertion of a internal tubular
reinforcement. Thus tube 1/2 was probably stronger than the rest of the
tube and this may, in part, explain the lack of deformation in this
region. In addition, supports 1 and 2 had been strengthened by
reinforcement with angle section at three of the four feet and by
bracing of the rear legs with outriggers.

The tube fractures had occurred in areas which had been located under
the metal straps designed, presumably, to retain the tube. The tube wall
thickness, nominally 4.5mm, had been reduced significantly by external
corrosion under each strap. In some cases holes had been present in the
tube at these locations before collapse occurred. Corrosion here
appeared to be a highly localised phenomenon which was confined to a
distance of 30mm to 35mm either side of the centreline of the strap.

In general the appearance of the tube fractures was typical of ductile
failure of wrought iron in a single-stage bending/tensile mode. The
region of brittle fracture, noted in the tube near support 3, was the
last part of the tube to fracture at this location. The change in
fracture mode can be explained in terms of increased constraint as the
fracture entered thicker material and an increase in strain rate as the
fracture propagated round the tube. Both these factors would tend to
promote brittle fracture.

Corrosion at the tube/support junctions was predictable because liquid
would have been retained in crevices under the strap and the surface of
the tube under the strap had not been painted. At the open end of the
tube, near support 4, internal corrosion had also contributed to
deterioration of the tube since there was access for rainwater. Here the
tube wall had been perforated by corrosion under the strap at two
locations producing holes which we estimate would have been
approximately 10mm and 20mm in diameter before the collapse. The centres
of these holes would have been located approximately 50mm from the open
end of the tube at support 4. They would have resembled the hole in the
tube on barrier 125 (Figure 3) and, in our opinion, they would have been
readily visible to the naked eye.

The direction of collapse of supports 3 and 4 appeared to be towards the
front left-hand corner of Pen 3, as viewed from the pitch. For the most
part the supports had been buckled and bent at locations which had been
weakened by corrosion. Although there was considerable sub-surface
corrosion of these supports, this played no part in the collapse. The
concrete which broke away at the front foot of support 4 did so because
this support had been positioned along the riser of a step in the
terrace.

In all cases the most severe sub-surface corrosion on the feet of
supports 3 and 4 had been located near the lower end of the region of
concrete containing the coarser aggregate. One possible explanation for
this could be that the height of the terrace had been raised at some
stage and the sub-surface corrosion may have occurred at or near the
original junction between the support feet and the terrace. This would
have reduced the effective height of the barriers.
                                                           document   No.   89   CONT’ D




    The use of wrought iron tube, and the method of tube fabrication,
    suggests that barrier 124A was many years old. British Standards
    governing the use of wrought iron tube were in use in the 1920s and
    1930s but are now obsolescent. The discovery of dated sections of
    newspaper in the tube indicates that parts of barrier 124A were at least
    58 years old, although clearly this barrier had received several
    modifications during its lifetime.

    5 CONCLUSIONS

    5.1 The tube on the collapsed part of barrier 124A had been made from
    wrought iron.

    5.2 The tube on the collapsed part of barrier 124A had fractured at
    supports 2, 3 and 4 in regions where considerable localised corrosion
    had occurred.

    5.3 The legs of supports 3 and 4 on barrier 124A had been made from low
    carbon steel angle section which had been corroded in some areas.

    5.4 Two other barriers in Pens 3 and 4 contained tubes which had been
    perforated by corrosion at support locations.

    In our opinion,

    5.5 The general direction of collapse of barrier 124A was towards the
    lower left-hand corner of Pen 3, as viewed from the pitch.

    5.6 Two holes, caused by corrosion, had been present in the tube of
    barrier 124A at the junction with support 4 before the collapse
    occurred and these would have been visible to the naked eye.




t




                                       -12-



                                                                                      496
              RADIAL FENCE BETWEEN
                    PENS 2 & 3




                                                                               Document No.
      PITCH




                                                                               89
                                     Fig. 1 - Reconstruction of Barrier 124A




                                                                               CONT’ O
497
                                                       Document No,




9
                                                       8904 - 073/17

           Fig. 2 - Barrier 124A on 17/4/89.




t




                                                       8904-073/84

    Fig. 3 - Front leg of support 4 on barrier 124A.

                                                                       498
                            149                                                                                                 150
                                                                                      144                                                       1
                                                                               I            1

                     136                         136a                                              137                                138
     Hi                                                                                                                                             LU
     O
     2
     Hi
              1— I— 1                       I— I----- 1                        132
                                                                                            i—      i—           i         i—               T       o
                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                    UJ
                                                                                                                                                    U-


                           2         SECTIONS
              124a         COLLAPSED                        125                             127                          128

          i            1------ 1— I             i---- 1— r                 i           i          1 i------ 1—                    T
                                                                                126



                                                                  PITCH
                                    PEN 3                                                          PEN 4




                                                                                                                                                         Document No.
                                                                                                         Older type barriers,

                                                                                                         New type barriers..




                                                                                                                                                         89
                                                Fig. 4 - Layout of barriers in p e ns 3 & 4




                                                                                                                                                         CONT’D
sO
VO
                        Document No.   Q9   CONT’D




                         8904-073/6

Fig. 5 - Barrier 125,




                                                 500
                                                                                                                                                          O
                                                                                                                                                          LO
CONT’D




                                                                                                         Step 9               CORE U
89




                                                                                                                  26           FINE
                                                          Step 8               CORE Q
Document No.




                                                                    23          f in !
               Step 7           COREP
                                                                                                                       115
                        27,      FINE                                    65                                                  COARSER
                                                                              COARSER
                          52   COARSER
                         _L                                                              Loosely bound
                                          Impression of                                  material
                                          support foot

                                                                                                                                         <Slice through
                                                                                                                                          support foot
                                  COARSEST
                                                                                                                   200
                                                                                                                             COARSEST

                                                                     245
                                                                              COARSEST


                               COARSEST



                                                                                                                         Fine      Aggregate : 1-2 mm
                                                                                                                         Coarse... Aggregate : 5-10 mm
                                                                                                                         Coarsest Aggregate : 20-30 mm


                                                                   Fig.6 - Concrete cores
                                    Document No.    89   CO NT’ D




§                                   8904 - 117/25
    Fig. 7 - Tube 2/3 from 124A.




#

                                   8904 - 117/26

    Fig. 8 - Tube 3/4 from 124A.




                                                            502
              im /3                            Document No.          89   CONT’D




#

                                                   8905 - 033/2
    Fig. 9 - Fracture of tube at support 3.




                                                   8 9 0 5 - 033/5
    Fig. 10 - Fracture of tube at support 4.

                                                                              503
                                                 Document No.     89   C O N T ’D




                                                  8904 - 117/42

          Fig. 11 - Tube at support 4 + CEN/1.


                                                             1




’if • ^




                                                  8907-048/13

               Fig. 12 - Tube on support 2.

                                                                            504
                                           D o c um e nt No.   CONTO




                                             8907 - 063/4

    Fig. 13 - Hole in tube at support 1.




t




                                                                   505
                                               Docurrreni No.     g9       CONT’ D




%
       b



                           89 - 04117/23                               89 - 04117/24


    Fig. 14 - Support 3.                   Fig. 15 - Support 4.




t

                                                                                506
                                                                  Document No.   89   C O N T ’D


                                                                         Incident Report


                                HEALTH AND SAFETY EXECUTIVE

                   RESEARCH AND LABORATORY SERVICES DIVISION

                                Broad Lane, Sheffield S3 7HQ


                                 Collapse load calculations
                                      for barrier 124A

                                             by
                                                                          *
                                    Professor R A Smith MA PhD CEng MIM
                                            and
                                        G A C Games BA

                                                    IR/L/ME/89/36


                       *
                           Department of Mechanical Engineering
                                  University of Sheffield




Distribution                                      Issue authorised by:Dr A Jones

The Court of Inquiry       (5 copies)                               Date: 7 February 1990
ACC J Mervyn Jones         West Midlands Police
Mr D C T Eves
Mr A Barrell               TD
Mr P G Jones               TD
Mr M S Nattrass            FAID Area 14
Mr J P Giltrow             HFS (N)
Mr M R Stephenson          NE FCG
Mr M A Fountain            TD 3B
Mr J B Hibbs               NE FCG
Mr M James                 TD 3B
Mr C J Pertee              NE FCG
Dr J McQuaid
Dr A Jones
Dr J H Foley                                      TO RLSD/DIAS STAFF ONLY
Dr C E Nicholson                                  NOT TO BE COMMUNICATED
Mr P F Heyes                                      OUTSIDE HSE WITHOUT THE
Mr I R Price                                      APPROVAL OF THE AUTHORISING
Mr D Waterhouse                                   OFFICER
Mr G A C Games
Mr G Norton
Authors
RPS                                               SMR/343/235/01
Library (2)
Registry File                                     S80.02.0TH.814


                                                                                             507
                                                         Document No.   89   C O N T ’D

CONTENTS

 1   INTRODUCTION

 2   MATERIAL PROPERTIES

 3   SECTION PROPERTIES OF   THE BARRIER TUBE

 4   ELASTIC DEFLECTIONS UNDER TEST LOADING

 5   YIELDING UNDER TEST CONDITIONS

 6   CALCULATIONS OF PLASTIC COLLAPSE LOADS

 7   COLLAPSE MODE

 8   ESTIMATES OF CROWD FORCES ACTING ON BARRIERS

 9   CONCLUSIONS

10   REFERENCES

APPENDIX 1   Bending tests to determine the mechanical properties of the
             wrought iron tubular top rail from barrier 129

APPENDIX 2 Evaluation of the plastic section modulus of cross-sections from
            spans 2\3 and 3\4 of barrier 124A

APPENDIX 3   A 'leaning crowd' model to estimate the loads generated by a
             barrier




                                                                                   508
                                                          Document No.   89     C O N T ’D

1   INTRODUCTION

During the incident which occurred at Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989,
two bays, 2\3 and 3\4, of barrier 124A, Fig 1, were broken down. This report
attempts to calculate collapse loads for the barrier and compares these loads
with the pressures likely to have been generated by the crowd.

Examination and mechanical testing of the broken barrier by staff of the
Health and Safety Executive (HSE), revealed that the upper rail had been
manufactured from wrought iron and was probably over sixty years old. The
vertical supports were made from mild steel (Ref 1). The tube was attached to
the supports by straps, underneath which considerable corrosion of the tube
had occurred.


2   MATERIAL PROPERTIES

Tensile tests from 2 specimens taken from the tube gave average tensile
strength of 366 MPa, 0.2% proof stress 259 MPa and an estimated elastic limit
of 150 MPa. Because of the considerable work hardening which occurs after
yield in this material and the sensitivity of the yield stress to prior load
history, there is an ambiguity about what single value of yield (or flow)
stress should be used to calculate a fully plastic moment.

Two full scale uniform bending tests were carried out on similar wrought iron
tubes from barrier 129, as described in Appendix 1. From the experimentally
determined plastic collapse loads and the geometry of the tube, representative
flow stresses, <7 f, were determined from each test. The values obtained were
298.2 MPa and 290.9 MPa. The difference in the two values of flow stress
obtained by experiment gives an indication of the reliability of the material
property input to the collapse calculations, i.e. +/- 1.2%. The average of
these values, 294.6 MPa was used in the subsequent collapse calculations. This
value is some 5.7% less than that obtained by using the approximation of the
average of the tensile strength and the 0.2% yield stress obtained in a
tensile test. An average value of Young's Modulus, E, (in flexure) of
190.5 GPa was also obtained from these experiments.


3   SECTION PROPERTIES OF THE BARRIER TUBE

Second moments of area, I, for a tube of outside diameter D and uniform wall
thickness, t, were calculated from the formula:
            "
     jtD4             2t ‘V
I *= ---    1 -   1 ---
     64                D

Equation (1) and the formulae which follow can be found in standard references
(e.g. Ref 2).

Fully plastic moments Mp were calculated as a product of the flow stress <7f
and Zp the plastic modulus:
                                                          Document No.      89   CONT’ D


The nominal dimensions of the tube, 60 mm outside diameter and 4 mm wall
thickness are used in the preliminary calculations in the bent two sections.


4    ELASTIC DEFLECTIONS UNDER TEST LOADING

The elastic deflection (5) at the centre of a beam of length L, built-in at bot
ends and subjected to a uniformly distributed load w, is given by

       wL4
6   ..............                            (3)
      384EI

If the ends are simply supported, the deflection is increased by a factor of
five.

For a span between supports (L) of 2.2 m, the length of spans 2\3 and 3\4 of
barrier 124A, subjected to the test loading of 6 kN/m, a figure prescribed by
the "Green Guide" (Ref 3), a central deflection of 6.9 mm is obtained. If the
ends are free, the deflection increases to 34.5 mm. In the calculation which
follows, the central span (2\3) of barrier 124A has been treated as having
built-in ends. The outer span (3\4), has been treated as having end 3 built-in
and end 4 simply supported.


5   YIELDING UNDER TEST CONDITIONS

For the span 2\3, the clamping moments are wL2/12. First yield will occur when
these moments equal 2Oy x I/D. If Oy corresponds to the measured elastic limit
of the material (150 MPa), then first yield corresponds to 3.4 kN/m, or just
over half of the test load. 0.2% proof stress gives a first yield load of
5.9 kN/m. Thus some yielding occurs on first loading up to the test load of
6 kN/m. Subsequent loading up to this test load will be elastic because of the
strain-hardening capabilities of the material.


6    CALCULATIONS OF PLASTIC COLLAPSE LOADS

The wall thickness of the tube under straps at 2, 3 and 4 was found to be much
reduced by corrosion. The reduction in thickness was not uniform round the
circumference; calculations of the plastic moduli of the as-measured sections
have been made by area integration, described in Appendix 2. The following
table results:

                      Section dimensions      Plastic modulus   Fully plastic mo
                                                                (crf - 294.6 MPa)
                      D mm    t mm            Zp mm3            Mp = <7f x Zp kNm

Tube   2\3   End 2    Corroded                 5,007+                    1.48
Tube   2\3   Centre   60.80   3.90            12,646*                    3.73
Tube   2\3   End 3    Corroded                 8,279+                    2.44
Tube   3\4   End 3    Corroded                 8,504+                    2.51
Tube   3\4   Centre   60.40   3.90            12,398*                    3.65
Tube   3\4   End 4    Corroded                 8,269+                    2.44

+   By area integration from measured irregular cross section (Appendix 2)
*   By Equation (2)
                                                        | uocum ent No.   89   C O N T ’D


The general case of plastic collapse for a beam of length L is shown below:



                            v /   u n it   le n g t h




where MA-and Me are the moments at the supports and Mg is the moment at the
centre of the beam. The collapse load is

     4 x (Ma + 2Mb + Me)
wc ..............................                                 (4)
              L2

The standard case we take is for the original beam built-in at both ends, i.e.
span 2\3 of barrier 124A. Denoting the collapse load for this case as wc and
noting M^ •= Me = Mg — Mp, the fully plastic moment at the uncorroded centre,


     16 x Mp   16 x 3.73
wc = ------- = --------- = 12.3 kN/m
        L2        2.22


Now for the span 3\4, assuming end 4 to be simply supported, the calculation
above can be repeated with Me — 0, and M* - Mb = 3.65 kNm, giving a collapse
load of 9.05 kN/m.

For the spans in a corroded condition, the central plastic moment can be
assumed to remain unchanged, but the appropriate plastic moments in the
above table can be substituted for end moments. The following table
results:

                                           Collapse Loads: kN/m
                              Built-in (Span 2\3)   One end simply supported
                                                       (Span 3\4) (Me = 0)

       Original                    12.3      (2.1)          9.05 (1.51)
       thickness

       Corroded condition            9.40 (1.57)            8.11 (1.35)

The figures in brackets are the calculated collapse loads as multiples of the
test load (6 kN/m).
                                                     Document No.   g 9   C O N T ’D


For the unsymmetrical calculations in the previous table, the inner plastic
hinge does not occur exactly at the centre of the span. The effect of this on
the calculated collapse loads is negligible and smaller than other sources of
uncertainty.

Tests performed by Dr Eastwood (Ref 4) on a similar, but not identical
barrier, after the incident, showed that a load of 9 kN/m (test load x 1.5)
was sufficient to cause very large permanent deformation of the tube. The
calculated collapse loads therefore appear to be realistic values.


7   COLLAPSE MODE

If we assume the shear strength to be only 50% of the tensile strength,
then to shear a 1.5mm wall thickness of tube directly, a load of 48 kN/m is
required. Even the worst corroded end had an average wall thickness of this
value, yet the shear failure load is many times higher than the plastic
collapse load. This evidence, together with the bent shape of the tube after
the incident, supports the view that barrier failure occurred by plastic
collapse of the tube. Because of its position, span 3\4 would fail before spar
2\3. If collapse of the legs had taken place prior to the failure of the tube,
the tube would not have been bent in the manner which was observed. Thus, of
the loads calculated in Section 6, the value of collapse for span 3\4 in the
corroded condition governs the problem.


8   ESTIMATES OF CROWD FORCES ACTING ON BARRIERS

A theoretical model of the forces generated by a crowd behind a barrier has
been developed, see Appendix 3. Values from this model are shown on Fig 2, onto
which values for the various calculated collapse loads have been added. For a
crowd density of 8/sq m, measured from photograhs (Ref 1), span 3\4 in the
original condition would withstand a crowd depth of approximately 6.4 m before
collapse. This would reduce to 6 m if it were in the corroded condition.
Because span 3\4 of barrier 124A was unprotected by barrier 136, a crowd of 7
m was able to exert pressure on this part of the barrier. Given that the crowd
was not of uniform density throughout and the approximate nature of the crowd
loading model, these figures adequately explain the collapse of the barrier.
Once span 3\4 had failed, span 2\3 would become simply supported at end 3 and
the vertical support would twist, causing collapse of span 2\3 at a similar
load level. If the crowd had been restricted to 5.4/sq m, the crowd depth to
cause collapse would be 8 m and 7.5 m in the original and corroded conditions
respectively. This latter value is in excess of the depth of crowd at this
location and indicates that the span would have survived had the crowd density
been so restricted.

If barrier 136 had been complete, the crowd depth behind barrier 124A would
have been limited to 3.5 m depth. The maximum load generated, as predicted by
the 'leaning crowd' model, by a crowd as dense as 10/sq m would have been some
20% less than the test load.

Given that the gap in the row of barriers behind 124A was greater than that
recommended in the Green Guide (Ref 5), the test load of 6 kN/m was
inadequate. At 5.4/sq m the model predicts that a crowd of 7 m depth would
generate a load some 22% greater than the test load.
                                                         Document No.   8 9   C O N T ’D

9     CONCLUSIONS

9.1     Collapse loads have been calculated for the spans 2\3 and 3\4 of barrier
        124A which was broken down during the Hillsborough Stadium incident.

9.2    If the barriers had been of the original thickness at the supports, loads
          2.1     and 1.51 times the test load of 6 kN/m would have been needed to
       collapse the barrier at spans 2\3 and 3\4 respectively. With the reduced
       wall thicknesses as measured, these ratios fall to 1.57 and 1.35 x test
       load.

9-3    These figures have been compared with barrier loads generated from a
       'leaning crowd' model.

9.4    In the corroded condition for a crowd of measured density 8/sq m, the
       span 3\4 of the barrier would have been broken down by a crowd of
       approximately 6 m depth behind the barrier. A crowd of some 7 m depth
       existed directly behind span 3\4.

9.5    If a crowd density of 5.4/sq m is assumed, the same tube would have
       required about 7.5 m of crowd to break it down.


10    REFERENCES

(1) The Hillsborough Incident 15 April 1989: An Investigation into Various
Technical Aspects prepared for the Court of Inquiry. C E Nicholson, HSE Report
No IR/L/ME/MM/89/1, June 1989.

(2) Steel Designers' Manual: The Steel Construction Institute; Crosby Lockwood
and Son Ltd

(3) Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds: Home Office/Scottish Office; HMSO, 1986.

(4) Statement by Dr W Eastwood submitted to the Court of Inquiry, page 48

(5) An Estimation of the Maximum Allowable Capacity of Pens 3 and 4.
A L Collins, D Waterhouse, HSE Report No IR/L/ME/89/35




                                      -5-




                                                                               5 1 3
•                            %
            RADIAL FENCE BETWEEN
                                                                       •     •
                  PENS 2 & 3




                                                                                 Document No.
    PITCH




                                                                                 89
                                   Fig. 1 - Reconstruction of Barrier 124A




                                                                                 OONT'O
                              Document No.
10    PERSONS PER SQ METRE




                              89
8     PERSONS PER SQ METRE




                              CONT’ D
5.4    PERSONS PER SQ METRE
                                                           Document No.   09   C O N T ’D

APPENDIX 1

BENDING TESTS TO DETERMINE THE MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF THE WROUGHT
IRON TUBULAR TOP RAIL FROM BARRIER 129

                                       by

                                A   L Collins
                                K   Heenan
                                J   C Moore
                                D   Waterhouse


A l .1   THE NEED FOR BENDING TESTS

Calculations of the loading to cause the collapse of barrier 124A requires a
knowledge of the mechanical properties of the wrought iron used in spans 2\3
and 3\4 of the top rail of the barrier.

RLSD's Metallurgy and Materials Section conducted tensile tests on two
specimens cut from the wrought iron tube used in spans 2\3 and 3\4 of barrier
124A. However, there were reservations about the use of the results of these
tests in calculations of the collapse load of this barrier because:


(i)      tests conducted on small specimens of a material that is known to have a
         heterogeneous structure may not provide results that are representative
         of a large sample;

(ii)     the tubes that had formed spans 2/3 and 3/4 were found to be permanently
         bent when they were recovered after the incident; it is known that the
         yield stress of wrought iron is likely to be affected by its previous
          loading history, and that wrought iron is sensitive to post-yield
          strain-hardening;

(iii) bending moments introduce compressive stresses as well as tensile
      stresses into the tube; we did not have data about the compressive
      properties of wrought iron that could be applied with reasonable
      confidence in calculations of the collapse load of barrier 124A.


It was the opinion of Smith and Games that data obtained from a bending test on
an undeformed sample of a similar wrought iron tube would be likely to be more
representative than the data obtained from tensile tests on small specimens.


A1.2 SELECTION OF THE TEST SAMPLE

Barrier 129 was a six-span barrier situated in the North-West Pen (Pen 5) of th
West terraces. It appeared to be of a similar construction to barrier 124A and
its top rail was not obviously bent. We assisted in the removal of the
complete assembly of barrier 129 from the West terraces to RLSD's premises.
Mr J G Tattersall of RLSD's Metallurgy and Materials Section confirmed that
the length of the top rail selected for testing was made from wrought iron.
                                                                                                      Document No.   3 9   C O N T ’D


        A1-3    m eth o d of   t e s t in g   and   c a l c u l a t io n   o f thf . r e q u ir e d   data




                                                                                                       NEUTRAL
                                                                                                        AXIS

    *




                                                      W

        Fig Al.l         Symmetrical 4-point loading of a beam


        Bending Moment (M) at a section A-A of the beam:

            W x a                                                                            W x (L - 1)
        M = — —          for a ^ (L/2 - 1/2);                     i.e. greatest value of M — ---      ■■■■


                  W x a        W              (L - 1)
        and M                                                 for (L/2 - 1/2) ^ a < (L/2 + 1/2)
t                    2

                   W x (L - 1)
                                2




                W x (L - a)                                                                                          W x (L - 1)
        and M = ---------- for a                    (L/2 + 1/2); i.e. greatest value of M =                                 —


        The greatest bending moment is therefore imposed along the full length of the
        central span (1) of the beam and has a uniform value of:

                W x (L - 1)
         M =                                                                                                 (1)



                                                                -li-




                                                                                                                                 517
                                                                                                Document No.                   89   CONT D


    Determination of the yield stress of the material

    The elastic bending equation is expressed as:

                  M       a      E
                                                                                                                   (2 )
                  I       y     R

    where M is the bending moment applied to the beam
          I is the     second moment of area of the cross-section
          a   is the   fibre stress on thematerial    of the beam
          y   is the   distance of a fibrefrom the    neutral axis
          E   is Young's Modulus for the material of the beam
          R is the radius of curvature of the neutral axis at the cross-section
          considered

    The second moment of area (I) for a circular section tube can be shown to
    be:
                4  4
         n x (D - d )
    I - ...........                                              (3)
             64

    where D and d are the outer and inner diameters, respectively, of the tube

                            M x y
    from    (2)       a   - -----                                                                                      (4 )
                              I

    Equation (4) shows that as the bending moment is increased the outermost
    fibres will be the first to reach the yield stress (ay) of the material. The
    relationship between load and deflection will cease to be linear when the
    outermost fibres are subjected to the yield stress of the material. Plastic
    deformation will be initiated and will spread inwards towards the neutral axis
    if the bending moment continues to increase. The outermost fibres of a hollow
    circular section of outer diameter D are situated at a distance D/2 from the
    neutral axis, i.e. y — D/2.

          My  D
    cry = — x —               ................................................ (5)
          I   2

    where My is the bending moment at which yielding commences

    Substituting for My from (1) and I from (3) in (5)

            8 x Wy x (L - 1) x D
    oy =    ■                                 .........................................................................( 6 )
                          4   4
                  n   x (D - d )

    where       a y the yield stess
                Wy is the load when yieldingcommences, i.e. theload at which the graph
                relating force and deflection ceases to belinear


                                                        -iii-


t
                                                                                                                                        518
                                                                  Document No.        89    C O N T ’D


    Therefore, if Wy can be obtained from the force\deflection graph, the yield
    stress (ay) can be determined.


    Determination of Young's Modulus (E) for the material

                             M x R
        From (2)         E ------------                                           (7)
                               I

        E and I are both constants, therefore R is proportional to M. Equation (1)
        shows that M is uniform over the central span (1) of the beam. Provided the
        loaded beam remains in an elastic condition, its radiusofcurvature R     over
        the central span will also be uniform i.e. the deflectedshape  of thecentral
        span will be an arc of a circle.

        From the geometrical properties of a circle it can be shown that if 1 »              c:

                   2

f   r    ----------1 _                                                     -   (8 )
              8 x c

        where      R is the radius of curvature of the central span
                   1 is the length of the central span
                   c is the mid-span deflection of the central span

        substituting for M frbm (1), I from (3), and R from (8) in (7)

                                      2
                        2 x (L - 1) x 1
        E   =     W/c x ...                                                           (9)
                               4   4
                        jr x (D - d )

        W/c is the gradient of the elastic, linear region of the load-deflection
        curve, which'can be measured from the graph obtained from the bending test.
        The remaining terms in Equation (9) are known constants and therefore E can be
        evaluated.

t       Comparison of theoretical and experimental maximum bending strennths

        Appendix 2 expresses the maximum theoretical bending strength (Mp) of a beam
        in, the form:

        Mp ” ci x Zp                                                                        (10)

           is a limiting constant stress which, dependent upon the properties of the
        material of the beam, may be the yield stress (<7y) or a 'flow stress' (fff).

        Zp is a plastic section modulus, which for a hollow circular section of
        uniform wall thickness (t) may be expressed in terms of its outer and inner
        diameters, or in terms of its outer diameter and wall thickness.


                                                -iv-




                                                                                                  5 1 9
                                                    Document No.   8 9   cqnT D




                                                                         (11 )




                                                                         (12)


If an appropriate value is known for <7(, then the theoretical maximum bending
strength may be calculated from Equation (12) and its value compared with the
experimental maximum bending strength obtained from the test to check the
validity of the calculation.


Equipment for conducting the bending tests

We designed and constructed equipment of the type shown diagrammatically in
Fig Al.l that was suitable for installation in RLSD's 1 MN (100 tonf)
tension\compression testing machine. The equipment was designed to accept a
sample with an overall span of 2 m and a central span of lm, the objective
being to minimize the point loads applied to the tube within the constraints
imposed by:

(i)   the overall length of sample available for testing;
(ii) the loading range of the testing machine;
(iii) maximizing the length of tube subjected to a uniform bending moment
      in order to obtain representative results

A spring-tensioned potentiometric displacement transducer was used to measure
deflections of the tube. The transducer had a range of 760 mm and was actuated
by a flexible wire, the end of which was attached to the mid-span of the tube.
The transducer was mounted on the loading rig so as to measure deflections of
the central span between its loading points.

The output from the potentiometric transducer was connected to a digital
voltmeter and the assembly calibrated and adjusted to provide a direct digital
reading of displacement, in millimetres, with a resolution of 0.1 mm. The
calibrated testing machine was operated on the lowest range of 100 kN, the
force being displayed in digital form with a resolution of 0.1 kN. Fig A1.2
shows a general view of the assembled equipment prior to conducting a test.

The testing machine was controlled manually whilst simultaneous readings were
taken of force and deflection. Fig A1.3 shows a sample in an advanced stage of
plastic deformation. Two samples from the top rail of barrier 129 were tested,
and the force\deflection graphs obtained from the results of these tests are
shown in Figs Al.4 and Al.5.

Values of yield stress, Young's Modulus, and maximum bending moment were
calculated for both samples of tube, using data on the force\deflection graphs
and Equations (6), (9) and (1) respectively. The theoretical maximum bending
                                                           Document No.    89     CONTD



    moment for each sample was also calculated using Equation (12) with     ay   - <7y,
    the yield stress determined from the same bending test.


    A1.4    RESULTS OBTAINED FROM THE BENDING TESTS MADE ON SAMPLES
            FROM BARRIER 129

                        Sample No 1      Fig A1.4        Sample No 2      Fig A1.5

    Outer diameter      60.13 mm                         60.43 mm
    Inner diameter      51.61 mm                         52.08 mm
    Wall thickness       4.26 mm                          4.18 mm

    Yield stress        256.1 MPa (16.6 tonf/sq in)      244.6 MPa (15.8 tonf/sq in)
    (Equation 6)

    Young's Modulus     193.6 GPa (12,500 tonf/sq in)    187.4 GPa (12,100 tonf/sq in
    (Equation 9)

    Theoretical max     3,413 Nm    (1.12 tonf ft)       3,237 Nm     (1.07 tonf ft)
    bending moment
    (Equation 12)

    Experimental max    3,975 Nm    (1.31 tonf ft)       3,850 Nm     (1.27 tonf ft)
    bending moment
    (Equation 1)

    The theoretical maximum bending moments were 15% and 16% less than the
    experimental maximum bending moments obtained from Samples 1 and 2
    respectively. It was the opinion of Smith and Games that these discrepancies
    were too great to justify using the experimentally determined yield stresses
    to calculate the collapse load of barrier 124A.

    They decided to use a 'flow stress' in their calculations of the collapse load
    of barrier 124A. The 'flow stresses' of Samples 1 and 2 were obtained by
    transposing Equation (10) into the form:

           Me
                                                                                 (13)
f           Z„

    where    O f is the 'flow stress' for the material
             Mg is the maximum bending moment determined experimentally from a
             bending test

    The 'flow stresses' obtained from the bending tests made on samples taken from
    barrier 129 are shown in the following Table:


    Sample No          'Flow stress' (af)

    1                   298.2 MPa   (19.3 tonf/sq in)

    2                   290.9 MPa   (18.8 tonf/sq in)

    Mean value          294.6 MPa   (19.1 tonf/sq in)


                                            -vi-



                                                                                          521
                                                                     Document No.    8 9 CONT’D




#
                9 0 0 1 -0 0 8 /2
                                      Fig.A1.2 - View of the bending equipment and the
                                                    sample prior to testing




i



                9001-008/4
                                         Fig.A1.3 - View of the bending equipment with
                                    the sample at an advanced stage of plastic deformation


    CROWN COPYRIGHT
                                                                                              522
              Graph Ref □00 ,H H ILY IE LD 3 .P LT


                                                                OUTSIDE DIAMETER MEASURED AT M ID-SPAN     60.128 m m

                                                                INSIDE DIAMETER MEASURED AT M ID-SPAN      51.605 m m



         LD




         ro


         CM
                                                                                                                 APPUED LOAD



                                                                                                                                         IBE UNDER TEST IN
                                                                                                                                         4 POINT BENDING
         O



     o
         CO

                       in




                                                                                                                                                             Document No.
                                                                                                             APPUED LOAD
                       o
                       o




                                                                                                                                                             89
         ro                                             OF GRAPH IN ELASTIC REGION -   1.818 k N /rn m


         04            O




                                                                                                                                                             CONT’D
                       O




                                                                                           DISPLACEMENT (m m )
04
                               Fia A1.4              LOAD DEFLECTION       CIJRVF OF        1 s t WROUGHT IRON TURF            FROM   RAPPIFf? m n   19 Q
             “   iSraph Ref L300.3DHILYIELD4.PLT


                                                           OUTSIDE DIAMETER MEASURED AT M ID-SPAN         60.425 m m

                                                           INSIDE DIAMETER MEASURED,AT MID-SPAN          52.075 m m

                                                                                   —   i




                                                                                                                 APPUED LOAD
                                                                                                           i—

                                                                                                                                        TUBE UNDER TEST IN
                                                                                                                                         4 POINT BENDING
      (kN)




                           BEGINNING OF YIELD 9.5 kN
      LOAD




                                                                                                                                                             Document No.
                                                                                                                 APPLIED LOAD




                                                                                                                                                             89
                                           GRADIENT 0E GRAPH IN ELASTIC REGION =   1.759 k N /m m




                                                                                                                                                             CONT’ D
                                                                                       40.                 50.
                                                                                           DISPLACEMENT (m m )
(J1
ro
4=*
                                Fiq A1.5           LOAD DEFLECTION     CURVE OF 2nd               WROUGHT IRON TUBE             FROM   BARRIER   N o . 129
                                                         Document No.   89   CONT’ D


APPENDIX ?

EVALUATION OF THE PLASTIC SECTION MODULUS OF CROSS-SECTIONS FROM
SPANS 2\3 AND 3\4 OF BARRIER 124A

                                 by

                             A L Collins
                                 and
                             D Waterhouse

A2.1    PREDICTION OF THE PLASTIC COLLAPSE OF A BEAM
                                                                   #

Bending moments are produced on a beam by the load that it is supporting.
These bending moments are resisted by moments of resistance produced by
tensile and compressive stresses developed on the cross-sectional area of the
beam.

A beam of ductile material, with a span that is large in comparison to its
cross-sectional dimensions, will fail by plastic collapse when the bending
moment creates sufficient plastic hinges along its span to transform the beam
from a structure to a mechanism. A plastic hinge is formed when the tensile
and compressive stresses exceed the yield strength of the material throughout
the depth of the beam's cross-section.

If the moments of resistance that are developed at the plastic hinges can be
determined, then the principle of Virtual Work may be used to calculate the
bending moment, and therefore the loading, that will cause the beam to
collapse.

Simple plastic theory expresses the maximum moment of resistance (Mp) that can
be developed by a cross-section of a beam (its maximum plastic moment of
resistance) as the product of its plastic section modulus (Zp) and a limiting
constant value of stress (cti).

i.e.. Mp - ai x Zp     ..................................... (1)

This relationship makes the following assumptions about the material of the
beam:

(i) an idealized rigid-plastic relationship exists between stress and strain,
i.e. deformation does not occur until a limiting value of stress (cti) is
reached, after which large deformations are developed whilst this stress
remains constant;

(ii) the behaviour of the material is the same in compression as in tension.

The tensile yield stress of the material (ay) is commonly used in Equation (1)
when strain-hardening (work-hardening) of the material may be neglected. When
strain-hardening of the material cannot be ignored then it is customary to use
a 'flow stress' (<7f) having a value between the yield stress and the ultimate
stress.

i.e.   ay   - cry (strain-hardening neglected)
or     ay   = a f (strain-hardening included)


                                      ■i-




                                                                                 525
                                                              Document No.   89   C O N T ’D


    Experience has shown that this simple plastic theory can predict the failure
    of beams by plastic collapse with an accuracy that is acceptable for practical
    purposes.


    A2.2   DETERMINATION OF THE PLASTIC SECTION MODULUS

    If the material of a section that is subjected to pure bending exhibits the
    same ideal rigid-plastic behaviour in both tension and compression, then Zp
    can be shown to be equal to the First Moment of Area of the cross-section
    about its neutral axis (or unstrained fibre). Furthermore, iji these
    circumstances, the neutral axis will coincide with the centroid of the area of
    the cross-section.

    The fully plastic section modulus for a hollow circular cross section of ideal
    rigid-plastic material and uniform wall thickness can be shown to be either:



    Z„ -


    where D - outer diameter
    and   d - inner diameter


            D                 2 11
    or Zp - —   1 -     1 -                                                               (2 )
            6

    where t - wall thickness

    Mr.’J G Tattersall of RLSD's Metallurgy and Materials Section had made
    ultrasonic measurements of the wall thicknesses of the wrought iron tube that
    had formed the top rail of crush barrier 124A. These measurements caused us to
    conclude that it was reasonable to use Equation (2) to calculate Zp for the
    top rail in the mid-span region of spans 2\3 and 3\4 of barrier 124A. The
    measured dimensions and their corresponding plastic section moduli are shown
    in the following Table.

t   Mid-span    Outer
                diameter (D)
                                     Inner
                                     diameter (d)
                                                    Wall
                                                    thickness (t)
                                                                    Plastic section
                                                                    modulus (Zp)
                                                                       3
                mm                   mm             mm              mm

    2\3         60.80                53.00          3.90            12,646

    3\4         60.40                52.60          3.90            12,398

    Both ends of the tubular sections that had formed spans 2\3 and 3\4 had
    fractured; the ends of the spans were deformed, severely corroded, and had
    variable wall thicknesses. It was our opinion that the variability of the wall
    thicknesses rendered Equation (2) unsuitable for calculating values of Zp at
    the ends of spans 2\3 and 3\4, and that these values would have to be
    determined by numerical integration.

                                             ■li-




                                                                                               526
                                                     Document No.   8 9   C O N T ’D


    Mr Tattersall provided us with sketches that showed wall thicknesses at the
    fractured ends of spans 2\3 and 3\4. We used a computer-aided draughting (CAD)
    system to draw our best impression of the cross-section at each end of spans
    2\3 and 3\4 before deformation failure occurred. Our re-construction of the
    cross-sections are shown in Figs A2.1 to A2.4.

    We used the facilities of the CAD system to assist us with the numerical
    integrations. Each cross-section was divided into strips of 2 mm width, with
    the exception of the last strip whose width was determined by the outer
    dimension of the section. A vertical axis was then drawn in the estimated
    position of the centroid (neutral axis). Each elemental area of tube
    thickness, with the exception of those adjacent to the estimated position of
    the centroid was successively magnified by the CAD system and then accurately
    cross-hatched. The CAD system then automatically calculated the area of each
    cross-hatched element.

    The sum of the elemental areas to the right of the estimated centroidal axis
    were compared with the sum of those to the left; the centroidal axis being in
    its correct position when it divides the cross-sectional area into two equal
    parts. The position of the centroidal axis was adjusted and the process
    repeated iteratively until the areas to the right and the left of the axis
    were equ?l.

    Each known elemental area of the tubular wall was then mutiplied by its
    distance from the centroidal axis to obtain the First Moment of Area of each
    element. A summation of the First Moments of Area for all the elements
    provided total First Moment of Area for the complete cross-section. The
    results obtained during successive stages of the calculation are tabulated in
    Figs A2.1 to A2.4.

    The plastic section moduli that we obtained by numerical integration of the
    re-construeted cross-sections at the ends of spans 2\3 and 3\4 from barrier
    124A are shown in the following Table.


    Span    End       Zp mm

    2\3               5,007
            2     /
    2\3               8,279
t   3\4
            3

            3         8,504

    3\4     4         8,269




                                     ■iii-




                                                                                       527
                                                                    r ig h t   HAM) S ID E


                                                                      No       AREA   CALI   L   (mm)   AREA       (Ab)   ( A l t A b ) xL      TOTAL
                            TO P                                       1          1.7 7 9    0 .325       2.659              1.442                  _
                                   N                                             5.735        1.65        8 . 046           2 2 .73 9
                                                                      2                                                                        2 1 . I8 l
                                                                      3          6 . 183      3.65        7 .894            51 .381            7 5.562
                                                                      4          6.531        5 .65       7 .618            79.912             155.501
                                                                      5          6.711        7 .65       7 .372           I 07.964           2 6 3 .1 6 8
                                                                      6          6 .900       9 .6 5      7 . 109         13 5 . 18 7         .5 9 8 . 6 5 5
                                                                      7          7.203       11.65        6.801           16 3 . I 47         5 6 1 .802
                                                                      a          7.645       13.65        6 .3 62         19 1 . 19 6         752. 9 ‘ ) 7
                                                                      9          8 .278      15.65        5 .917          2 2 9 . I 52        9 7 5 .1 4 9
                                                                      10         9 . 149     17.65        5.825           264.291            1 2 3 9 . 4 IfJ
                                                                      11         11.815      19.65        8 .000          3 9 0 .9 3 7       1630.377
                                                                      12         27.28       21 . 6 5         -           5 9 0 . B 12       2 220.900

                                                                                                                            TOTAL            2520 .sag
       PITCH                                      SPECTATOR
       SIDE                                          SIDE           LE FT HAM3 S I D E


                                                                      No       AREA   (Al)   L   (mm)   AREA       (Ab)   (AL+Ab) x L          TOTAL

                                                                       l         3 . 568     0.675        5.529             6 .140                 _
                                                                       2         S. 055      2.35         8.469            31.781              37.921
                                                                       3         4.812        4 .35       8 .667           58.634              96.555
                                                                       4         4 .602       6 .3 5      8.646            84.125             180 .6 8 0
                                                                       5         4 . 456      8 .3 5      8 .247          106.070            2 8 6 .7 5 0
                                                                       6         4.338        10.35       7 .665          124.231            410.981
                                                                       7         4 .322       12.35       7 .095          141.000            551 .9 8 1
                                                                       8         4 .298       14.35       6.471           154.535             7 0 6 .5 1 6
                                                                       9         4 .231       16.35       G .0 I3         1 67.489           8 7 4 .0 0 6




                                                                                                                                                                        Document No.
                                                                       10        4.271        18.35       5 .348          176.509            1050.515
                                                                       11        4.212       2 0 .35      4 .5 8 6        1 79.650           1230.164
                                                                       12        4.313       2 2 .35      3 .795          181.214            14 1 1 . 3 7 8
                                                                       13        4 . 459     24 . 3 5     2 .850          1 77.974           1S 8 9 . 3 5 2
                                                                       14        4 .704      2 6 .35      1.705           16 8.877           1758.229
                                                                       15        5 . 140     2 8.35       1.256           1 8 1.327          1939.556
                                                                       16        6 . 038      30.35        1.489          2 2 8 . 41J        2168.000
         TOTAL PLASTIC SECTION MODULUS = 5006.70 mm'                   17        9 .345      3 2.35       4 . 38G.        4 4 4 .1 9 8       2612.198




                                                                                                                                                                        89
                                                                       18        5 . 158     33.655            -          173.592            2785.791
                                                                     ■ ----- 1                           «
                                                                                                                             TOTAL           27BS.791




                                                                                                                                                                        CONPD
<_n                         Fig A 2 . 1   BARR IER No   124 A SPAN 2/3 END No 2
IX )
00
                                                                                                                                                               I   in   '.H I t
                                                                         No      AREA (At)         L (mm)   AREA (Ab)       (Al «Ah) xL         TOTAL
                               TO P
                                                                             1      3. 7G0      0. 725         3.912           5. 59(1
                                                                                    5.231        2.15          5. I I t)      25.313           30 . 933
       0 .2 0 —     0 .5 5 —                                               3        5 . 1G2      1 . 15        1 .05G         15.915           7G.0IR
                                                                           1        5.572        R. 15         1 -G23        G5. 7',0         I12.F,(J5
                                                                           5        5.510        0.15          1 .131        01 .200         22F>.BUB
                                                                           S       5. 171       10.15          1 .279       i n i . 3 1g     320.005
                                                                           7       5.100        IP .15         1 . i r,g    120.230          119. (131
                                                                           0       5. 531       11 .15        1 . 00 7      i 30.goo         500.011
                                                                           g       5 .BIB       IG. 15        1 . i or,     159.9G0          717.971
                                                                          ID       5. 701       10.15         1 . I 30      101.137          929.111
                                                                          11       5.920       2(1.15         1 .265       200.203          1137.095
                                                                         12        0.22G       ea. 15         1 .1 IG      203.013          M2 1.500
                                                                         13        0.553       21 .15         1 . 70G      32G.139          I717.P1G
                                                                         11        7. I 71     2G. 15         5.323        330.51G          20 70. I 92
  SPECTATOR                                                              IS        0. I09      20. 15         G.209        1og. F.23        2107.015
                                                     PITCH               IG       I0.UG9
     SIDE                                            SIDE                                      30 .15         7 . 9-10     510.GI 0         3(135.132
                                                                         I7       I 5. r,r,s   32.15          11.OUO       9E.2. HO-l       3999. 32 I
                                                                        IS I      20.033       31 .15             -        965.73 7         1955.050
                                                                                                                             TOTAL         1355.050

                                                                       LEFT HAND SIOE

                                                                        No       AREA   (Al)   L    (ram)   AREA    (Ab)   (Al*Ab)   xL       TOTAL
                                                                         I          1.431      0.275          I . 553       0.021
                                                                        2          5.203         I .55        5.900         17.210            10 . 0 3 I
                                                                        3          5.27I        3.55          G.39G         11.110           59.119
                                                                        1          5.337        5.55          7.0 I I       GO. 5.51        127.900




                                                                                                                                                             Document Mo.
                                                                        5          5.190        7.55          7.797        100.317          220.297
                                                                        G          5.027        9.55          0.&GI        130.3GO          3GG.650
                                                                        7          G.2O0       I I .55        9.(357       105.£51          552.200
                                                                        0          7. 0 10     13.55          I I . 720    251.000          OOG.217
                                                                        g          0.267       15. 55        11 .290       350. 7F>I       1 IGG.970
                                                                        10        I 0.795      I 7.55        I 7.250       192.330         IG19.3O0
                                                                        11        10.005       19.55         25.G0F.       071 . 3Fi3      2520 . P 7 I
         IOTAL PLASTIC SECTION MODULUS = 0578.557    mm                 12        13.597       2I .55        20.921        713.063         32G1.531
                                                                        13        2. 1.50      28. G9             -        10.9G5          3313.199




                                                                                                                                                             89
                                                                                                                            TOTAL          33)3.499




                                                                                                                                                             CONT’ D
                               Fig A 2 .E?   BARRIER No   124 A SPAN 2/3 END No 3


Ln                                                                                                                                                         m-i a-rciM
IX)
                                                                   RIGHT HAND SIDE

                             TOP                                    No    AREA (A l)   L (mm)      AREA (Ab)     (Al+Ab)    xL      TOTAL
                                                                     I      4 .9 13     0 .8 5       7.818         10.821
                               N
                                                                     a      S .818      2 .7 0       9 .339       40.924           5 1.745
                1 . 77E>                                             3      5 .9 09     4 .70        9.535        72.554          1 24.299
                                                                     4      6. 068      6.70         9.691        105.583         5 2 9 . Q04
                                                                     s      6.251       8.70         9.985        1 41.227        371.111
                                                                     s      6 .513      10.70       )0.329        180.209         55 1 .321
                                                                     7      6.745       12.70       10 . 6 8 9   221.374          7 7 2 .695
                                                                     a      7.265      14.70        11.238       2 7 1 .9 0 S    104 4 . 6 0 1
                                                                     g      7 .967     16.70        11.639       3 2 7 .4 2 0    1372.021
                                                                     10     8.921      18.70        12.919       4 0 8 .4 0 0    17 8 0 . 4 2 3
                                                                     l)    10.955      2 0.70       14.329       5 2 3 .3 7 9    2303.800
                                                                     12    1 7 . G7B   22.70        20 .26 2     8 6 1.238       3165.046
                                                                     13    29.574      2 4 .70          -        7 3 0 . 4 70    3895.523

                                                                                                                   TOTAL         3895.523
 SPECTATOR                                         PI TCH
    SIDE                                           S I DE          LEFT HAND SIDE

                                                                    No    AREA (At)    L   (mm)    AREA (Ab)     (At+Ab) xL         TOTAL
                                                                      1     0.89S        0 . 15      1.370         0.340               _
                                                                     2      5.764        1.30       9.044          19.250           19.950
                                                                     3      5 .048       3.30 ■     8.950         48.833           6 8.424
                                                                     4     5 .914        5.30       8 .7 65       77.799           146.222
                                                                     S     5.991         7.30       8 .733        107.485         2 5 3 .7 0 7
                                                                     6     6 . 187       9.30       8.669        138.161          3 9 1 . B6S
                                                                     7     6.309        11.30       8.534        167.726          5 5 9 .5 9 4
                                                                     8     6 .570       13.30       8.298        197.744          7 5 7 .3 3 9
                                                                     9     6 . S7 1     15.30       7 .840       2 2 5 .0 7 9     9 8 2 .4 1 6
                                                                     10     7 . 133     17.30       7 .315       2 4 9.950       1232.367




                                                                                                                                                       Document Mo.
                                                                     11     7 .602      19.30       6.9 43       2 8 0 .7 1 8    1513.086
                                                                     12    B . 045      21 . 3 0    6.S7S        3 1 1 .4 2 7    1024.513
                                                                     13     9.033       2 3.30      6.2 55       3 5 6 .2 1 0    21B0.723
                                                                     14    9 .917       2 5.30      G. 231       40 8 .5 4 4     2589.268
                                                                     15    11.966       2 7 .30     6.6 65       5 0 0 .6 2 6    3097.894
                                                                     16    16.029       2 9.30      9 .610       7 5 1 .2 2 3    3849.117
        TOTAL PLASTIC 5ECTION MODULU5 = 8504.349 mm"                 17    24 .35 9    3 1 . iaa        -        7 5 9 . 70'8    4608.825




                                                                                                                                                       89
                                                                                                                   TOTAL         4BOB.825




                                                                                                                                                       C O N T ’D
                           Fig A2.3   BARRIER No   12 4 A SPAN 3/4 END No 3
530




                                                                                                                                                  nw sj'Tcr.M
                                                                RIGHT HAND SIDE
                         TO P
                                                                 No    AREA (At)     L (mm)     AREA (Ab)     (Al+Ab) xL       TOTAL
                        N
                                                                   1     0.937        0.19          l .SSI      0.473
     56                                                           5      4. 982        1 .30       8.321        18.358        IB.831
                                                                  3      5. OSD       3.3B         B. 522      4S.B73         B4 .704
                                                                  4      5. 172       5.3B        B.77G        75.040        139.74 4
                                                                  5      5.274        7.30         9.037       I0S.GI5       545.3G0
                                                                  G      S.3BB        9. 38       9.319        137.933       383.592
                                                                  7      5. 173       1 1 .38     9.G2B       1G B .413      551.705
                                                                  B      4 .B7G       13.38       l0.022      199.335        751.040
                                                                 9       4 .539      15.3B        10.248      227.4 24       97B.4B4
                                                                 10      4.5B6       17.38        10.855      263.151       124 1 .G 15
                                                                 11      4. 101      19.38        11.4G4      301.650       1543.2S5
                                                                 12      3.924       21 .38       12.181      344.325       1BB7.59Q
                                                                 13      3.924       23.38        13.304      402.791       2290. 380
                                                                 14      4.204       25.38        I4.939      4B5.B49       5776.530
                                                                 15     5.363        27.38        18.001      G 3 9 .70G    34 15.936
 PITCH                                       SPECTATOR           IB     27.350       59.38             -      803.543       4519.479
  SIDE                                         SIDE
                                                                                                             . TOTAL        ■4219.479

                                                                LEFT HAND SICE

                                                                 No    AREA (AL)     L (mm)     AREA (Ab)    (At+Ab) xL        TOTAL
                                                                  1      3.960       0.81        G.S32          8.498           -
                                                                 5       4.BG3       5.62        B.3Sa         34.GG5        43.164
                                                                 3       4.7G4       4.G a       8. 788        G2.G10        105.774
                                                                 4       4.744       G.G a       9.131         91.852        197.656
                                                                 s       4. 748      8.G2        9.723        124.740       355.366
                            0.3Q                                 e        4.70       10. G2      10.24 1      158.673       481.040




                                                                                                                                                    Document Mo.
                                                                 7       4.G8G       12.65       10.792       195.332       676.375
                                                                 B       4 .699      14.65       11.618       238.4G7       914.839
                                                                 9       4.71G       16.65       15.552       286.994       1501.833
                                                                 10      4.582       i s . ea    13.940       344.880       154G,713
                                                                 11      4.532       ao.e a      15.832       419.906       1968.619
                                                                 1a      4 .985      as. ea      19.324      54 9 .8 7 0    5 5 1 6 .4 8 9
                                                                 13     17.487       24 .&a      55 .8 1 4   998.211        3 5 0 8 .6 9 9
     TOTAL PLASTIC SECTION MODULUS = 0560.959 mm"                14     2 0 .4 8 3   as. 1 0         -       5 4 0 . 751-   4 0 4 9.450




                                                                                                                                                    89
                                                                                                               TOTAL        4049.450




                                                                                                                                                    CONT’D
                         Fig AE.4   BARRIER No      1E4A SPAN 3/4 END No 4
cn
                                                                                                                                             CM 5W FC7M
                                                                        Document Mo.        g <^   C O N T ’D

    APPENDIX -s

    A 'LEANING CROWD' MODEL TO ESTIMATE THE LOADS GENERATED BY
    A BARRIER

    Consider a person on the nth step behind a barrier. The whole crowd is assumed
    to be up on its toes, inclined forward at an angle 6 , in a fashion which would
    be adopted to obtain a view of an incident in front of the crowd. The
    spectator is leaning forward on a support provided by the person in front and
    is thus subject to supporting force Pn, from the front and to a toppling force
    Pn-t> from the person behind,>offset by the terrace step height h.

                                 Pn-J
                                                     h =      Step H e ig h t
                                                     "H =     C e n tre o f Mflss H e ig h t
                                                     H *=     Push H e ig h t
                                                     uj   =   Step W idth
                                                     mg =     W eight o f S p e c ta to r




    Equilibrium of person on the nth step, moments about 0

               PnH'cos# - mgHsinfl + Pn.j(H 'c o s 0 + h)
                 ^   >
                          Pn - mg(H/H')tan0 + Pn-i(l + h/(H'cos0))

i   ie a recurrence relationship of the form:

                             A + BPn-i,    A, B constants

    P0   “ o
    P,   = A
    P2   - A + AB
    P3   - A + AB + AB2

           A + AB + AB2 + ..... + ABn'1

           A(Bn-l)/(B-l)                   (Sum of geometric progression)

                     mg H sin#           h       n
                                  1 + -------        - 1
                                       H*cos0




                                                                                                                532
                                                                f oDocument
                                                                   ocu,       No.   89   CONT’D


        For the person immediately behind the barrier, if the barrier is at the push
        height, then clearly Pn would be transmitted to the barrier. In general the
        barrier is lower than this, and the push is probably transmitted to the
        barrier by bending at mid-height for the few rows of people just behind the
        barrier. If this were not so, the person at the barrier would be subjected to
        a large turning moment. The exact details of this force feed to barrier height
        are not yet clear, but for this purpose it is assumed that P,,, where n is the
        number of steps behind the barrier in question, is the force on the barrier.

        If the crowd density is N/sq m, then there are Nw persons/unit length on each
        step, thus we obtain the force/unit length on the barrier as;

                                  N w mg H sin0          h        n
        Force/unit length                         1 + -------         - 1
                                                       H’cosS


        which is the expression evaluated on Fig 2. A 'lean' angle of 10 deg has been
        estimated as a reasonable value to use in the calculation; other parameters are
        declared on the Figure.

        It should be noted that no previous work can be found in the literature
        concerning this type of calculation. Existing design rules for barriers appear
        to rely on empiricism together with limited experimental testing. Caution
        should be exercised in the use of this new model, which requires experimental
        substantiation.




                    ;




                                           -ii-




•   v



                                                                                          533
                                                         Document No.   8 9   C O N T ’D


                                                                  Incident Report



                      HEALTH AND SAFETY EXECUTIVE

               RESEARCH AND LABORATORY SERVICES DIVISION

                      Broad Lane, Sheffield S3 7HQ




                An investigation into the number of
                people in 'pens' 3 and 4


                                   by

                             G Norton BSc

                                               IR/L/ME/89/32




                                              Issue authorised by Dr A Jones

                                              Date: 18 December 1989


Distribution

The Court of Inquiry (5 copies)
ACC M Jones West Midlands Police
Mr D C T Eve s>
Dr J McQuaJti/
Dr A Jones
Mr A Barrell TD
Mr P G Jones TD
Mr M S Nattrass FAID Area 14
Mr J P Giltrow HFS (N)
Mr M R Stephenson NE FCG
Mr M Fountain TD3
Dr J H Foley
Dr C E Nicholson                            TO RLSD/DIAS STAFF ONLY:
Mr P F Heyes                                NOT TO BE COMMUNICATED OUTSIDE
Mr I R Price                                RLSD WITHOUT THE APPROVAL OF
Mr D Waterhouse                             THE AUTHORISING OFFICER
Mr G A C Games
Mr G Norton
Mr M James TD3                                                 SMR/343/235/01
Mr C J Pertee NE FCG
Mr J B Hibbs NE FCG                                            S80.02.0TH.814
RPS
Library (2)
Registry File




                                                                                    5 3 4
                                                         Document No.   8 9   C O NT’D
    CONTENTS

    1   INTRODUCTION

    2   PHOTOGRAPHS USED FOR COUNTING THE NUMBER OF PERSONS
        2.1 Photographs taken on 15 April 1989 showing 'pens'   2 and 3 - PR1/7A and
             PR1/8A
        2.2 Photographs taken on 22 May 1989 showing the West   Terrace when empty -
             PR10/A2 to PR10/A5
        2.3 Photographs taken on 15 April 1989 showing 'pens'   2,3 and 4 - MP1A-14
        2.4 Photographtaken on 15 April 1989 showing areas of   'pens' 3 and 4
             behind the goal area of the West Terrace - 148.3

    3   DIGITISING PROCEDURES USED
        3.1 Digitising the crowd from photographs PR1/7A and PR1/8A
        3.2 Digitising the crowd from the remaining photographs
        3.3 Digitising the crush barriers from photographs PR10A-2 to PR10A-5

    4   CAD MANIPULATION OF THE DIGITISED DATA
        4.1   Numberof persons in the whole area of 'pen' 3
        4.2   Number of persons in rows within 'pen' 3
             4.2.1 Estimation of number of persons in the front row of 'pen' 3
        4.3   Crowd packing density in 'pen' 2
        4.4   Comparison of crowd packing density in 'pens' 3 and 4

    5   RESULTS
        5.1 Number of persons in 'pen' 3 obtained from photographs PR1/7A and PR1/8A
             5.1.1    Number of persons identified directly from thephotographs
             5.1.2    Number of persons assessed by dividing the 'pen' into rows
        5.2 Number of persons in 'pens' 3 and 4 obtained from photograph MPlA-14
        5.3   Number of persons withina sample columnar area in'pen' 2
        5.4   Comparison of the number of persons in 'pens' 3 and 4

    6 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS




i




                                        -i-




                                                                                      5 3 5
1     INTRODUCTION
                                                            E
                                                            Document No.    89   CONT’D



Following the incident at Hillsborough Stadium, Dr Nicholson provided me with
several albums of   photographs. He told me that these had been supplied to him
by the West Midlands Police. He said that they contained some photographs of
the spectators in   'pens' 3 and 4 taken at Hillsborough Stadium and that they
had been taken at   about the time that the game commenced. He asked me to
provide him with a scientifically-based estimate of the number of persons in
'pen' 3 and in 'pen' 4, and the crowd packing density (number of persons per
square metre) in these 'pens'.

I was also provided with a dimensioned drawing showing a plan view of 'pens' 3
and 4. The drawing had been prepared by Ralph Brade & Assbciates, Consulting
Engineers, Sheffield, at the request of Dr Nicholson; it was numbered 1340/02
Rev A and was dated 3/5/89. I used this drawing to establish the locations of
the crush barriers in 'pens' 3 and 4 and to calculate the areas of these 'pens'.

1 was assisted in this work by Mr G A C Games, a Senior Scientific Officer of
RLSD's Mechanical Engineering Section and Mrs S M Barker of RLSD's Mechanical
Design Unit.

2     PHOTOGRAPHS USED FOR COUNTING THE NUMBER OF PERSONS

2.1     PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN ON 15 APRIL 1989 SHOWING 'PENS' 2 AND 3 - PR1/7A AND
        PR1/8A

Two prints of the West Terrace were selected by Mr Games and myself from the
albums of photographs. These prints were labelled PR1/7A and PR1/8A. West
Midlands Police informed Dr Nicholson that these photographs were taken by a
police,photographer, Mr P Rich of the South Yorkshire Police, from a fixed
position in the South Stand. The photographs were marked with a time of 15.03.
The field of view on the two photographs overlapped and by identifying the
same landmarks on each, it was possible to overlay the photographs to form a
continuous view of the crowd. The prints from the albums were too small for
further work, and I therefore requested that enlargements be provided. Wests
Midlands Police subsequently provided enlargements of the prints and these
were overlapped, as described above, and taped together.

2.2     PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN ON 22 MAY 1989 SHOWING THE WEST TERRACE WHEN EMPTY -
        PR10/A2 TO PR10/A5

I could not identify the positions of barriers within the 'pens' from the
combined photographs PR1/7A and PR1/8A. Dr Nicholson therefore requested West
Midlands Police to arrange for Mr Rich, using the same equipment as used on
the day of the incident, from the same position, to take a set of overlapping
photographs which showed the empty West Terrace. Common landmarks were
identified on these prints and a subset, marked with numbers PR10/A2 to
PR10/A5, were then overlapped to form a panoramic view of the empty terrace.



2.3     PHOTOGRAPH TAKEN 15 APRIL 1989 SHOWING 'PENS' 2,3 AND 4 - MP1A-14

Other photographs taken on the day of the incident showed larger areas of the
terrace. Photograph MP1A-14, taken from the North Stand, showed a long view of
'pens' 2,3 and 4 and was marked with a time of 14.52. Dr Nicholson requested
enlargements of the photograph and these were provided by West Midlands
Police.


                                       -2-


                                                                                  536
                                                          Document No.       CONT’D


    2.4   PHOTOGRAPH TAKEN 15 APRIL 1989 SHOWING AREAS OF 'PENS' 3 AND 4 BEHIND THE
          GOAL AREA OF THE WEST TERRACE - 148.3

    Dr Nicholson provided me with two overlapping photographs, marked 148.3, which
    had been obtained from the West Midlands Police. No information was available
    as regards the time that the photograph was taken. On the basis of my
    examination of the other photographs, the fact that several spectators were
    already on the field and that the players were still on the pitch, it is
    evident that it was taken at approximately 15.00. It showed a view of the
    crowd in 'pens' 3 and 4 and was taken from in front of the West Terrace goal.
    The photograph appeared to be taken from a position low down, possibly at
    ground level. I considered it to be unsuitable for obtaining an absolute count
    of the number of occupants of 'pens' 3 and 4 but that it could be used to
    estimate comparative densities in these 'pens'.

    3   DIGITISING PROCEDURES USED

    Digitising is a means of transferring the positional data of physical points
    shown in graphical material, eg photographs, into a computer file. The
    graphical material to be digitised is attached to the surface of a digitising
    tablet, which resembles a large drawing board. The tablet consists of a
    plastic working surface, AO in size, over a closely packed grid of horizontal
    and vertical wires. These wires are continually fed with electrical pulses
    from the digitiser controller. To identify the points to be digitised a hand
    held stylus is used; this is a 'pen' shaped device with spring loaded pointer
    set in one end. When the pointer is pressed onto the surface at the point to
    be digitised, a switch contact is made in the stylus enabling the pulses in
    the wire grid to be detected. The time delay between sending a pulse and
    receiving it at the stylus is directly proportional to the distance travelled
    by the pulse and hence the stylus position. These delays are measured by the
    controller equipment and translated into positions in both the horizontal and
    vertical directions. This information is then transferred into a computer
    file.
       >

    The information stored in the file can be accessed by a computer aided
    draughting (CAD) program for subsequent graphical display and manipulation (eg
    scaling).Plot? of the manipulated information can be created using a pen
    plotter; the figures in this report were created in this manner, the position
    of each person being shown by an asterisk.


%   The photographs were secured to the digitiser surface, in turn, and a sheet of
    transparent plastic film was placed over them. The position of every
    discernible person on the photographs was digitised using the centre of the
    persons head as an identification point. As the position of each person was
    digitised a mark was made on the transparent film at the person's head to
    ensure that no person was digitised twice. Great care was taken in the
    identification of individual persons and only those people that could be
    positively discerned were included in the digitising.

    3.1   DIGITISING THE CROWD FROM PHOTOGRAPHS PR1/7A AND PR1/8A

    The overlapping photographs PR1/7A and PR1/8A were positioned on the
    digitising tablet and the boundary details were entered into the CAD system as
    described in Section 3. The outlines of people outside the 'pens' who were
    'masking' people within were included in this procedure.




                                         -3-


                                                                                    537
                                                            Document No.   8 9   C O N T ’D

    The head of every discernible person in the crowd was digitised to produce
    the drawing PR178A, Fig 1 is based on this drawing.

    3.2     DIGITISING THE CROWD FROM THE REMAINING PHOTOGRAPHS

    The same digitising procedures were used with photographs MP1A-14 and 148.3,
    again digitising only positively discernible individuals. Figs 2 and 3 show
    the digitised information from MP1'A-14.

    3.3    DIGITISING THE CRUSH BARRIERS FROM PHOTOGRAPHS PR10/A2 to PR10/A5

    Overlapping photographs, PR10/A2 to PR10/A5, were positioned on the digitising
    surface and the crush barriers, fences and wall boundaries were digitised into
    the CAD system as a separate drawing.


    4     CAD MANIPULATION OF THE DIGITISED DATA

    4.1    NUMBER OF PERSONS IN THE WHOLE AREA OF 'PEN' 3

    Drawing PR178A (Fig 1) showed asterisks representing people in part of 'pen' 2
    and part of 'pen' 3. The drawing did not include all of 'pen' 3, because of
    the limited view in the photographs, and therefore     an overall count forthe
    'pen' could not be made using the drawing shown in Fig 1 alone.

    The editing facilities of the CAD system were used on drawing PR178A to delete
    the asterisks representing the occupants of 'pen' 2, and produced the drawing
    shown in Fig 4. The CAD system was then used to overlay and position the
    drawing made from photographs PR10/A2 to PR10/A5, as summarized in Section
    3.3, on the drawing of Fig 4 by matching common landmarks on each drawing. The
    resulting drawing displayed the full extent of 'pen' 3, but only contained
    that part of the crowd shown on the original photographs PR1/7A and PR1/8A,
    causing part of 'pen' 3 to appear to be empty.

    I used the facilities of the CAD system to estimate the number of persons in
    this missing part of the crowd by creating a 'patch' of the same size and
    shape as the apparently empty part of 'pen' 3. This 'patch' was superimposed
    on the popu^laifced area of fpen' 3 and the resulting 'crowd patch' copied to the
    apparently entpty part of 'pen' 3. The resulting drawing is shown in Fig 5, the
    crush barriers having been omitted for clarity and the 'crowd patch' being

t   shown in bold outline. I used the automatic counting facility of the CAD
    system to count the number of heads (asterisks) shown on this drawing.

    4.2     NUMBER OF PERSONS IN ROWS WITHIN 'PEN' 3

    I was concerned about the difficulty in discerning individual heads near the
    front of 'pen' 3. I also wished to have some measure of the variation of crowd
    density across the depth of this 'pen'. Therefore 'pen' 3 was divided into
    rows parallel to the front boundary fence. Using the crush barriers, digitised
    from photographs PR10/A2 to PR10/A5, as demarcations to divide 'pen' 3 into
    four parallel rows numbered from Row 1 (front row) to Row 4 (rear row).

    Using the overlaying facility of the CAD system the crush barriers were
    superimposed on the drawing shown in Fig 5. The top rail of each barrier was
    then projected upwards to a common scaled height of 1.7 m, assuming this
    dimension to be a common height to the centre of every head. Identification of
    the occupants of 'pens' 3 and 4 had been undertaken by locating the position


                                           -4-


                                                                                        5 3 8
                                                      Document No.   89     CONT'D


of each person by an asterisk at the centre of their head. I therefore assume
that any asterisk lying between adjacent projections of the top rails on the
drawing represented a person standing between the corresponding crush
barriers.

Asterisks lying outside the appropriate projected top rails were deleted for
each row in turn, leaving only asterisks representing people in that row. Any
part of the crowd missing from a row, because of the limited*view on the
photographs, was estimated using the 'crowd patch' method described in Section
4.1. This technique was used to produce the drawings shown in Figs 6,7 and 8,
and the automatic counting facility of the CAD system then used to count the
number of persons in Rows 2,3 and 4.                     .

4.2.1     Estimation of the number of persons in the front row of 'pen' 3

My uncertainty about identifying the heads of persons in the front row (row 1)
of 'pen' 3 caused me to use an alternative method to estimate the number of
persons in this row.

Some ad-hoc tests had been undertaken on RLSD's premises to assess the
discomfort experienced by persons in crowds of different packing densities.
Increasing numbers of volunteers of both sexes had stood in a closed vestibule
which had a floor area of 2.8 sq m. The criterion adopted in these tests for
determining the acceptability of different crowd packing densities was that no
person should feel physically distressed. Each test lasted approximately 2
minutes. The tests suggested that a crowd density of 10 persons/sq m could be
achieved without distress, although the subjects felt they were "packed
tightly".

I considered the crowd packing densities that were obtained in Rows 4,3 and 2,
and the results of RLSD's crowd packing tests. I then decided that the best
estimate of the number of persons in the front row of 'pen' 3 would be obtained
by,multiplying the plan area (in square metres) of the front row by a packing
density of 10 persons/sq m. It is my opinion that this estimate would be
neither unrealistically high nor unrealistically low.

4.3     CROWD PACKING DENSITY IN 'PEN' 2
             # i
I estimated the crowd packing density (number of persons/sq metre) in 'pen' 2
by using similar procedures to those described in Section 4.2. Using the
drawing shown in Fig 1 a columnar area was created within 'pen' 2 by
projecting the stanchions of the front boundary fence to the back boundary
wall, the projection lines defining the width of the columnar area. All
asterisks outside this column were deleted and the missing part of the column
filled using the 'crowd patch' method to produce the drawing shown in Fig 9.
The asterisks within the columnar area were then automatically counted and,
knowing the ground area (distance between stanchions multiplied by overall
depth of 'pen'), it was possible to calculate the crowd packing density within
it.

4.4     COMPARISON OF CROWD PACKING DENSITY IN 'PENS' 3 AND 4

I used photographs 148.3 to obtain a comparison of the crowd packing densities
in 'pens' 3 and 4. Onto the drawing obtained by digitising photographs 148.3, a
fixed rectangular area was superimposed in 'pens' 3 and 4. This rectangle was
not intended to represent a specific ground area on the terraces, but rather
to define an area on the original photographs. An automatic count of the heads


                                       -5-

                                                                                     5 3 9
                                                      Document No.     89   CONT’ D

(asterisks) within the rectangular area in each 'pen' was then obtained. This
procedure was repeated at different locations until 4 sets of counts had been
obtained, at the positions shown in Fig 10, taking care to ensure that
obstructions e.g. persons outside the terrace, did not protrude into the
rectangular areas.

5     RESULTS

5.1     NUMBER OF PERSONS IN 'PEN' 3 OBTAINED FROM PHOTOGRAPHS PR1/7A AND PR1/8A

5.1.1     Number of persons identified directly from the photographs
                                i’
The number of persons counted automatically within 'pen' 3, on the basis of
the number of heads directly identified with the digitising method, was 1074.
To this must be added the number of persons in that part of the 'pen' not
shown on the photographs but estimated by the 'crowd patch' method ie 334.
This results in a total figure of 1408. It is my opinion that this total is an
underestimate of the number of persons within 'pen' 3; lack of clarity in the
photographs made it difficult to identify individual heads near the front
boundary wall and also people outside the 'pen' obscured parts of this area.

5.1.2    Number of persons assessed bv dividing the 'pen' into rows

Table 1 shows my alternative assessment of the number of persons within 'pen' 3,
based on the division of the 'pen' into four rows. Persons in Rows 4,3 and 2
were identified directly from the photographs using the digitiser and 'crowd
patch' methods and counted automatically. The number of persons in the front
row (Row 1) were estimated on the basis of the plan area of the row and a
crowd packing density of   10 persons/sq  m. This     alternative andpreferred
assessment of the number   of persons in  'pen' 3     is 1576.

Table 1 also shows the crowd packing densities for each of the four rows in
'pen' 3. The crowd packing densities for Rows 4,3 and 2 are based on the number
of persons identified with the digitiser and 'crowd patch' methods from
photographs whilst that for Row 1 is a value assumed on the basis of tests
made at RLSD.

5.2     NUMBER Of PERSONS IN 'PENS' 3 AND 4 OBTAINED FROM PHOTOGRAPH MP1A-14
                * /
Table 2 shows the number   of persons in  'pens' 3 and 4 obtainedby using the
automatic counting facility of the CAD    system,     after they had been identified
on photograph MP1A-14, using the digitising method.

It was extremely difficult to differentiate between individual heads on
photograph MP1A-14 and only those heads that could be definitely identified
were digitised. I consider this to be the reason for obtaining a count of 678
persons in 'pen' 3 from photograph MP1A-14, a number which is low compared to
the 1408 persons counted from photographs PR1/7A and PR1/8A and to my
preferred estimate of 1576 persons.

It is my opinion that the counts of 678 persons in 'pen' 3 and 821 persons in
'pen' 4 should be regarded as being unrealistically low. It is also my
opinion that I obtained a much more reliable assessment of the number of
persons in 'pen' 3 from the counts and estimate based on photographs PR1/7A and
PR1/8A.

Whilst the above figures cannot be used as a total count for the 'pens' I



                                       ' 6'

                                                                                  5 40
                                                    Document No.   89   C O N T ’D

believe they can be used to compare crowd densities. The ground areas of
'pens' 3 and 4 are very similar (see table 1) and I consider that the counts
obtained suggest that the crowd packing densities in 'pens' 3 and 4 were also
similar. The larger count in 'pen' 4 can be partially attributed to the angle
and position from which the photograph was taken, which enabled easier
identification of individual heads in 'pen' 4 than in 'pen' 3.

5.3   NUMBER OF PERSONS WITHIN A SAMPLE COLUMNAR AREA OF 'PEN* 2

A total of 150 persons occupied a sample columnar area taken from the front
boundary wall to the rear boundary wall of 'pen' 2. The corresponding crowd
packing density was 5.0 persons/sq m.

5.4   COMPARISON OF THE NUMBER OF PERSONS IN 'PENS' 3 AND 4

Table 3 summarizes the number of persons identified within different areas of
the same size at four locations in each 'pen'. Although the numbers of persons
should not be regarded as absolute values, because of the difficulty in clear
identification, it is my opinion that they do serve to compare the crowd
packing densities in 'pens' 3 and 4.

Making allowance for the difficulty in identifying persons, I consider the
differences between the numbers obtained in each of the four comparisons to be
small. Additionally, there is no distinct bias to suggest an appreciable
difference between the crowd packing densities in 'pens' 3 and 4; this is
confirmed by the close agreement obtained between the average values of the
four sample counts made for each 'pen'.

6   SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

6.1 I used photographs supplied by West Midlands Police, together with a
drawing prepared by Ralph Brade & Associates, as the basis for my assessment
of .the number of persons in parts of the West Terrace of Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club's Hillsborough Stadium. I used the facilities provided by a
computer-aided draughting system to assist in identifying and counting the
number of persons within 'pens' on the West Terrace.

6.2 In making my assessment I assumed that a crowd packing density in one
part of 'pen' 3 was reproduced in another, adjacent part of it. Additionally, I
was unable to obtain an acceptably accurate count of the persons between the
front boundary wall and the nearest line of crush barriers in 'pen' 3 by the
direct identification of heads on photographs. I therefore estimated the
number of persons in this area of 'pen' 3 from considerations of the crowd
packing densities in other areas of the 'pen', together with results from an
investigation of packing densities made on RLSD's premises. It is my opinion,
based on a study of photographs of 'pens' 3 and 4, that my assumption and
estimation were justified.

6.3 My best assessment of the number of persons within 'pen' 3 is that 1576
persons were present at 15.03 hours on 15 April 1989. It is my opinion that
1576 persons is unlikely to be an overestimate of the true number. It
represents an average crowd packing density in 'pen' 3 of 8.4 persons/sq m,
which exceeds the maximum value of 5.4 persons/sq m recommended in "Guide To
Safety At Sports Grounds" (ref 1) by 56%

6.4 The crowd packing density within 'pen' 3 increased between the rear
boundary wall and the line of crush barriers nearest to the front boundary
                                                     Document No.   g ^   CONT’ D


wall. My lowest assessment of the crowd packing density in 'pen' 3 had an
average value of 7.5 persons/sq m, this occurring in the area between the rear
boundary wall and the rearmost line of crush barriers. The highest crowd
packing density that I was able to assess directly had an average value of
8.1 persons/sq m, and this occurred in the area between the line of crush
barriers nearest the pitch and the next line of crush barriers. These crowd
packing densities exceed the maximum value recommended in "Guide To Safety At
Sports Grounds" by 39% and 50% respectively.

6.5 I assessed the average crowd packing density in 'pen' 2 at 15.03 hours to
be of the order of 5 persons/sq m.

6.6 I was unable to assess the number of persons in 'pen' 4 by a direct
counting method and I used a technique that compared the packing densities in
'pen' 4 with those in 'pen' 3. This comparison has caused me to conclude that at
approximately 15.00 hours the packing densities in 'pens' 3 and 4 were nominally
the same.




                                    -8-



                                                                             542
                                                          Document No.   89   C O N T ’D

Table 1     Number of persons in 'pen' 3 and their packing densities at
            15.03 hours on 15 April 1989. based on photographs PR1/7A and
            PR1/8A

Row No                      Number of persons       Crowd packing density
                                                    (persons/sq m)

4 (Rear)                    268                     7.5
(Fig 8)

3                           382                     7.6
(Fig 7)

2                           409                     8.1
(Fig 6)

1 (Front)                   517                    10.0 (assumed)

                           1576 total               8.4 mean value


Table 2     Number of persons in 'pens' 3 and 4 and their packing densities
            on 15 April 1989. based on photoeraph MPlA-14

'pen' No                    Number of persons       Area (sq m)


'pen' 3                     678                     188
(Fig 2)

'pen' 4                     821                     192
(Fig 3)
                           1499 (total)             380 (total)


Table 3     Comparison of number of persons within sample areas of the
            same- size in 'pens' 3 and 4

                           Number of persons within a sample
                           area of the same size (see Fig 10)

                           'pen' 3                  'pen' 4

First comparison          44                        56

Second comparison         56                        49

Third comparison          45                        51

Fourth comparison         50                        41

Mean comparison           48.75                     49.25




                                          -9-



                                                                                    5 4 3
                                               Document No.   g ^   CONT’ D
REFERENCES

1   Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (1986)
    HMSO
    ISBN 0 11 340840 4




                                    -10-

                                                                      5 4 4
      DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPHS PR1-7A & PR1-8A




                     HEADCOUNT   -   1419
                   PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN 15.03
545




                                                           FIG 1
                                                                BASED ON
                                                         RLSD SHT PR178A/PP1131
      •            •                                      •           t
              DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPH MP1A-14
          SHOWING RAISED 1ST BARRIER & PEN DIVIDING FENCES


                       OCCUPANTS OF PEN 3 SHOWN




                                                  PEN 3


             PEN
                                     v» * * • »   ®• *


                                                              PEN 4




                                                                                  Document No.
                         HEADCOUNT           678




                                                                                  89
                        PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN 14.52




                                                                                  C0NT D
546




                                                                        FIG 2
                                                                             BASED ON
                                                                      RLSD SHT UP114E/PP1131
      •                       •                                         •                   •
                           DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPH MP1A-14
                       SHOWING RAISED 1ST BARRIER & PEN DIVIDING FENCES


                                       OCCUPANTS OF PEN 4 SHOWN
                        (NB   ESTIMATED CROWD - 84 OCCUPANTS - SHOWN HATCHED)




                                                                                    PEN 4
                          PEN 2
          •Alttg Qjp
                                              PEN 3                     •r•*.***•

                                                     >• •:*.   • *.*.




                                                                                                        Document No.
                                         HEADCOUNT               821




                                                                                                        89
                                       PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN 14.52




                                                                                                        CO NFD
547




                                                                                              FIG 3
                                                                                                   BASED ON
                                                                                            RLSD SHT lfPl14F/FP1131
              DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPHS P R 1-7A & P R 1-8A
                         OCCUPANTS OF PEN 2 DELETED




                                                                     PEN




      PEN 2




                                                                                      O
                                                                                      o
                                                                                      o
                                                                                      G
                                                                                     ,CD
                                                                                      3
                              HEADCOUNT   -   1074
                             PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN 15.03

                                                                                     co

                                                                                       o
                                                                                       o
                                                                                       z
                                                                                       •H
                                                                                       d
548




                                                                             FIG 4
                                                                                  BASED ON
                                                                           RLSD SHT PR178B/PP1131
                  DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPHS PR1-7A & PR1-8A
                                   SUPERIMPOSED ON
      DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPHS PR10A-2 TO PR10A-5, SCALED ETC TO MATCH


                                   OCCUPANTS OF PEN 3 SHOWN
                   (NB   ESTIMATED CROWD - 334 OCCUPANTS - SHOWN HATCHED)
                                        FSBIIOTKS OF EH1-7A/PR1-6A


                                                PEN 3




                                                                                 PEN 4




                                           ,••• *•



       PEN



                                                                                                   O
                                                                                                   o
                                                                                                   e:




                                    HEADCOUNT                   1408

                                   PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN 15.03
                                                                                                 O
                                                                                                 o
                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                 D



Ln                                                                                    FIG 5
                                                                                             Ba s ed on
                                                                                   R L S D SB T P S N 3 /P P 1 1 3 1
'sD
      #                              #                                           t       •
                        DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPHS P R 1-7A & P R 1-8A
                                         SUPERIMPOSED ON
            DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPHS PR10A-2 TO PR10A-5, SCALED ETC TO MATCH

                                                        PEN 3
                                            OCCUPANTS OF ROW 2 ONLY SHOWN
                           (NB       ESTIMATED CROWD - 118 OCCUPANTS - SHOWN HATCHED)
                                                               EHl-7A/rai-6A




                                                   1- "                                  PEN 4
                                      I-------
                                                                   PEN 3
                                                                                        - ■ *1
                                                 TV'
                                 T
                     1 "
      r "
             PEN 2


                                                                                                       O
                                                                                                       o
                                                                                                       o

                                                                                                       cn




                                                   HEADCOUNT               409                         oo
                                                 PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN 15.03                                O


                                                                                                        O
550




                                                                                             FIG 6
                                                                                                   BASED ON
                                                                                          Sl s d s&r PRi7az/ppiisi
#                                 •                                                    •           •
                           DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPHS P R 1-7A & P R 1-8A
                                            SUPERIMPOSED ON
               DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPHS PR10A-2 TO PR10A-5, SCALED ETC TO MATCH

                                                     PEN 3
                                         OCCUPANTS OF ROW 3 ONLY SHOWN
                            (NB   ESTIMATED CROWD - 60 OCCUPANTS - SHOWN HATCHED)
                                                pgRIMKTSH Or '’HI—7A/PH1--6A




                                                                                                   PEN 4


                                                                               PEN 3       - '11
                              -r"
         --T
    r"
                PEN 2




                                            HEADCOUNT                     382                                 OO

                                           PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN 15.03
                                                                                                               O
                                                                                                               ivr
                                                                                                               o



                                                                                                      FIG 7
                                                                                                            BASED ON
                                                                                                    RI.SD SHT PR178D/PP1131
                                   DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPHS PR1-7A & PR1-8A
                                                   SUPERIMPOSED ON
                       DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPHS PR10A-2 TO PR10A-5, SCALED ETC TO MATCH

                                                        PEN 3
                                            OCCUPANTS OF ROW 4 ONLY SHOWN

                                                    ppinmTCK or   F B I- TA/Ha-a*




                                                                                               ■■ t
                                                                                    -----1
                                                                                                                            PEN 4
                                                                                                            T "
                                                                                                      r~~
                                                                           - ~1                                             - n
                                                                                       PEN 3                      -   - 1
                                   -r~
           - - T
      r"
                   PEN 2


                                                                                                                                          O
                                                                                                                                          o
                                                                                                                                          c:
                                                                                                                                          CD
                                                                                                                                          =5




                                                 HEADCOUNT                      268

                                               PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN 15.03
552




                                                                                                                                      F IG            8
                                                                                                                                        Ba s e d on
                                                                                                                             H L SD   3ET PR176C/PP1131
                          DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPHS P R 1-7A & P R 1-8A
               T                           SUPERIMPOSED O N
              DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPHS PR10A-2 TO PR10A-5, SCALED ETC TO MATCH

                                                  PEN 2
                                OCCUPANTS OF FRONT TO BACK SLICE AS SHOWN

                                             FBRIIOTER 0 ? P R l-7 A /T B l-flA




                                                                                  T
                                                                 - 1

                                                                                              I-------
                                                                                                         PEN 4
                                                                                      PEN 3

              r"

      PEN 2


                                                                                                               CJ
                                                                                                               o




                                                                                                             00
                                         HEADCOUNT                          150

                                        PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN 15.03


                                                                                                               CJ
553




                                                                                                              FIG 9
                                                                                                                  BASED ON
                                                                                                           RLSD SHT E*817flF/PPl131
            ISED DRAWINGS OF PHOTOGRAPHS     3
       COMPARING CROWD DENSITIES IN PENS 3 & 4


                                                     HATCHED AREA HEADCOUNT

                                                           PEN 3 - 4 4
                                                          PEN 4 - 5 6




      TT              TT
                                                          PEN 3 - 5 6
                                                          PEN 4 - 4 9




                                                          PEN 3 - 4 5
                                                          PEN 4 - 5 1
                                                                                        a
                                                                                        o
                                                                                        o
                                                                                        cz




                                                          PEN 3 - 5 0                   OO
                                                          PEN 4 - 4 1                   vjQ
                                                                                        O
                                                                                        O
                                                 AVERAGE HATCHED AREA COUNTS

                                                        PEN 3   -   48.75
554




                                                        PEN 4   -   49.25
                                                                                F I G 10
                                                                                      BASED ON
                                                                               RLSD SET F1483K/FP1131
                                                                        Incident Report

                       HEALTH AND SAFETY EXECUTIVE

               RESEARCH AND LABORATORY SERVICES DIVISION

                       Broad Lane, Sheffield S3 7HQ



                An estimation of the maximum allowable
                capacities of Pens 3 and 4


                                      by

                              A L Collins
                                  and
                              D Waterhouse BSc(Eng) CEng MIMechE FIMEMME

                                                 IR/L/ME/89/3 5




                                                Issue authorised by: Dr A Jones

                                                Date: 31 January 1990

Distribution

The Court of Inquiry   (5 copies)
ACC J Mervyn Jones     West Midlands Police
Mr D C T Eves
Mr A Barrel^ j?        TD
Mr P G Jones ' *       TD
Mr M S Nattrass        FAID Area 14
Mr J P Giltrow         HFS (N)
Mr M R Stephenson      NE FCG
Mr M Fountain          TD3
Mr M James             TD3
Mr C J Pertee          NE FCG
Mr J B Hibbs           NE FCG
Dr J McQuaid
Dr A Jones
Dr J H Foley
Dr C E Nicholson                              TO RLSD/DIAS STAFF ONLY
Mr P F Heyes                                  NOT TO BE COMMUNICATED OUTSIDE
Mr I R Price                                  RLSD WITHOUT THE APPROVAL OF
Mr G A C Games                                THE AUTHORISING OFFICER
Mr G Norton
Authors                                                           SMR/343/235/01
RIS
Library (2)                                                       S80.02.0TH.814
Registry File




                                                                                   5 5 5
                                                        Document Mo.          C O N T ’D
CONTENTS                                                                   _____ _

1   INTRODUCTION

2   ESTIMATIONS OF THE CAPACITIES OF PENS 3 AND 4

3   METHOD OF CALCULATING THE REVISED MAXIMUM CAPACITIES OF PENS 3 AND 4

4   ASSESSMENT OF REVISED CAPACITIES

5   SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

APPENDIX 1   Tabulated calculations of the maximum allowable number of persons
             in Pens 3 and 4




                                                                                  556
                                                             Document No.          C O N T ’D


    1   INTRODUCTION

    As part of the investigation by the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) into the
    incident at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club's Hillsborough stadium on 15
    April 1989, Mr A L Collins, a Scientific Officer, and Mr D Waterhouse, a
    Principal Scientific Officer, of HSE's Research and Laboratory Services
    Division (RLSD) calculated the maximum number of persons (the capacity) that
    was appropriate for Pens 3 and 4, The calculations were based on their
    interpretation of recommendations contained within the Home Office/Scottish
    Office publication "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds" (H M Stationery Office:
    1986).


    2   ESTIMATIONS OF THE CAPACITIES OF PENS 3 AND 4

    Dr Nicholson, a Deputy Director of RLSD's Safety Engineering Laboratory (SEL)
    provided us with a drawing that he had received from Eastwood and Partners on
    24 April 1989. The drawing was labelled Eastwood and Partners, was numbered
    8945/lA, had the title "Sheffield Wednesday F.C. PLC Hillsborough Ground
    Layout 1987" and was dated 16/4/87 with Revision A dated 21/10/87. This
    drawing showed the capacity of one of the two central 'pens' of the West
    terraces of the stadium to be 1,200 persons and that of the other to be 1,000
    persons, i.e. the capacity of the combined area was 2,200 persons.

    The interim report IR/L/ME/MM/89/1 prepared by RLSD for the Court of Inquiry
    states that, "if 54 people per 10 sq m is assumed as the allowable packing
    density for the West Terrace then the capacity of Pen 3 is 1015 and Pen 4 is
    1036 making a total of 2051 for the combined area".

    However, Paragraph 221 of the 1986 edition of the Home Office/Scottish Office
    publication "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds" (H M Stationary Office) states
    "Where crush barriers meet the strength and spacing guidelines of Chapter 9
    the capacity of a terrace or viewing slope should be assessed from the area
    available for standing by allowing a packing density of between 54 and 27
    persons per 10 square metres depending upon the condition of the terrace or
    slope".

    We knew that RLSD's calculation had been made as a preliminary check of the

i   capacity assigned by Eastwood & Partners to the two central 'pens'. We
    therefore examined two drawings that had been prepared for HSE by Ralph Brade
    & Associates, Consulting Engineers, Midland Bank Chambers, 3 Sharrow Lane,
    Sheffield. Drawing No 1340/02 Rev A, dated 3/5/89, showed a plan view of
    Pens 3 and 4 on the West terraces and Drawing No 1340/03A Rev A, also dated
    3/5/89, showed a section through part of the West terraces. These drawings are
    reproduced, to a smaller scale, in Figs 1 and 2 respectively.

    Our examination of these drawings caused us conclude that RLSD's nominal
    maximum capacity 2051 persons for the central 'pens' might have to be reduced
    to compensate for some departures from the recommendations of Chapter 9 of the
    Guide. We therefore calculated capacities for Pens 3 and 4 on the basis of the
    areas behind crush barriers and perimeter fences in which a crowd packing
    density of 5.4 persons/sq m would be permissible, provided all other aspects
    of the terraces conformed with the Guide's recommendations.




%                                         -   1
                                              -




                                                                                   557
                                                           Document No.   8 9   C O N T ’D




    3   METHOD OF CALCULATING THE REVISED MAXIMUM CAPACITIES OF PENS 3 AND 4

    The calculation of the revised maximum capacity of Pens 3 and 4 was based on
    our interpretation of Paragraph 113, Paragraph 225, and Table 1 of the Guide.

    Paragraph 113 states: "Ideally, crush barriers should be provided along the
    full width of a terrace, with gaps only at radial gangways".

    Paragraph 225 states "The capacity of the terrace is calculated by multiplying
    the area available for standing by the appropriate packing density. The
    following following formula may be used:

                                    A
    Capacity (Number of persons) - — x (27 to 54)
                                    10

    where 'A' is the area available for standing in square metres.

    Table 1 recommends the maximum horizontal distance that should exist between
    barriers conforming to the "greater" and the "lesser" strength requirements
    when they are installed on "peak viewing areas" and on "other areas". We
    classified Pens 3 and 4 as being 'peak viewing' areas because they were
    behind a goal, and the barriers as conforming to the "greater strength
    requirement" because this permitted greater horizontal distances.

    Pens 3 and 4 did not have radial gangways, nor did their crush barriers extend
    the full width of the terraces, gaps being present along the rows. We
    therefore calculated the plan area of terrace behind each barrier (or
    perimeter fence) by multiplying the length of the barrier by a 'permissible
    depth' behind it. This 'permissible depth' was either the maximum horizontal
    distance between barriers that was recommended for "peak viewing" in Column A
    of Table 1 of the Guide, or the existing distance between the barrier and the
    next barrier (or wall) behind it, whichever was the least.

    Brade's Drawing No 1340/03A showed the slope of Pens 3 and 4 to be 13 degrees
    40 minutes. The recommended maximum horizontal distance between crush barriers
    that corresponded to this slope was interpolated from Table 1 of the Guide as

%   being 3.9 m.' Brade's Drawing No 1340/02 Rev A showed that the horizontal
    distance between the rows of crush barriers in Pens 3 and 4 was usually 3.5 m,
    i.e. the existing distance between the rows of crush barriers was usually
    within the recommended maximum value.

    The heights of the barriers were generally less than the values of 1.02 m to
    1.12 m recommended in the Guide. However, we did not discount any of the crush
    barriers in our calculations; no barrier had a height less than 81% of the
    minimum recommended value, and our intention was to calculate a 'base'
    capacity that could be further reduced because of other departures from the
    Guide's recommendations.

    We multiplied each plan area behind a barrier (sq m) by 5.4 persons/sq m and
    truncated the product to obtain the number of persons appropriate to each
    area. Fig 3 is a pictorial representation of the method of calculation, the
    details of which are shown in Appendix 1. The total capacities of Pens 3 and 4
    were then obtained by summing the numbers of persons appropriate to each area
    behind a barrier. Our calculations showed the capacity of Pen 3 to be 822
    persons and that of Pen 4 to be 871 persons, i.e. the combined capacity of the
    central 'pens' was 1,693 persons.

                                         -   2-
                                                                                   558
                                                              Document No.   89   C O N T ’D




    4   ASSESSMENT OF REVISED CAPACITIES

    The white areas of Fig 3 represent those parts of the terrace where, ideally,
    persons should not stand, otherwise the thrust exerted on part of a crush
    barrier by a crowd of 5.4 persons/sq m might exceed the force intended by the
    Guide.

    Our calculations did not include any reduction in capacity of the central
    'pens' to compensate for departures from other recommendations contained in
    the Guide. Brade's drawings indicated that departures from Paragraphs in the
    Guide, other than those associated with the continuity (Paragraph 113) and
    spacing (Table 1) of crush barriers, existed in the central 'pens', i.e.

    Paragraph 92   - "A terrace step should not be less than 280 mm or more than
    380 mm wide.   The preferred dimension is between 355 mm and 380 mm". Pens 3
    and 4 had 33   terrace steps, of which 28 (85%) were slightly wider, (not more
    than 10 mm),   than the maximum recommended width.

    Paragraph 96 - "The aim should be to ensure that every spectator on the
    terraces is within 12 metres of a gangway or exit so that spectators can move
    quickly on to exit routes at the end of an event or in the event of an
    emergency. This may be achieved by a pattern of gangways (not less than
    1.1 metres wide) linked to the exit system". There were no gangways in Pens 3
    and 4 and if the perimeter gates are not considered as exits, then
    approximately 40% of the persons in these 'pens' were not within 12 m of an
    exit.

    Paragraph 110 - "In order to locate the top rail against that part of the body
    most able to tolerate pressure the heights of crush barriers should be 1.02 m
    to 1.12 m above the nosing of the step immediately behind the barrier, with a
    preferred height of 1.1m" . Four of the five barriers in Pen 3 and six of the
    nine barriers in Pen 4 did not conform with this recommendation.

    Paragraph 114 - " Where barriers are not continuous between radial gangways,
    the alignment of gaps in successive rows of barriers on a terrace should form
    an angle of lefes than 60 degrees to the line of the barriers. There should be
    no more than 2 consecutive gaps in any line of gaps". Two of the four 'paths

%   of gaps' in Pen 3 and one of the eleven 'paths of gaps' in Pen 4 did not
    conform with the recommendation on alignment.

    Paragraph 115 - " Where there are gaps in the line of crush barriers these
    should be at least 1.1 m and not more than 1.4 m in width". Four of five gaps
    in Pen 3 did not conform and nine of ten gaps in Pen 4 did not conform to a
    literal interpretation of this recommendation. A more liberal interpretation,
    relating the acceptability of the width of a gap to the resulting depth of
    crowd that could form between two rows of barriers, resulted in four of five
    gaps in Pen 3 and three of six gaps in Pen 4 not conforming, as shown in the
    schematic plan of Fig 4.

    Paragraph 215 - "For most major stadia, whether used for association football
    or other sports, the pitch perimeter fence will be required either to prevent
    access to parts of the pitch as mentioned above (Paragraph 214), or at least
    to discourage attempts by spectators to enter the playing area. Gates or other
    access points (minimum width of 1.1 m) should nevertheless be provided for use
    in an emergency and, at those grounds where a perimeter track is used as part
    of the exit system, for the departure of spectators at the end of an event.


                                           -3-
                                                                                     5 5 9
Provision of such gates or access points is particularly important to allow
for access to the playing area (or track) where it is likely to be used as a
place of safety in an emergency. Such gates or access points should be
properly stewarded and clearly marked so that immediate access to the playing
area or perimeter track can be ensured". The gate to Pen 3 had a clearance
width of 0.81 m to 0.82 m and the gate to Pen 4 had a clearance width of
0.77 m to 0.79 m. The two gates in the perimeter fence of the central 'pens'
therefore did not conform with this recommendation.

It is our opinion that it might be advisable to reduce the 'base' capacities
of 822 persons for Pen 3 and 871 persons for Pen 4, because of these six
departures from the Guide's recommendations.


5   SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

5.1 We used recommendations contained within the 1986 edition of the Home
Office/Scottish Office publication "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds" (the
Guide) to calculate revised maximum allowable capacities for Pens 3 and 4 of
the West terraces of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club's Hillsborough stadium.
We calculated the maximum allowable capacity of Pen 3 to be 822 persons, and
that of Pen 4 to be 871 persons. It is therefore our opinion that the combined
maximum allowable capacity of the two central 'pens' should not exceed1,693
persons, provided that all other aspects of the terraces conformed with the
Guide's recommendations.

5.2 Our calculations showed the capacity of Pen 3 to be less than that of
Pen 4. Eastwood & Partners Drawing No 8945/1A dated 16/4/87 showed The
capacity of Pen 3 to be greater than that of Pen 4.

5.3 Our revised maximum allowable    combined capacity of 1,693 persons for the
two central 'pens' was 83% of that   initially calculated by RLSD, solely on the
basis of the area of Pens 3 and 4,   and was 77% of that shown on Eastwood &
Partners Drawing No 8945/1A, dated   16/4/87.

5.4 Our calculation of the revised capacities of Pens 3 and 4 did not include
any reduction that might be needed to compensate for some departures from the
Guide's recommendations in these 'pens'. These departures were associated
with:

(i)     the width of the terrace steps.
(ii)    the distance of persons from gangways or exits;
(iii)   the heights of crush barriers;
(iv)    the alignment of gaps in the rows of crush barriers;
(v)     the width of gaps in the rows of crush barriers;
(vi)    the width of the gates in the perimeter fence;

It is our opinion that the revised number of 1,693 persons for the maximum
combined capacity of Pens 3 and 4 should be reduced further because of these
six departures from the Guide's recommendations.




                                      -4-


                                                                               560
o


o




-T3-
o




                                                                                             H i
                                                                                         j    )j
                                                                                     •        i*
                                                                                             ; * *
                                                                                             ri I

                                                                                         ^{i
                                                                                             Us

                                                                                             ill




                                                                                                     Ralph Brade & Associates

                                                                                                     C o n s u ltin g En gin eers   ^£3/




                                                                                                      HEALTHt SAFETYEXECUTIVE



             £747/   3                                                                                SHEFFIELD      WEDNESDAY
                                                                                                          FOOTBALL CLUB
                                                                                                          HILLSBOROUGH


                                                                                                            W EST     TERRACE
                                       —     z}                                                           P L A N DETAILS OF
                                                                                                            CENTRAL       PENS


       Fig   1           P L A N V IEW OF P E N S 3 AND 4 OF NES T T E R R A C E S                        V 100

                                                                                                         13i0

                                                                                                            13W O 2A\ A,
                                                                                                         vO
                                                                                                         to
CONT’ D
89
Document No.




                                                                                 R a lp h B r a d e & A s s o c ia te s
                                                                                 C o n s u ltin g Engineers

                                                                                  3        L*ne
                                                                                  ST W M SJ7 8A£
                                                                                  Ttt 10742 SSJ25S




                                                                                   &ALTHi SAFETYEXECUTIVE



                                                                                   SHEFFIELD         WEDNESDAY
                                                                                        FOOTBALL        CLUB
                                                                                         HILLSBOROUGH



                                                                                         CENTRAL        TUNNEL

                                                                                         &    WEST TERRACE

                                                                                      LONGITUOINAL SECTION


               Fig 2   S E C T I O N T H R OU GH P A R T OF N E S T TE RR ACES                  1-100


                                                                                        1360

                                                                                                     0/03AI
CONT’ D




                                                                                                                                                          563
                                                                                                                PEN 4
39




                                         PEN 3
                                         TOTAL SEE                                                          TOTAL 871
Document No.




                                                                                                                                No 150
                                 No 145                                                                                         £.04m
                                 7.005m                                                                                     a 1 PERSONS
                               94 PERSONS                                                \ No 144 \
                                                                                         \ 2.425m \
                                                                                         \   45   \
                                                                                         \PERSONS\



                                                       No 13&A                                               No 137              /    No 138
                          No 136                                                                                                 /    3.B45m
                           5.475m                       4.525m                                                4 -4&m
                                                     94 PERSONS                                            91 PERSONS            / S B PERSONS
                        105 PERSONS

                                                                             x No 132 4.495m
                                                                             \ 92 PERSONS

                                                              No 125                               /-No 127 y               No 128
                             No 124A                                     /1 .BSm y                 /2.310m /
                              7.425m                         5.395m                                                          &. 88m
                                                                         /    22   ^               /   35   /            133 PERSONS
                           144 PERSONS                     105 PERSONS   PERSONS                   /PERSONS/
                                                                                \ No 12&s
                                                                               /\2. 270mN
                                                                                \   38 s
                                                                               ''PERSONS


                           FENCE                                                                                     FENCE
                            S.0m                         FENCE               / FENCE                                11.305m
                        280 PERSONS                      7.45m               /2.455m                              EBB PERSONS

                                                                                       [0 .885m]
                                         GATE 3                                        GATE 4                                                    GATE 5




               Fig 3   WEST T E R R A C E         - IDEAL D I S T R I B U T I O N OF P ER SO NS                          IN C E N T R A L PENS
CONT’D




                                                                                                                                    564
                                        PEN 3                                                         PEN 4
89
Document No.




                       GAP 1                                  GAP 2                                  GAP 7

                                                                               GAP G




                                         GAP 3                        GAP 4                                   GAP 8




                                                 GAP 5                                  GAP 9        GAP 10


                                                                              GAP 1 1




                                       GATE 3                                           GATE 4



                                          X      GAP DOES NOT CONFORM TO GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS

                                         s/      GAP CONFORMS TO GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS




               Fig 4      C O N F O R M I T Y OF WI D TH OF G A P S B E T W E E N B A R RI ER S               IN P E N S 3 A ND 4
                                                          Document No.   89   C O N T ’D


APPENDIX 1


Table 1   Calculations of maximum allowable number of persons in Pen 3


PEN 3
Barrier      Available spectator area        Number of spectators at a
number       sq m                            density of 5.4 persons/sq m

                                             Calculated    Truncated

149           7.005 x 2.5   -   17.513       94.570          94

136          1.125 x 3.9    -    4.388       23.695          23
136          4.350 x 3.5    -   15.225       82.215          82

136A         0.330 x 3.5    -    1.155        6.237           6
136A         4.195 x 3.9    -   16.361       88.349          88

124A         5.475 x 3.5    -   19.163      103.480         103
124A         1.950 x 3.9    -    7.605       41.067          41

125           3.365 x 3.5   -   11.778       63.601          63
125           2.030 x 3.9   -    7.917       42.752          42

Fence        7.425 x 3.6    =   26.730      144.342         144
Fence        1.530 x 3.9    -    5.967       32.222          32
Fence        5.395 x 3.6    =   19.422      104.879         104

                                    Total   827.409        822




                                                                                    565
                                                                  Document No.   gg   C O N T ’D



    APPENDIX 1 (cont)


    Table 2   Calculations of maximum allowable number of persons in Pen 4


    PEN 4
    Barrier     Available spectator area             Number of spectators at a
    number      sq m                                 density of 5.4 persons/sq m

                                                     Calculated      Truncated
    150         6.040 x 2.5       -    15.100        81.540           81
    144         2.425 x 3.5       -     8.488        45.835           45

    137         0.095 x 2.5       mm    0.238         1.285            1
    137         3.825 x 3.9       -    14.918        80.557           80
    137         0.540 x 3.5       -     1.890        10.206           10

    138         3.645 x 3.5       -    12.758        68.893           68

    132         4.340 x 3.9            16.926        91.400           91
    132         0.155 x 1.5       -     0.233         1.258            1

    125         1.610 x 2.0             3.220        17.388           17
    125         0.240 x 3.9       -     0.936         5.054            5

    127         0.885 x 2.0             1.770         9.558            9
    127         1.425 x 3.5       =     4.988        26.935           26

    128         1.565 x 3.5             5.478        29.581           29
    128         1.855 x 3.9       -     7.235        39.069           39
    128         3.460 x 3.5       -    12.110        65.394           65

    126         0.245 x 1.5             0.368         1.987            1
    126         2.000 x 3.5       =     7.000        37.800           37
    126         0.025 x 1.5       -     0.038         0.205            0


%   Fence
    Fence
    Fence
                1.605
                2.270
                2.275
                        x
                        x
                        x
                            3.6
                            2.1
                            3.6
                                  =
                                  -
                                  =
                                        5.778
                                        4.767
                                        8.190
                                                     31.201
                                                     25.742
                                                     44.226
                                                                      31
                                                                      25
                                                                      44
    Fence       1.430   x   3.9   «     5.577        30.116           30
    Fence       6.880   x   3.6   -    24.768       133.747          133
    Fence       0.185   x   3.9   -     0.722         3.899            3

                                            Total   882.876          871




%
                                                                                           566
                                                           Documfint No.   89   C O N T ’D



                                                                      Incident Report

                      HEALTH AND SAFETY EXECUTIVE

               RESEARCH AND LABORATORY SERVICES DIVISION

                      Broad Lane, Sheffield S3 7HQ




                An investigation of the turnstiles at the
                Leppings Lane entrance to the stadium


                                  by

                              G A C Games BA
                                   and
                              D Waterhouse BSc(Eng) CEng MIMechE FIMEMME

                                              IR/L/ME/89/33




                                             Issue authorised by: Dr A Jones

                                             Date: 26 January 1990

Distribution

The Court of Inquiry (5 copies)
ACC J Mervyn Jones West Midlands Police
Mr D C T Eves
Mr A Barrell •      TD
Mr P G Jones        TD
Mr M S Nattrass     FAID Area 14
Mr J P Giltrow      HFS (N)
Mr M R Stephenson   NE FCG
Mr M Fountain       TD3
Mr M James          TD3
Mr C J Pertee       NE FCG
Mr J B Hibbs        NE FCG
Dr J McQuaid
Dr A Jones
Dr J H Foley
Dr C E Nicholson                        TO RLSD/DIAS STAFF ONLY
Mr P F Heyes                            NOT TO BE COMMUNICATED OUTSIDE
Mr I R Price                            RLSD WITHOUT THE APPROVAL OF
Mr G Norton                             THE AUTHORISING OFFICER
Authors
RPS                                                        SMR/343/235/01
Library (2)
Registry File                                              S80.02.0TH.814




                                                                                5 67
                                                               Docunrent No.   89   C O N T ’D

    CONTENTS

    1   INTRODUCTION

    2   THE SCOPE OF THE INVESTIGATION

    3   INVESTIGATION OF THE EFFECT OF A HORIZONTAL FORCE ON THE 'GATES' OF
        TURNSTILES SERVING THE WEST TERRACE
        3.1 Turnstiles in the group A to G
        3.2 Method of testing

    4   INVESTIGATION OF THE ACCURACY OF THE SYSTEM FOR COUNTING AND RECORDING
        THE NUMBER OF ADMISSIONS THROUGH THE TURNSTILES
        4.1 The counting and recording system
             4.1.1 The counting device on the turnstiles
             4.1.2 The recording and display system
        4.2 Assessment of the accuracy of the counting and recording of admissions
             through the turnstiles in Leppings Lane
             4.2.1 Method of assessment

    5   THE AVERAGE ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS OF THE TURNSTILES

    6   DISCUSSION OF THE RESULTS OF THE INVESTIGATION
        6.1 The effect of a horizontal force on the 'gate' of a turnstile
        6.2 The accuracy of the system for counting and recording admissions
             through the turnstiles in Leppings Lane
        6.3 Average admission requirements of the turnstiles

    7   SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
        7.1 The effect of a horizontal force on the 'gates' of turnstiles serving
             the West Terrace
        7.2 The accuracy of the system for counting and recording admissions
             through the turnstiles in Leppings Lane
        7.3 Average admission requirements of the turnstiles




t




%
                                                                                      568
                                                              Document Mo.   89   C O N T ’D


    1     INTRODUCTION

    As part of the investigation by the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) into the
    incident at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club's Hillsborough stadium on
    15 April 1989, Mr G A C Games, a Senior Scientific Officer, and
    Mr D Waterhouse, a Principal Scientific Officer, of HSE's Research and
    Laboratory Services Division (RLSD) visited Hillsborough stadium on 24 April,
    25 April and 28 April 1989. They investigated aspects of the turnstiles,
    particularly those giving access to the terraces at the Leppings Lane end of
    the ground.


    2     THE SCOPE OF THE INVESTIGATION

    We examined a drawing labelled "Eastwood & Partners - Drawing No 8945/1A" that
    Dr Nicholson had received from Eastwood & Partners on 24 April 1989. This
    drawing had the title "Sheffield Wednesday F.C. PLC Hillsborough, Ground
    Layout 1987" and was dated 16/4/87. The drawing showed the number of persons
    (capacity) allocated to each designated zone of the stadium and showed the
    location and designation of turnstiles around the perimeter of the stadium. In
    this report the term 'West terraces' is used as the collective name for
    the terracer. zones at the West, or Leppings Lane end, of the stadium.

    The drawing showed two groups of turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end of the
    stadium. It appeared that group A to G could be used for admissions to the
    West terraces and the West Stand, and that some of group 1 to 16 could be used
    for admissions to the North Stand and some for admissions to the west terraces
    and the West Stand.

    Our investigation was divided into three parts:

    i)      tests to assess the difficulty experienced by an operator in releasing
            the rotary 'gate' of a turnstile when a horizontal force was applied to
            to one of its 'wings' (or 'paddles');

    ii)     tests to assess the accuracy of the computerized system for counting and
            recording the number of persons admitted through the turnstiles in
            Leppings Lane;

t   iii) calculation of the average number of persons to be admitted through each
         of the turnstiles if all zones of the stadium were filled to their
         designated maximum capacity, i.e. calculation of the average admission
         requirement of the turnstiles.

    We were assisted by other staff of RLSD working under our supervision and to
    our instructions. Our tests to assess the effect of a horizontal force on the
    'gate' of a turnstile were observed by officers of the West Midlands Police.
    Our investigation of the accuracy of the computerized system for counting and
    recording admissions through the turnstiles was supervised by Detective Chief
    Inspector Tope of the West Midlands Police.




                                             -1-




                                                                                       569
                                                               Document No.    39   C 0 NT
                                                                                             3
    3     INVESTIGATION OF THE EFFECT OF A HORIZONTAL   FORCE ON THE 'GATES'
          OF TURNSTILES SERVING THE WEST TERRACES

    3.1    TURNSTILES IN THE GROUP A TOG

    We examined all the turnstiles inthe group A to G. Turnstiles C to G appeared
    to be of the same type, but turnstiles A and B were of a different pattern and
    were slightly different from each other. However, the principle of operation
    of all the turnstiles in group A to G appeared to be the same,

    Fig 1 shows a view of a typical turnstile in group A to G. Each turnstile had
    four equally spaced 'wings' on its 'gate', which was attached to a spindle. It
    was apparent that a quarter-revolution of the spindle was intended to admit
    one person when the pedal of a pivoted locking lever, shown in Fig 2, was
    depressed by an operator. A counter-weight on this lever normallycaused its
    inner end to engage with one of four teeth on the lower rachet of a dual cam
    assembly attached to the base of the spindle, as shown in Fig 3. Depression of
    the pedal raised the inner end of the lever, allowing the spindle to rotate
    until the upper cam drove the inner end of the locking lever back down into
    engagement with the next tooth ofthe lower rachet. The cam/rachet mechanism
    locked the spindle after each quarter-revolution of the 'gate', the operator
    having to depress the pedal of the locking lever each time that he wished to
    admit a person. The rachet on the upper part of the dual cam assembly
    prevented the 'gate' from being rotated in the reverse direction.

    Our examination of the turnstiles caused us to suspect that a personpushing,
    or being pushed, against a 'wing' of a turnstile mightcause the operator to
    have difficulty in depressing the pedal to release the 'gate'. It was our
    opinion that difficulties in releasing the 'gate' might reduce the flow
    through a turnstile to below the maximum notional rate of 750 persons/hour
    that was suggested in the Home Office/Scottish Office publication "Guide to
    Safety at Sports Grounds" (H M Stationery Office: 1986).

    On 24 April 1989 we conducted tests on the turnstiles designated B and C to
    investigate the relationship between the horizontal force applied to a 'wing'
    of a turnstile and the force required on the pedal of the locking lever to
    release its 'gate'.

t   3.2    METHOD OF TESTING

    Fig 4 shows how a horizontal force was applied to the mid-span of a 'wing' of
    a turnstile by means of a baulk of timber, a nylon sling, a tensile loadcell
    and a 'pull-lift' rachet-hoist apparatus. The loadcell, connected between the
    sling and the 'pull-lift', measured the force applied to the 'wing' of the
    turnstile on a digital display unit. We calibrated this display unit before
    making the tests by suspending standard test weights from.the loadcell.

    We used the 'pull-lift' to apply a force to a 'wing' of the turnstile and then
    gently placed standard test weights on the pedal of the pivoted locking lever,
    as shown in Fig 5, until the 'gate' was released. This procedure was repeated
    with increasing forces applied to the 'wing'. The results obtained from the
    tests are shown in the graphs of Fig 6.




                                                 2-
%                                            -




                                                                                       5 7 0
                                                                           Document No.     89   CONT’D



4     INVESTIGATION o f t h e a c c u r a c y o f t h e s y s t e m f o r c o u n t i n g
      AND RECORDING THE NUMBER OF ADMISSIONS THROUGH THE T U R N S T T T .F .S

On 25 April 1989 we visited Hillsborough stadium, accompanied by Detective
Chief Inspector Tope of the West Midlands Police. We discussed the system used
for counting and recording the number of persons passing through the
turnstiles with Mr R J Houldsworth of Abbey Systems Ltd, whose company
maintained and operated the computerized system for Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club. On 28 April 1989 we conducted limited tests to assess the
accuracy of the recording system on the turnstiles in Leppings Lane.

4.1     THE COUNTING AND RECORDING SYSTEM

The counting and recording system was described to us by Mr Houldsworth.

4.1.1      The counting device on the turnstile

An electrical switch was attached to each of the turnstiles serving the
stadium, and signal cables connected each switch to a signal conditioning unit
housed in a control room beneath the South Stand. Each quarter-revolution of a
turnstile was intended to cause its switch to close and re-open, transmitting
an electrical pulse to the signal conditioning unit.

Mr Houldsworth said that he was in the process of modifying an earlier design
that had used a roller-plunger micro-switch on each turnstile to provide the
pulse signals. The intention of this system had been for the plunger of the
micro-switch to be depressed as it was traversed sequentially by each of the
four horizontal lugs of a cruciform cast metal boss that connected the upper
tubular arms of the four 'wings' to the spindle of a turnstile. However, the
micro-switch was prone to mis-counts arising from the cast surface of the lugs
and the vertical 'float' of the spindle in its bearings, and the position of
the micro-switches required frequent adjustment.

The reliability of the pulse generation had been improved on more modern
turnstiles serving other zones of the stadium by enclosing the micro-switches
within the upper mounting of the spindle, but this modification had not been
possible with the older turnstiles in Leppings Lane.

The roller-plunger micro-switches on the turnstiles in Leppings Lane were
being replaced by more robust switches that were operated by 'rat-tail' spring
probes. The compliant probe on this type of switch was deflected horizontally
by the vertical tube of each 'wing' as the 'gate' rotated, and the correct
generation of pulses did not depend on a relatively precise positioning of the
switch. However, the new switches had not yet been fitted on all the
turnstiles in group A to G; the new switches that had been installed on this
group were attached to temporary mountings, permanent installation awaiting
the end of the season.

4.1.2     The recording and display system

The pulse counts obtained from the switch on a turnstile were received by a
storage register which was dedicated to that turnstile and formed part of the
signal conditioning unit. The storage registers were scanned continuously and
the counts transmitted to the central processor of a micro-computer. The
programming of the micro-computer enabled its visual display unit (VDU) to

                                                     -3-



                                                                                                     571
                                                       Document No.   89    CONT’D




display a list identifying each turnstile and showing the number of admissions
through it, i.e. the number of pulses transmitted from the turnstile. The
count of the number of admissions through each turnstile was incremented
continuously and the admissions through the groups of turnstiles allocated to
the zones of the stadium were displayed as accumulating totals.

The system was therefore designed to count the total number of admissions
through each turnstile and to provide a record of the accumulating total
admissions to each zone of the stadium, i.e. Spion Kop, North Stand, West
Stand, West terraces, etc. Financial information corresponding to the
admission price at each turnstile was also displayed.

The rated maximum capacity of each zone of the stadium was displayed on the
VDU. A warning was provided, by means of flashing inverse contrast on the
display, when the capacity of each zone was within 1,000 persons of its
maximum designated capacity.

The micro-computer system did not have 'backing' storage in the form of disc
or magnetic tape. Long term storage was confined to obtaining a copy of the
display on the VDU from a printer, although the display on the screen was
retained in the memory of the computer until a command was typed from the VDU
to clear this part of the memory. There were no facilities at present to
undertake any further processing of the data held in the central storage of
the computer.

Mr Houldsworth said that on 15 April, when he realised that a serious incident
had occurred on the West terraces, he had printed three copies of the display
on the VDU. Apart from the relatively few turns of the 'gates' made by HSE's
staff whilst examining turnstiles A to G, the data in the computer memory and
displayed on the VDU was the data that he had copied on 15 April.

4.2   ASSESSMENT OF THE ACCURACY OF THE COUNTING AND RECORDING OF ADMISSIONS
      THROUGH THE TURNSTILES IN LEPPINGS LANE

We assessed the accuracy of the system for counting and recording admissions
through the turnstiles in Leppings Lane. We concentrated the assessment on
turnstiles designated A to G because they were labelled both "Standing Only"
and "Leppings Lane Standing".

However, we made some assessment of the accuracy of the counting system on the
turnstiles in group 9 to 16 because, although they were labelled "West Stand",
they might have provided access to the West terraces.

4.2.1   Method of assessment

Detective Chief Inspector Tope monitored turnstiles A to G whilst we observed
Mr Houldsworth take a copy from the printer of the accumulated admissions
displayed on the VDU. The control room was then locked and we accompanied
Mr Houldsworth whilst he simulated 50 admissions through each turnstile in
group A to G by rotating each 'gate' through 50 quarter-turns, at a speed
corresponding to approximately 2.25 sec/admission (1600 admissions/hour).
Detective Chief Inspector Tope then monitored turnstiles A to G again whilst
we returned to the control room with Mr Houldsworth and observed him take
another copy from the printer of the display on the VDU.
                                                        Document No.     C O N T’D




A similar procedure was used to check the accuracy of the counting and
recording system of turnstiles 9 to 16, but each 'gate' in this group was
rotated through only 10 quarter-turns.

We then returned to the turnstiles in group A to G and repeated the first
test, rotating each 'gate' through 50 quarter-turns

Table 1 shows the results of our investigation of the accuracy of the counting
and recording system on turnstiles A to G and 9 to 16.


5     THE AVERAGE ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS OF THE TURNSTILES

The. number of persons (capacity) allocated to each zone of the stadium and the
location and designation of the turnstiles were shown on Eastwood & Partners
Drawing No 8945/lA, dated 16/4/87. The zones and their capacities are shown in
Columns 1 and 2 of Table 2.

On 28 April 1989 we walked around the outside of the perimeter of the stadium
and observed any labels on the entrances to the turnstiles that indicated the
zones they served.

A printed record of the admissions to the stadium, made by Mr Houldsworth on
the afternoon of 15 April 1989, was delivered to Dr Nicholson on 24 May 1989
by Detective Constable Phillips of the West Midlands Police. We examined a
copy of this record, in conjunction with Eastwood & Partners Drawing No 8945/lA
and our observations of the labels on the turnstiles, to assist us in deducing
how turnstiles were allocated to zones of the stadium on 15 April 1989.

We deduced that the turnstiles were allocated to zones as shown in Column 3 of
Table 2, the number of turnstiles allocated being shown in Column 4. The
capacity of each zone was divided by the number of turnstiles allocated to it,
giving their average admission requirements (persons/turnstile) as shown in
Column 5.


6     DISCUSSION OF THE RESULTS OF THE INVESTIGATION

6.1     THE EFFECT OF A HORIZONTAL FORCE ON THE 'GATE' OF A TURNSTILE

The relationship between the force applied to the 'wing' of a turnstile and
the force required to depress its release pedal showed considerable 'scatter'.
Some variation between individual tests might be attributable to differences
in the position at which the horizontal forces were applied to a 'wing'.
Furthermore, we could not ensure that test weights were always placed on the
pedal at exactly the same distance from the pivot of the locking lever, and we
would have preferred to have applied smaller increments of weight to the
pedal. However, a frictional force had to be overcome when depressing the
pedal to release the 'gate', and it is our opinion that the 'scatter' was
principally attributable to the inherent variability of the coefficient of
friction between unlubricated metallic surfaces.

Fig 6 suggests that, typically, a pedal force - 0.56 x 'wing' force would be
required to release turnstile B, and that a pedal force - 1.56 x 'wing' force
would be required to release turnstile C, i.e. turnstile C required a force on
                                                           Document No,   89   C O N T ’D




    its pedal that typically was 2.8 times greater than that for turnstile B. We
    had observed that turnstiles A and B appeared to differ in detail from
    turnstiles C to G.

    An operator weighing 750 N (169 lbf or approximately 12 stones) might have
    difficulty in releasing the 'gate' of turnstile B if a force exceeding 1340 N
    (301 lbf) was applied to a 'wing', because he might have to exert a force of
    more than his weight on the pedal to release the 'gate'. The same operator
    would probably have difficulty in releasing the 'gate' of turnstile C if a
    force of 480 N (108 lbf) was applied to a 'wing'. It is our opinion that
    turnstiles A and B would be likely to behave in a similar manner and that
    turnstile C was representative of those in the group C to G.

    Variations about the predicted average force required on the pedal ranged
    between approximately plus 70% and minus 44% for turnstile B, and between
    approximately plus 55% and minus 36% for turnstile C. The stated relationships
    provide only approximate indications of the forces that might be needed to
    release turnstiles in the group A to G.

    6.2   THE ACCURACY OF THE SYSTEM FOR COUNTING AND RECORDING ADMISSIONS THROUGH
          THE TURNSTILES IN LEPPINGS LANE

    Table 1 shows that the first set of 50 quarter-turns of turnstiles A to G
    caused turnstile E to record six more 'admissions' than we had counted, and
    turnstile G to record one less 'admission' than we had counted.

    The second set of 50 quarter-turns of turnstiles A to G caused turnstile E to
    record the correct number of 'admissions' and turnstile G to record three
    fewer 'admissions' than we had counted. Turnstile C recorded three more
    'admissions' than we had counted, but we were interrupted during the counting
    and it is our opinion that the discrepancy was probably attributable to this
    interruption.

    We inspected turnstile E and concluded that the discrepancy obtained during
    the first 50 quarter-turns arose from vertical upward 'float' of the spindle
    in its bearings‘and the position of the roller-plunger micro-switch. The
    combined effect was that the micro-switch occasionally appeared to be actuated

t   spuriously by protrusions on the cast surfaces of the lugs of the upper
    cruciform boss that connected the 'gate' to the spindle. The error only
    appeared during the first set of 50 quarter-turns and we concluded that it
    was likely to have occurred during the first few 'admissions' after a period
    of inaction. It is our opinion that the error would not persist throughout a
    period of continuous operation.

    Turnstile G recorded fewer 'admissions' than we had counted during both sets
    of 50 quarter-turns. We observed that the lugs of the upper cruciform boss on
    turnstile G only just made contact with the roller on the plunger of its
    micro-switch. We concluded that this uncertain contact caused turnstile G to
    record less than the correct number of 'admissions'. It is our opinion that
    this under-recording was likely to persist throughout a period of continuous
    operation and that the number of admissions recorded by turnstile G was likely
    to be less than the correct value.

    Turnstile 14 recorded one more 'admission' than we had counted whilst making
    the 10 quarter-turns on turnstiles 9 to 16. However, we suspected that this

                                           -   6   -




                                                                                     5 7 4
                                                             Document No.   89   C O N T ’D




    discrepancy arose because the 'gate' of turnstile 14 was in a mid-travel
    position when the test commenced. Our tests therefore suggested that
    turnstiles 9 to 16 would provide an accurate record of the number of persons
    admitted through them.

    We concluded that the computerized system would be likely to record the total
    number of admissions through group A to F of the turnstiles with an accuracy
    that was within 1%. In a test turnstile G recorded 6% less than the correct
    number of admissions, but we concluded that the uncertainty in the operation of
    its micro-switch might cause the under-recording to be more severe than this.

    We concluded that the turnstiles in group 9 to 16 would record the correct
    number of admissions.

    6.3   AVERAGE ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS OF THE TURNSTILES

    Table 2 shows that the stadium's maximum capacity of 54,324 persons was served
    by 83 turnstiles on 15 April 1989, and that 45% (24,447 persons) of the
    stadium's capacity were to be admitted from Leppings Lane, where 28% (23) of
    the turnstiles in use were sited.

    Table 2 has been arranged in descending order of the average number of
    admissions required from each group of turnstiles serving the different zones
    of the stadium. The highest admission requirement was 1,443 persons/turnstile
    for the West terraces, followed by 988 persons/turnstile for the North Stand
    Seating and by 744 persons/turnstile for the West Stand Seating. The admission
    requirement of the turnstiles for the West terraces was therefore almost 3.5
    times greater than that for the South Stand Uncovered Seating (the lowest
    admission requirement) and approximately 2.9 times greater than that for Spion
    Kop, the other terrace zone.

    Six groups of turnstiles served the stadium and the three groups with the
    highest admission requirements were sited in Leppings Lane. The overall
    average admission requirement of the 23 turnstiles in Leppings Lane was
    1063 persons/turnstile.

    The other overall average admission requirements were 500 persons/turnstile
    for the turnstiles in Penistone Road and 493 persons/turnstile for those in
t   the Concourse behind the South Stand. The overall average admission
    requirement of the turnstiles in Leppings Lane was therefore approximately
    twice that of the turnstiles sited elsewhere around the perimeter of the
    stadium.

    We have therefore concluded that, if a maximum capacity crowd was to be
    admitted, the longest delays would be likely to be experienced by persons
    required to enter the stadium through the turnstiles in Leppings Lane;
    particularly long delays would be likely to be experienced by those with
    tickets for the West terraces. We would therefore expect larger crowds to form
    outside the turnstiles in Leppings Lane than at other places of entry to the
    stadium.




                                           -7-



                                                                                     5 7 5
                                                          Document No. 8 9   C O N T ’D




7     SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

7.1    THE EFFECT OF A HORIZONTAL FORCE ON THE 'GATES' OF TURNSTILES SERVING
       THE WEST TERRACES

7.1.1 Our tests suggested that, typically, the force needed on the pedal of a
turnstile to release its 'gate' was 0.56 x the force on a 'wing' for
turnstiles A and B, and 1.56 x the force on a 'wing' for turnstiles C to G.
Variations of up to 70% were obtained in the force required to depress the
pedal and these relationships should serve only as an indication of the forces
that might be needed to release the turnstiles serving the West terraces.

7.1.2 A turnstile operator weighing 750 N (169 lbf or approximately
12 stones) or less might have difficulty in releasing the 'gate' of turnstiles
A or B if the horizontal force applied to a'wing' was 1340 N (301 lbf) or
more, because he might have to exert a force of more than his weight on the
pedal to release the 'gate'. The same operator might have difficulty in
releasing the 'gate' of a turnstile in the group C to G if a horizontal force
of 480 N (108 lbf) or more was applied to a 'wing'.

7.1.3 It is our opinion that the ease with which an operator could depress
the pedal would affect the time taken for a person to be admitted. Therefore a
thrust exceeding 480 N (108 lbf) that was imposed by a crowd on a person at
the 'gate' of a turnstile would be likely decrease the flow of persons through
the group of turnstiles A to G.

7.2    THE ACCURACY OF THE SYSTEM FOR COUNTING AND RECORDING ADMISSIONS THROUGH
       THE TURNSTILES IN LEPPINGS LANE

7.2.1 Our tests suggested that turnstiles A, B, C, D, and F would record the
correct number of admissions. It is our opinion that the error obtained during
the first test on turnstile E would be unlikely to persist during a period of
continuous operation. In our opinion turnstiles A to F, as a group, would
record the number of admissions within an accuracy of approximately 1%.

7.2.2 Our tests indicated that a persistent error was likely to occur in the
counting system of turnstile G. During a period of continuous operation this
turnstile could repeatedly fail to count some admissions, and the recorded
admissions could be significantly less than the correct number. We concluded
that the error in counting at turnstile G was probably attributable to
uncertainty of contact between the roller of the micro-switch and the four
lugs on the upper cruciform boss of the 'gate'.

7.2.3 Our tests suggested that turnstiles in the group 9 to 16 would record
the correct number of admissions.

7.3    AVERAGE ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS OF THE TURNSTILES

7.3.1 We have concluded that on 15 April 1989 the spectators were intended to
enter the stadium through 83 turnstiles, of which 23 (28%) were sited in
Leppings Lane. If the stadium was to be filled to its maximum capacity of
54,324 persons then 45% (24,447 persons) of this capacity would be admitted
from Leppings Lane, through 28% of the turnstiles serving the stadium.
                                                          Document No.     g<^   CONT’ D
                                                                wmwhim..

    7.3.2 The turnstiles serving the West terraces had the highest average
    admission requirement (1,443 persons/turnstile) of any group of turnstiles
    serving the stadium. It was almost 3.5 times the lowest average admission
    requirement of 413 persons/turnstile for the South Stand Uncovered Seating,
    and was approximately 2.9 times the average admission requirement of
    500 persons/turnstile for Spion Kop, the other terrace zone.

    7.3.3 Six groups of turnstiles served the stadium. The three groups of
    turnstiles with the highest average admission requirements were sited in
    Leppings Lane; i.e. West terraces (1,443 persons/turnstile), North Stand
    (988 persons/turnstile) and West Stand (744 persons/turnstile).

    7.3.4 The average admission requirement of the 23 turnstiles in Leppings Lane
    was approximately twice that of the 42 turnstiles in Penistone Road and that
    of the 18 turnstiles in the Concourse behind the South Stand. It is our
    opinion that larger crowds would form in Leppings Lane than in the other
    entrance areas to the stadium when it was to be filled to its maximum
    capacity.

    7.3.5 It is our opinion that, when the stadium was to be filled to its
    maximum capacity, the longest delays in admission would be be experienced by
    persons required to enter through the turnstiles in Leppings Lane, and that
    those with tickets for the West terraces would experience the most severe
    delays.




I




                                          -9-

t
                                                                                     577
                                                         Document No.    C O N T ’D


Table 1     Results obtained from the counting and recording system
            on the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end of the stadium

'Gates' rotated at approximately 2.25 sec/quarter-turn (1600 admissions/hour)

Turnstile         Computer record   Quarter- turns       Comments
designation       Initial Final     Counted Recorded

A    (rat-tail)   1062     1112      50      50
B    (rat-tail)   1017     1067      50      50
C    (plunger)    1301     1351      50      50
D    (plunger)    1272     1322      50      50
E    (plunger)     976     1032      50      56    spindle 'float'; i
F    (rat-tail)   1066     1116      50      50
G    (plunger)     612      661      50      49

Total A to G      7306     7661     350     355



9                  634      644      10      10
10                 582      592      10      10
11                 754      764      10      10
12                 609      619      10      10
13                 784      794      10      10
14                 755      766      10      11    starting position
15                 836      846      10      10
16                 665      675      10      10

Total 9 to 16     5619     5700      80       81



A    (rat-tail)   1112     1162      50      50
B    (rat-tail)   1067     1117      50      50
C    (plunger)    1351     1404      50      53    counting interrup
D    (plunger)    1322     1372      50      50
E    (plunger)    1032     1082      50      50
F    (rat-tail)   1116     1166      50      50
G    (plunger)     661      708      50      47

Total A to G      7661     8011     350      350




                                                                                5 7 8
                                                                  Document No.    89   C O N T ’D


    Table 2     Admission requirements of the turnstiles serving the
                zones of the stadium

    Zone                  ♦Capacity    Turnstile        Number of        Average persons
                           (persons)   designation      turnstiles       per turnstile

    West Terrace           10,100      A to G            7                1,443 }
                                                                                )
    North Stand             9,882      I to 8           10                  988 } Leppings
    Seating                            9 and 10                                 } Lane
                                                                                  }
    West Stand              4,465      II to 16                             744 }
    Seating                                                                       }


    South Stand             5,567      23 to 32         10                  557 } Concourse
    Covered Seating

    Spion Kop              21, 000     37 to 78         42                  500 } Penist'n Rd

    South Stand             3,310      19 to 22          8                  414 } Concourse
    Uncovered Seating                  33 to 36


    TOTAL                 54,324                        83                  655


    * Taken from Eastwood & Partners Drawing No 8945/1A, dated 16/4/87


    Admissions from Leppings Lane        24,447
                                                  x 100 - 45%
    Admissions to stadium                54,324


    Turnstiles in Leppings Lane          23
    --------------------------         - — x 100 - 28%
    Turnstiles serving stadium           83


I   Leppings Lane average admission requirement
                                                        24,447
                                                                     1063 persons/turnstile
                                                             23

                                                        21, 000
    Penistone Road average admission requirement                      500 persons/turnstile
                                                             42

                                                        8,877
    Concourse average admission requirement                           493 persons/turnstile
                                                             18
                                                             Document No.   g9       C O N T’D




          8904-097/46A
                           Fig.1 -A typical turnstile serving the West Terrace,
                                           viewed from the exit




           8904-097/83
                            Fig.2 - Pivoted locking lever; the release pedal is
                         depressed to allow the spindle of the turnstile to rotate
                                                                                                 580
CROWN COPYRIGHT
                                                                        Document No.   89    C O N T ’D




            8 9 0 4 -0 9 7 /8 4

                                       Fig.3 - Dual cam assembly on the lower end of
                                                   the spindle of a turnstile




            8904-106/5
                                  Fig.4 - The equipment used to apply a horizontal, known,
                                               force to the ’wing’ of a turnstile
                                                                                                    581
CROWN COPYRIGHT
                                                                      D ocument No,         C O N T ’D




#
                 8904-106/10
                               Fig.5 - Standard test weights applied to the release pedal
                                        of the pivoted locking lever of a turnstile




%
                                                                                              582
    CROWN COPYRIGHT
          0                     --------------                               ... .                                     ------
                                                                                                                                   m
                                                                                                                                   --------------
                                                                                                                                                                    •                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ...........

               -
                                -------------- -------- --                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                )


          Q
          m                                                                                                                                                              T u rn stile C
                                                                        j                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ----------------------------
                ----------- t --------------                                                                     ............ —t
                                                                                                                                                                    /          fo rc e on pe da l •= 1. 56 x fo r ce on 'i ving'

                                --------------                                                                                                                 ■/                       I                    I                 .1
<st
CL                                                                      i
2  o
   CD
<y «—                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               •“urnstile                B
                -------------   --------------

O)
-*-* O
          O                                                                                                                                 /
 o o                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .—..........
O ' t—                          —------------                                               --------------
                                                                                                                  m                                     *                 *                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *
          CD
                -
£         <*»                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -------- —-\
•3
Q>        o -
f=        O
          oo                                                                                                                                                                                             .
                                -------------- -------------- ------------- H                                                                                                                                                  .

                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           fo rc e ^>n pedal =                               0.56 x fo rc e                   on 'win g'
                -                                                                                                                                       m                                                        *
    QJ    CD                                                           * *
                                                                                                     yC------ —                                                                                                                                                                         -------------- --------------
2 °                             ----------------- ------------------                        ------                          ....




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Document No.
          CD
                -
S 2                             -----------------                                       /                                                                                                                                                        -------------                            ---------------
    <W
    o .


    § 8
                -

                                                                   XIy
                                                                                /
    :3 o
    c r   o
                -
                                ----------                     /
                                                                   /   --
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -- - - - - - - - - -                                               ----------




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Q9
                                                           /
                -                                      /
    C     CD
    o o                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _   . . .                     ----------
Li_       ro                                    -/




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                C O N T ’D
                                     --------

                   -
                                                     ----------                                                                                                                                                                    L   .                          .... . . . .                                     ____                                  --------------




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i _____                                                                                          ------------------




                                 - - - - 1- - - - - - - - 1- - - -          —      i—        ----     1—     i          ,           —     i—        i      ,            - - - - 1- - - - - - - - - 1- - - - - - - - 1- - - -       i       ,         ,           ----     1—            - - - - - 1- - - - - - - - - - 1- - - - -           ,            - - - - 1- - - - - - - - 1- - - - -   —       i—
                                                     200.                   300.             400.            500.               600.                700.                800.                900.                 1000.         1100.           1200.             1300.                  1400.                 1500.                 1600.                1700.                1800.            1900.        2000.
on                                                                                                                                              Force a p p lie d to                     o ’w ing' o f th e tu rn s tile                       (N e w to n s ))
oo                 FIG.                              RELATIONSHIP                        BETWEEN THE FORCE REQUIRED ON THE             RELEASE
o >
  j
                                                     prnAi                      n r a ti ipmqtii r AKin t u p r n p r r appi irn t o a  wimc
                                                        Document No.   g9   CONT’D

                                                               Incident Report

                          HEALTH AND SAFETY EXECUTIVE

                   RESEARCH AND LABORATORY SERVICES DIVISION

                         Broad Lane, Sheffield S3 7HQ



                    An investigation into the number of
                    people entering the stadium through
                    Turnstiles A to G and through Gate C


                                      by

                                 G A C Games BA

                                                   IR/L/ME/89/34




                                                  Issue authorised by: Dr A Jones

                                                  Date: 1 February 1990

    Distribution

    The Court of Inquiry (5 copies)
    ACC J Mervyn Jones West Midlands Police
    Mr D C T Eves
    Mr A Barrell TD
    Mr P G Jones TD
    Mr M S Nattrass FAID Area 14
    Mr J P Giltrow HFS (N)
    Mr M R Stephenson NE FCG
    Mr M Fountain TD3

%   Mr M James TD3
    Mr C J Pertee NE FCG
    Mr J B Hibbs NE FCG
    Dr J McQuaid
    Dr A Jones
    Dr J H Foley
    Dr C E Nicholson                        TO RLSD/DIAS STAFF ONLY
    Mr P F Heyes                            NOT TO BE COMMUNICATED OUTSIDE
    Mr I R Price                            RLSD WITHOUT THE APPROVAL OF
    Mr G Norton                             THE AUTHORISING OFFICER
    Authors
    RPS                                                       SMR/343/235/01
    Library (2)
    Registry File                                               S80.02.OTH.814




                                                                                     5 8 4
                                                         Document No.   89   CONT’D


CONTENTS

1     INTRODUCTION

2   VIDEO TAPE RECORDINGS USED FOR ANALYSIS

3   LOCATION AND DESCRIPTION OF TURNSTILE BOOTHS A-G AND GATE C

4   THE COUNTING METHOD
    4.1 Turnstiles
    4.2 Gate C

5   DATA PROCESSING AND RESULTS
    5.1 Turnstiles
         5.1.1 Turnstile total counts
         5.1.2 Turnstile rate counts
         5.1.3   Comparison between RLSD counts and SWFC computer record
         5.1.4   Count for turnstiles F+G and error in SWFC countfor turnstile G
         5.1.5   Estimate of total number of people throughturnstiles A  to G
         5.1.6 Estimate of time at which 10100 people would have entered
                through turnstiles A to G
         5.1.7 Turnstile C - Intervals between successive entrants
    5.2 Gate C
         5.2.1   First opening
         5.2.2   Second opening
         5.2.3   Third opening

6   SUMMARY OF RESULTS
    6.1 Turnstile counts, estimates, totals and rate of admission
    6.2 Counts and estimates for the three openings of gate C and final totals
    6.3 SWFC Computer counts for turnstiles A to G
         6.3.1   Turnstiles A to E
         6.3.2   Turnstile G

7   DISCUSSION
    7.1 Rate of admission through turnstiles A to G
    7.2 Gate C openings
    7.3 Times.taken to pass through turnstile C

8   CONCLUSIONS


Table 1 Total number of people counted through turnstiles A to G at different
        times
Table 2 Number of people counted through turnstiles in each 5 minute interval
Table 3 Summary Table
Table 4 Number of people having the same interval of passage through turnstile C

Fig   1   Schematic plan showing turnstiles A to G and gate C
Fig   2   Total number of people counted by RLSD for turnstiles A to G
Fig   3    Number of people counted through turnstiles in each 5 minute interval
Fig   4   Rate of admission for turnstiles A to G
Fig   5   Turnstile C - Number of people having the same interval of passage
Fig   6   Number of people emerging from gate C at the 'Second Opening'




                                                                              585
                                                            Document No.   gy   C O N T ’D

    1     INTRODUCTION

    I was told by Dr C E Nicholson, a Deputy Director of the Safety Engineering
    Laboratory (SEL) of the Research and Laboratory Services Division (RLSD) of
    the Health and Safety Executive (HSE), that on the 15th of April a video
    recording had been made which showed people entering the Sheffield Wednesday
    Football Club's (SWFC) stadium through the Leppings Lane turnstiles A, B, C,
    D, E, F and G and through gate C; the turnstiles served the West Terrace and
    North-West Terrace and in this report these terraces are called the 'West
    terraces'. It is my understanding that the video camera had been in a fixed
    position and had been recording from before 1:00 pm until after 3:00 pm. As
    part of the HSE investigation of the incident Dr Nicholson asked me to analyse
    a copy of the recording to:

    i)      count the total number o f people who had entered through these
            turnstiles and compare these counts with the counts registered by the
            Sheffield Wednesday's computerised system for recording admissions.

    ii)     measure the rate at which people had entered the stadium through
            turnstiles A to G throughout the period of the video recording.

    iii) estimate the number of people who had entered the stadium through gate C.

    1 was assisted by other staff of RLSD working under my supervision and to my
    instructions. Police Constable (PC) R Watson of the West Midlands Police
    liaised with me and he provided the copies of the video recordings. He gave me
    a copy of a statement by                      of West Mercia Police TV Unit
    which gave details of the copy and edit procedure that had been undertaken
    from the original video tape.


    2     VIDEO TAPE RECORDINGS USED FOR ANALYSIS

    Dr Nicholson gave me copies of drawings which had been produced by Ralph Brade
    and Associates. Drawing No 1340/05 titled 'Close Circuit Television Cameras
    Location Plan' shows 'S.W.F.C. CAMERA 2 GATES A-G' and it is my understanding
    that the original VHS video tape identified as 'RJH2' was produced from
    signals sent by a camera at this location and that all the video recordings
    used by RLSD for analysis were copied from this original tape.


%   The U-matic video tape recordings used for 'turnstile' admission analysis were
    delivered by PC R Watson on 15 May 89; the individual tapes were labelled
    RJH2/E/Part 1 Copy A, RJH2/E/Part 2 Copy A, RJH2/E/Part 3 Copy A, RJH2/F/Part
    1 Copy A, RJH2/F/Part 2 Copy A, RJH2/F/Part 3 Copy A. The tapes showed the
    exits of turnstile booths A to G fromapproximately 12:55 pmuntil 3:10 pm on
    15 April 1989. The '/E/' Tapes showed the exits ofturnstiles A, B and C and
    the '/F/' Tapes showed the exits of turnstiles D, E, F and G. The two Part l's
    covered the first hour, the two Part 2's the second hour and the two Part 3's
    the remaining time. The continuous reference timings on the video tapes were
    with respect to the start of each tape and not to British Summer Time (BST)
    but I determined the relationship between these times and BST using specific
    events in conjunction with West Midlands Police.

    The VHS video recording used for 'Eate C analysis' was a copy identified as
    DF1/B and had been produced by               an RLSD photographer, from a
    video recording labelled RJH2, loaned to us by PC R Watson. The copy had
    continuous reference timings which related to the start of the tape and not to


                                           -1 -


                                                                                    5 86
                                                         Document No.   09   C O N T ’D


BST. The recording showed the exits of turnstile booths A to G, gate C and the
general area on the West Stand side of these turnstiles.


3     LOCATION AND DESCRIPTION OF TURNSTILE BOOTHS A-G AND GATE C

Fig 1 is a schematic plan showing the seven turnstiles A to G and gate C. The
location of the turnstile booths and of gate C is shown on the Ralph Brade and
Associates drawing No 1340/04A and the aperture of gate C when open is shown
as 4115 mm. Gate C, when closed, formed part of the perimeter boundary and was
adjacent to turnstile booth G and approximately perpendicular to the row of
turnstile booths. Normally gate C was closed and it is my understanding that
the main function of gate C was to let people out of the stadium after a
match.

The turnstile booth exits consisted of seven doors, designated in alphabetical
order from A to G. When viewed from the video camera location door A was on
the right and furthest away from the video camera. Doors A and B, D and E, F
and G were in pairs and Door C was on its own. Within the booths the exit
doors aligned directly with the appropriate turnstile passage, but the
internal layout of the turnstile booths did not prevent a person passing
through the 'gate' of turnstile A and then emerging from the door of the booth
marked B (and vice versa); similarly for the other paired turnstiles. In my
opinion, this indirect route may have been used on a few occasions, for
example if there was someone standing in the way at the normal 'direct' exit
door. Thus the individual counts for the 'paired' turnstiles may be less
accurate than the sum of the two counts from the two doors of a pair.

The turnstile mechanisms were not identical in design nor in ease of operation
and details are reported by Games and Waterhouse (RLSD report IR/L/ME/89/33).

It is my understanding that on the 15th April these 7 turnstiles served the
West terraces which had a designated capacity of 10,100 persons.


4     THE COUNTING METHOD

4.1     TURNSTILES

The counting method used a specially developed computer program and
micro-computer. The video recording was played at normal speed and the
computer's clock was synchronised with a reference time on the video image.
Whenever a person was seen to emerge from a specific turnstile booth an RLSD
observer depressed a push button, closing an electrical circuit and sending an
electrical pulse signal to the computer. The computer recorded each signal
pulse and the elapsed times from the start of playback. People emerging from
turnstiles A and B were registered together because the shadows on the video
recording image sometimes made it impossible to differentiate between people
emerging from the exit door of turnstile A and those from the exit door of
turnstile B. People emerging from all other turnstiles were registered
separately.

4.2 GATE C

Dr Nicholson was informed by Inspector M Layton of West Midlands Police that
gate C had been opened three times and that the 'First Opening' had occurred
at approximately 2:48 pm for a duration of about 30 seconds and that the
                                                     Document No,       C O N T 'D

'Second Opening' had occurred at approximately 2:52 pm for a duration of about
5 minutes 30 seconds. A 'Third Opening' had occurred approximately one minute
later when the gate was opened sufficiently to allow the entry of people in
single file for approximately 8 minutes.

The position of gate C on the video image and the small distance between
adjacent people as they passed through gate C made it impracticable to discern
each person as they passed through the open gate. Therefore the method of
assessment for the first two openings was to count the number of people
passing a reference line drawn on the video display monitor for a recording
period of 3 seconds, and then to repeat this process at intervals throughout
the period of opening. The reference line was drawn so that any person who had
entered through gate C would cross the line, whilst generally being separated
from other people by a greater distance than when passing through the open
gate, thus making each person more discernable. The path of each person was
viewed to ensure that people emerging from turnstiles were not counted. The
counting process was repeated several times f by rewinding and replaying the
video tape, for each sample, to ensure that the chance of not counting a
particular person was reduced to a minimum. The playback speed on the video
recorder was adjusted to play the recording slowly enough to optimize the
counting.

Four samples were taken during the First Opening and 27 samples were taken
during the Second Opening; the longest interval between samples being 15
seconds. The whole of the Third Opening was analysed in one continuous sample.


5 DATA PROCESSING AND RESULTS

5.1     TURNSTILES

5.1.1    Turnstile Total Counts

Table 1 shows how many people had been counted through the turnstiles at
intervals of 5 minutes, the bottom row of the table being the final count just
before the turnstiles were closed. Each row of the table gives the individual
total count for turnstiles C to G, the totals for the three pairs A+B, D+E,
F+G and the tptal for all seven turnstiles.

Fig 2 shows the total number of people who had been counted through all seven
turnstiles at any particular time and is a graphical representation of the
same data as the final column in Table 1 but every data point has been
presented, rather than just the totals at intervals of 5 minutes.

5.1.2     Turnstile Rate Counts

Table 2 shows the number of people counted through the turnstiles in each 5
minute interval. Each row of the table shows the individual 5 minute counts
for turnstiles C to G, the 5 minute count for the pairs A+B, D+E, F+G and the
5 minute count for the sum of all seven turnstiles. These counts can be
converted to rates of admission, measured as 'people per turnstile per hour',
by multiplying by 12 and dividing by the number of turnstiles under
consideration.

The last column of Table 3 shows the overall rates of admission for all seven
turnstiles for each 5 min period after 2:00 pm and the average (mean) rate of
admission measured over the 45 min period from 2:05 pm to 2:50 pm was
approximately 660 people/turnstile/hour.
                                                       Document No.   89   C O N T ’D

For the period between 2:25 pm and 2:50 pm turnstile C, a single turnstile,
achieved a mean rate of admission of 830 people/turnstile/hour whereas the six
other 'paired' turnstiles achieved a significantly lower rate of 630
people/turnstile/hour.

A visual representation of the data for turnstiles A+B, C, D, E, F and G is
shown in the bar chart in Fig 3.

I analysed the data obtained from the counts from turnstiles A to G in greater
detail to give a more continuous measure of the rate at which people were
entering the stadium through these turnstiles. The method of analysis used a
period of time ('window') of three minutes and calculated the rate of
admission for the 'window' from the number of admissions made during its 3
minute duration. The 'window' was then moved forward by an increment of 0.5
minutes and a new rate of admission calculated. This process was repeated
until the end of the data was reached and the resulting graph of rate of
admission against time is shown in Fig 4. I made analyses using other
durations of the 'window'; a longer 'window' gave a smoother curve with some
loss of information and a shorter one gave rapid fluctuations which tended to
mask more general trends of change in rate of admission. It is my opinion that
a 'window' of 3 minutes gave the most representative rates of admission.

5.1.3    Comparison between RLSD counts and Sheffield Wednesday Football
         Club's computer record

The RLSD final count totals are summarised in the following table and compared
with the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club's (SWFC) computer print-out, taken
on 15 April 1989 by Mr R J Houldsworth (RLSD report IR/L/ME/89/33).


Turnstiles               RLSD     SWFC            Differ*
                         Count    Computer

A+B                       1930    2004            -3.7%

C                         1168    1206            -3.3%

D+E                       2130    2196            -3.0%

A to E                    5228    5406            -3.3%

F+G                       2019    1632            +23.7%

Total                     7247    7038


Dr Nicholson informed me that the turnstiles  were open for a period beforethe
start of the video recordings. In my opinion   this accounts for RLSD's count of
the admissions through turnstiles A to E being approximately 3.3% less than
the admissions shown on the print-out taken from the SWFC's computerised
system on 15 April. I have therefore concluded that SWFC's count for the total
number of admissions through turnstiles A to   E is likely to be correct.

5.1.4    Count for turnstiles F+G and error in   SWFC count for turnstile G

The SWFC count for turnstile F was 1049, 2% less than the RLSD count of
1071 (Table 1) but this may be attributable to some people passing through
                                                      Document No.     89   C O N T ’D

turnstile G but emerging from Exit Door F; in my opinion the SWFC count is
probably accurate for this turnstile.

RLSD's count for turnstiles F+G was 23.7% higher than that obtained from
SWFC's computerised recording system. RLSD report IR/L/ME/89/33 concluded that
there was likely to be persistent under-recording from turnstile G and it is
my opinion that under-recording on turnstile G is probably the sole cause of
the discrepancy. I have assumed that the RLSD count of 2,019 is less than the
true count by the same percentage (3.3%) for turnstiles F+G as for turnstiles
A to E, and have estimated that 2,088 is the true total for turnstiles F+G.

My estimate of 2,088 for turnstiles F+G can therefore be divided into a count
of 1,049 for turnstile F (the SWFC count) and the remainder of 1,039 for
turnstile G. The SWFC count of 583 from turnstile G is therefore 56% of my
estimated correct number of admissions through this turnstile.

5.1.5   Estimate of total number of people through turnstiles A to G

It is my opinion that the best estimate for the final total of people admitted
through all seven turnstiles is given by adding the SWFC total for turnstiles
A to E of 5,406 to my estimate of 2,088 for turnstiles F+G, giving an overall
total of 7,494 admissions for turnstiles A to G. In my opinion, based on the
tests reported by Games and Waterhouse (RLSD report IR/L/ME/89/33), it is most
unlikely that the true total exceeded this value by more than 2% ie a maximum
of 7,644 for the number of people who passed through the seven turnstiles.

My estimated total of 7,494 admissions through turnstiles A to G from the time
that they were opened is 247 greater than the RLSD count. It is my opinion
that this is attributable to people entering the stadium before the start of
the video recording.

5.1.6   Estimate of time at which 10.100 people would have entered
        through turnstiles A to G

RLSD's count at 2:50 pm was 5,868 but an estimated 247 people had entered the
stadium before the start of the video recording. Therefore at 2:50 pm the
estimated number of people who had entered through turnstiles A to G was
6,115. Based on a capacity of 10,100 for the West terraces there were still
3,985 people yet to enter the stadium for these terraces. The average (mean)
rate of admission, measured over a 45 min period, was 660 people/turnstile/
hour. If this rate had been maintained I have estimated that it would have
taken until approximately 3:40 pm to admit the remaining 3,985 people.

Prior to the 'Second Opening' of gate C at approximately 2:52 pm the highest
rate of admission, measured over a period of 5 minutes, for the seven
turnstiles was 702 people/turnstile/hour (Table 3 Col 5). If this rate had
been constantly maintained it would have taken about 123 minutes to admit
10,100 people. For all these people to have entered the stadium before 3:00 pm
the first entrants would have needed to enter before 1:00 pm and continued to
enter at this maximum rate.

Prior to the 'Second Opening' of gate C the greatest number of admissions
during a period of 5 minutes through turnstile C, a single turnstile, was 76
people, and for any pair of turnstiles it was 141 people (Table 2). On the
basis of these values I have calculated a theoretical maximum composite
admission for all seven turnstiles (single C and pairs A+B, D+E, F+G) for a 5
min period:
                                                     Documemt No.   89   C O NT’D

i.e. 76 + (3 x 141) = 499 people through 7 turnstiles in 5 minutes, which
represents 855 people/turnstile/hour. If this rate had been constantly
maintained it would have taken about 101 minutes to admit 10,100 people. For
    these people to have entered the stadium before 3:00 pm the first entrants
would have needed to enter before 1:20 pm and have continued to enter at this
theoretical maximum composite rate of admission.

5.1.7   Turnstile C - Intervals Between Successive Entrants

Turnstile C was the only turnstile where the people necessarily emerged from
one door. Therefore the data from this turnstile was further analysed to give
the time intervals between the emergence of successive people. The data which
was analysed consisted of the times of emergence, rounded to the nearest whole
number of seconds, for each person.

The admissions after 2:00 pm were divided into successive groups of 10 minutes
duration and the data in each group analysed to give the number of people that
had emergence times of 0 second, 1 second, 2 seconds, 3 seconds, etc after the
previous person.

There is an anomoly which gives a small number of times for a 0 second
interval. The reason for this anomoly is because of the procedure which
rounded the actual times to the nearest integer times; for example if a person
emerged with an actual time of 97.51 seconds and the next person 0.98 seconds
later with an actual time of 98.49 seconds, both of these people would
register as 98 seconds and the interval would be calculated as 0 second. A '0
second' interval is therefore occasionally, but not necessarily, recorded for
a person who emerged from the door within 1 second of the previous person.
These rounding errors were not cumulative and do not affect the average (mean)
time of passage.

Table 4 shows the number of people having the same time interval of passage
through turnstile C and its contents are presented as the bar charts of Fig 5
which show the frequency distribution of the various times; times exceeding 10
seconds are not shown. Both Table 4 and Fig 5 show that the average (mean)
time taken to pass through turnstile C was always greater than the most
frequently oc.curring time of passage.

5.2   GATE C

5.2.1   First Opening

I assumed that the rate at which people entered through gate C changed
linearly between successive sampling periods. The counts made during each of
the 3 second sample periods were therefore used to calculate an estimated
number of entries between each sample period. The total number of entries
through gate C was obtained from the sum of these estimates, added to the
counts made during the sampling periods. The total number estimate was 130 but
in my opinion this estimate should be regarded as a minimum because of the
likelihood that some people were obscured by others. My best estimate would
be that about 150 people entered during the 'First Opening' of gate C and in
my opinion the actual number was unlikely to have been greater than 180.

5.2.2   Second Opening

There was an initial surge of people during which a sample was taken and the
measured rate for this sample was 10 people/second; the flow soon became
                                                         I Document No.    CO NT ’ D

    relatively steady and the rates of admission for many of the samples during the
    remainder of the period were about 6 people/second. Drawing No 1340/04A showed
    Gate C to be 4115 mm wide and by assuming a shoulder width of 550 mm I
    calculated that it would allow 7 people to pass abreast when it was fully
    opened. The measured rate of 6 people/second therefore corresponds
    approximately to a rate of 1 person per shoulder width per second.

    A similar method of analysis was used to that for the 'First Opening' and Fig
    6 shows a graph of the number of people who entered through gate C during the
    'Second Opening'; the asterisks on the graph denote the individual sample
    points. The total number estimate was 1800 but in my opinion this estimate
    should be regarded as a minimum because of the likelihood that some people
    were obscured by others. My best estimate, based on the assumption that 1
    person in 10 may not have been counted, would be about 2000 and in my opinion
    the actual number was unlikely to have been greater than 2200.

    5.2.3     Third Opening

    Entries during the 'Third Opening' were at a much lower rate than in the other
    two openings and a continuous count was made over a period of about 8 minutes.
    A total of 90 people were counted and in my opinion the actual number is
    unlikely to have been greater than 100.


    6 SUMMARY OF RESULTS

    6.1     TURNSTILE COUNTS, ESTIMATES, TOTALS AND RATE OF ADMISSION

    The '5 minute totals' and rates for turnstiles A to G are summarised in Table
    3.

    The third column in Table 3 was obtained from my assumption that the
    discrepancy of 247 between the RLSD total and final estimated total was due to
    people entering the stadium before the start of the video recording. This
    number has therefore been added to all the intermediate RLSD counts to give an
    estimated count for the intermediate times.

    The total entries shown in the fourth column were obtained by adding, at
    appropriate times, admissions through turnstiles A to G from the third column
    to my best estimates of the number of entries made through gate C.




                                           -7-

%                                                                                 5 92
                                                     I Documelit No.   3 9   C O N T ’D

6.2     COUNTS AND ESTIMATES FOR THE THREE OPENINGS OF GATE C AND THE FINAL TOTALS

The estimates for gate C and estimated totals for the turnstiles are
summarised below:

                   RLSD Count      'Best' Estimate       Maximum Estimate

First Opening       130                     150                180

Second Opening     1800                    2000               2200

Third Opening          90                    90                100

Total gate C       2020                    2240               2480


Turnstiles         7247                    7494               7644

Total              9267                    9734              10124


6.3     SWFC COMPUTER COUNTS FOR TURNSTILE A TO G

6.3.1    Turnstiles A to E

The RLSD counts for these turnstiles would indicate that the SWFC counts for
turnstiles A to E were accurate and in my opinion SWFC's record of the
admissions through these turnstiles would not be in error by more than 2%.

6.3.2    Turnstile G

The SWFC count for turnstile G was low and estimates in this report indicate
that the SWFC computer only registered about 56% of the correct number of
admissions through this turnstile. Evidence of the turnstile switch
malfunctioning is reported by Games and Waterhouse (RLSD report IR/L/ME/89/33)
and this would account for errors in the total registered by the SWFC
computer.


7     DISCUSSION

7.1 RATE OF ADMISSION THROUGH TURNSTILES A TO G

I consider it reasonable to suppose that, in the absence of crowd forces, the
rate at which people entered the stadium would rise until there were queues at
all the turnstiles. I would then have expected the rate of admission to remain
fairly constant, possibly rising slightly as the match start time approached.

Fig 4 shows that from about 2:05 pm the rate was fairly constant until
2:25 pm, which in my opinion suggests that all turnstiles had queues and
people were not having undue difficulty in entering the turnstiles.

After about 2:25 pm turnstile C generally has the highest rate of admission
and it is noticeable from Table 2 that the paired turnstiles were performing
less well. In particular turnstiles F+G recorded a count of only 86 between
2:45 pm and 2:50 pm and turnstiles D+E a count of 77 between 2:40 pm and
2:45 pm; equivalent to 516 and 462 people/turnstile/hour respectively. The
rate at which people were entering decreased at about 2:35 pm and in my
opinion a likely cause was crowd forces acting on the people entering the
turnstiles. Even so the lowest overall rate of admission for all seven
turnstiles for a 5 minute period of 610 people/turnstile/hour and the
corresponding highest overall rate of admission of 702 persons/turnstile/hour
were both within 8% of the average rate of 660 people/turnstile/hour that was
achieved for the period between 2:05 pm and 2:50 pm.

The theoretical maximum composite rate of admission was 855 people/turnstile/
hour and in my opinion this theoretical maximum may have been achievable for
these turnstiles operating under ideal conditions, for example with no crowd
pressure acting on people entering the turnstile booths and with each person
having their ticket ready. In my opinion the maximum measured rate of 702
people/turnstile/hour, achieved over a period of 5 minutes, would have been
maintained after 2:35 pm if there had been no crowd forces acting on people
entering the turnstiles.

7.2   GATE C OPENINGS

I calculated that an estimated 2000 people entered the stadium during the
'Second Opening', during which significant checking of tickets was not
apparent from the video recording. The rate of admission of the turnstiles
increased markedly at about the time of the 'Second Opening' of gate C. In
my opinion this increase may have been due to two possible causes:

a) the turnstile operators may not have been checking tickets to the same
extent as they were before the 'Second Opening'.

b) the 'Second Opening' resulted in decreased crowd forces thus allowing
people to enter the turnstiles more easily.

It is my opinion that the number of people who can pass through a given sized
opening in a given time will tend to be self-limiting. If a person moves more
quickly then more clearance between successive people will be required. If
people shuffle through almost touching each other their speed will be limited
because of lack of freedom of movement. For example if people walk at a speed
of 2 m/sec (4.5 mph) and a spacing of 1.5 m (5 ft) then 80 people per shoulder
width would pass a given point in 1 min; if the speed was 1 m/sec (2.2 mph)
and the spacing was 0.75 m (2.5 ft) the number of people passing the point in
1 min would be the same.

7.3 TIMES TAKEN TO PASS THROUGH TURNSTILE C

Fig 5 and Table 4 show that between 2:00 pm and 2:10 pm the most frequent time
of passage was 5 sec. The time then diminished to 3 sec for the
intervals of 2:30 pm to 2:40 pm and 2:40 pm to 2:50 pm, with an approximately
equal numbers of admissions taking 2 sec and 4 sec; however the mean times
for these intervals were 4.3 sec and 4.4 sec respectively, corresponding to
828 people/hour and 822 people/hour. This shows that the asymmetric
distribution of times, caused by a significant number of people taking longer
than 5 seconds, gives a mean time that is about 50% greater than the most
frequent time for this interval.

The relevance of the difference between the mean time and the most frequent
time is that the capacity of a turnstile cannot be calculated on the
assumption that each person will take the same time of passage.
                                                          Document .No,   89   CONT’ D



    8   CONCLUSIONS

    8.1 My best estimate of the number of people admitted through turnstiles A to
    G is 7,494 and through gate C is 2,240, i.e. a total of 9,734. It is my opinion
    that the true total is most unlikely to have exceeded 10,124, i.e. the total
    admissions were approximately equal to the designated capacity of 10,100
    people for the West terraces.

    8.2 RLSD measured the average (mean) rate of admission through turnstiles A to
    G as 660 people/turnstile/hour for the 45 min period between 2:05 pm and
    2:50 pm.

    8.3 On the basis of RLSD's measured average rate of admission of 660
    people/turnstile/hour through turnstiles A to G, and the number of people who
    had already been admitted through these turnstiles at 2:50 pm, I have
    estimated that if gate C had not been opened it would have taken until about
    3:40 pm to admit a total of 10,100 people through these turnstiles.

    8.4 Using RLSD's measured maximum rate of admission of 702
    people/turnstile/hour through turnstiles A to G I calculated that people would
    need to have been continuously entering through these turnstiles at this rate
    before 1:00 pm to enable 10,100 people to enter the West terraces before
    3:00 pm.

    8.5 The rate of admission into the stadium increased markedly at about 1:45 pm
    rising from about 300 to about 550 people/turnstile/hour. The 5 minute rate
    for all seven turnstiles peaked at 702 people/turnstile/hour for the period
    2:30 pm to 2:35 pm and remained within about 8% of the average (mean) rate of
    660 people/turnstile/hour between 2:05 pm until 2:50 pm. There was a fall in
    the rate at about 2:35 pm with no recovery until about the time of the 'Second
    Opening' of gate C when the rate of admission increased markedly. At this
    stage the turnstile operators may not have been checking tickets to the same
    extent and crowd pressure outside the turnstiles may have decreased.

    8.6 The distribution of the times of passage through turnstile C, a single
    turnstile, was asymmetric and the mean time of passage was always significantly
    greater than the most frequent time. Between 2:30 pm and 2:50 pm the most
    frequently occurring time of passage was 3 sec but the mean time of passage
    was 4.4 seconds.

%   8.7 Turnstile C, a single turnstile, achieved a significantly higher rate of
    admission of 830 people/turnstile/hour during the period between 2:30 pm and
    2:50 pm in comparison with 630 people/turnstile/hour for the other six
    turnstiles which were in pairs.

    8.8 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club's computerised system for recording
    admissions to the stadium registered only approximately 56% of the people who
    entered through turnstile G. There is no evidence from the RLSD counting that
    any of the total counts from turnstiles A to F were registered incorrectly.




%                                      -   10   -
                                                                                   595
                                                         Document No.   89     C O N T ’D

Table 1


TOTAL NUMBER OF PEOPLE COUNTED THROUGH TURNSTILES A to G AT DIFFERENT TIMES

                             TURNSTILE

   TIME   A+B       C        D      E      F     G    D+E     F+G   TOTAL
    pm

   1:00      3     10      5        7       9     8     12     17         42
   1:05     19     21     24       23      16    21     47     37        124
   1:10     40     41     39       43      28    40     82     68        231
   1:15     64     54     56       59      35    44    115     79        312
   1:20     84     74     76       80      47    53    156    100        414
   1:25    114     92     98       94      56    60    192    116        514
   1:30    146    114    131      111      74    85    242    159        661
   1:35    178    149    151      113      93   102    264    195        786
   1:40    216    176    185      131     125   124    316    249        957
   1:45    271    199    217      165     150   141    382    291       1143
   1:50    363    241    278      211     189   182    489    371       1464
   1:55    448    280    336      270     229   214    606    443       1777
   2:00    535    341    390      312     281   262    702    543       2121
   2:05    603    399    439      348     331   303    787    634       2423
   2:10    690    447    494      399     398   377    893    775       2805
   2:15    784    490    546      448     463   444    994    907       3175
   2:20    883    537    611      496     532   509   1107   1041       3568
   2:25    989    587    676      548     589   559   1224   1148       3948
   2:30   1097    658    736      603     634   618   1339   1252       4346
   2:35   1206    730    790      663     691   676   1453   1367       4756
   2:40   1309    796    847      709     758   720   1556   1478       5139
   2:45   1415    857    892      741     820   770   1633   1590       5495
   2:50   1522    933    946      791     873   803   1737   1676       5868
   2:55   1649   1000   1015      832     932   840   1847   1772       6268
   3:00   1790   1096   1098      902    1005   904   2000   1909       6795
   3:05   1911   1160   1163      951    1066   940   2114   2006       7191
   3:10   1930   1168   1170      960    1071   948   2130   2019       7247


Ref SEL1 [300,5]hdtabl.tab




                                                                                  59 6
                                                     Document No,    39    C O N T ’D

Table 2

NUMBER OF PEOPLE COUNTED THROUGH TURNSTILES IN EACH 5 MINUTE INTERVAL

                                  TURNSTILE

    TIME             A+B     C    D      E     F      G     D+E     F+G    TOTAL
     pm

 12:55        1:00      3    10    5      7      9      8     12      17       42
  1:00    -   1:05     16    11   19     16      7     13     35      20       82
  1:05    .   1:10     21    20   15     20     12     19     35      31      107
  1:10    -   1:15     24    13   17     16      7      4     33      11       81
  1:15    -   1:20     20    20   20     21     12      9     41      21      102
  1:20    -   1:25     30    18   22     14      9      7     36      16      100
  1:25        1:30     32    22   33     17     18     25     50      43      147
  1:30    •   1:35     32    35   20      2     19     17     22      36      125
  1:35    -   1:40     38    27   34     18     32     22     52      54      171
  1:40    •   1:45     55    23   32     34     25     17     66      42      186
  1:45    .   1:50     92    42   61     46     39     41    107      80      321
  1:50    _   1:55     85    39   58     59     40     32    117      72      313
  1:55        2:00     87    61   54     42     52     48     96     100      344
  2:00    _   2:05     68    58   49     36     50     41     85      91      302
  2:05    _   2:10     87    48   55     51     67     74    106     141      382
  2:10    _   2:15     94    43   52     49     65     67    101     132      370
  2:15    _   2:20     99    47   65     48     69     65    113     134      393
  2:20        2:25    106    50   65     52     57     50    117     107      380
  2:25    -   2:30    108    71   60     55     45     59    115     104      398
  2:30    _   2:35    109    72   54     60     57     58    114     115      410
  2:35    _   2:40    103    66   57     46     67     44    103     111      383
  2:40    -   2:45    106    61   45     32     62     50     77     112      356
  2:45    _   2:50    107    76   54     50     53     33    104      86      373
  2:50    _   2:55    127    67   69     41     59     37    110      96      400
  2:55    _   3:00    141    96   83     70     73     64    153     137      527
  3:00    _   3:05    121    64   65     49     61     36    114      97      396
  3:05    -   3:10     19     8    7      9      5      8     16      13        56

Ref SEL1 [300,5]hdtab2.tab




                                                                                 597
                                                Document Mo.        89   CO N T’D



Table 3

SUMMARY TABLE

Time            Total        Total       Total     Rate for 5 minutes
                 Turnstile   Turnstile   Turnstile in people per
                 Count       Estimate    + Gate C turnstile per hour
                                         Estimate

2.00 pm         2121         2368        2368
                                                           517
2.05            2423         2670        2670
                                                           654
2.10            2805         3052        3052
                                                           634
2.15            3175         3422        3422
                                                           673
2.20            3568         3815        3815
                                                           651
2.25            3948         3948        3948
                                                           682
2.30            4346         4593        4593
                                                           702
2.35            4756         5003        5003
                                                           656
2.40            5139         5139        5139
                                                           610
2.45            5495         5742        5742
                                                           639
2.50            5868         6115        6265
                                                           685
2.55            6268         6515        7665
                                                           903
3.00            6795         7042        9202
                                                           678
3.05            7191         7438        9658
                                                               96
3.10            7247         7494        9734


Ref SEL1 [300,5]hdtab3.tab




                                                                             5 9 8
Table 4


NUMBER OF PEOPLE HAVING THE SAME INTERVAL OF PASSAGE THROUGH TURNSTILE C

                            INTERVAL IN SECONDS                        Mean   Total
              0    1    2     3   4   5   6   7     8   9   10   >10   Time   Count

1:50 - 2:00   0    6   11   13   15   19    9   5   3   1    3   15     6.0    100

2:00 - 2:10   0    3    7   16   20   23   12   7   3   4    1   10     5.7    106

2:10 - 2:20   1    1    4   10   17   20   10   7   4   1   1    14     6.7     90

2:20 - 2:30   1    6   20   19   21   12   16   8   6   2   1     9     5.0    121

2:30 - 2:40   0    7   26   39   25   17    8   3   5   1   1     6    4.3     138

2:40 - 2:50   2   12   23   29   21   14    9   5   7   9   1     5    4.4     137

2:50 - 3:00   4   29   47   30   19    7    5   3   1   1   6    11     3.7    163


NB Fig 4 is a visual presentation of the data in this table


Ref SEL1 [300,5]hdtab4.tab




                                                                                      5 9 9
                                                            LEPPINGS
                                                              LANE




                                           TERRACE   WEST STAND
                                          STANDING      SEATS      NORTH STAND
                                                                      SEATS




                                                                                                   o
                                                                                                   o
                                                                                                   o
                                                                                                   c
                                                                                                   3
                                                                                                   o
                                                                                                    13
                                                                                                    r-t-


                                                                                                    o’

                                                                                                   00
                               TUNNEL TO CENTRE                                                    sO
                               TERRACE STANDING                                                     o
                                                                                                    o
                                                                                                    H
 1                                                                                                  O


      FIG 1   SCHEMATIC PLAN SHOWING TURNSTILES A TO G AND GATE C                 RL3D SHT T3TILX/HILLS
600




                                                                                          BASED OR
                                                                                 RALPH B U M k A880CU TSS
                                                                                     nuvim 1S40/M
                                                                                  «§
         8000.
                        bTART
                                                                                       END
                           OF
                                                                                       OF
                         DATA
                                                                                       DATA
         7000.
         6000.
         5000.
         4000.
PEOPLE
         3000.




                                                                                              Document No.
         2000.




                                                                                              89
         1000.




                                                                                              CONT’ D
    1

         CD

                 135.           120 .   105.

                                               TIME RELATIVE TO 3.00pm   (MINS)
                                                                             VERTICAL SCALE
                                                                             (No. OF PEOPLE)




                                                                                                         Document Ho,
                                                                                                         89
                                                 1-00   1.30   2.00   2.30         3.00




                                                                                                         CONT’ D
o>    FIG 3   NUMBER OF PEOPLE COUNTED THROUGH TURNSTILES IN EACH 5 MINUTE INTERVAL
c>
!\>           ________________________________                                            RL3D 3HT HDDIF1/HIL!
      p
      CD
                                                    •                                                  #                              •
                      START
                                                                                                                                          END
                      DATA
                                                                                                                                          DATA


      o
      o
      o




      oo
      o

tti




a; o
o


CL

Cl_
O
Q.




                                                                                                                                                   Document
                                                                                                                                                   No.
      O
      o
      oj




                                                                                                                                                   89
                                                                                                                                                   CONT’ D
                                  1.00pm                                       2.00pm
                                                                                                                             3.00pm
           -1 3 5 .           -   120.     105.              -7 5 .         -6 0 ,            -4 5 ,       -3 0 .   -1 5 .                   15.
                                                               TIME RELATIVE TO 3.00pm   (MINS)



           FIG.         4     RATE OF ADMISSION   FOR TURNSTILES A to      G
                                         :40 - 2 : 5 0                                   VERTICAL SCALE
                                                                                             (No. OF PEOPLE)




                                                            2:30 -   2:40


                             \



                                                                         2:20
                                                                         2 :20 -        2:30

                                  \             \                           \
                                                    \




                                                                                                                                DocumerTt Mo.
                                                                                             2:10   -   2 : 20




                                                                                               ^ ^ \ 2:00 -      2:10




                                                                                                                                89
                                                        0    1   2   3   4      5   6    7     8    9 1 0




                                                                                                                                CONT’ D
                                                                     INTERVAL IN SECS



      FIG 5   TURNSTILE C - NUMBER OF PEOPLE HAVING THE SAME INTERVAL OF PASSAGE
C5N                                                                                                               RLSD 3HT HDC3KC/HILL3
oL
         0
         CD
                                                      m                                        m




         CD




    o_
    o
    UJ
    Q-


    OH
    UJ
    CD




                                                                                                                            Document No.
         to _




                                                                                                                            89
                                                                                                                            CONT’ D
                                              100.                               20 0 .                       300.   400.
                                                                         TIME in seco nd s
O
              c-ir   c   mi   ujoro   nr   Drnni r   curpriM i?   rpnu   nATr   r    AT TWF 'Q FrnMn   HPFMIMO'
                                                           Document No,   89   CONT’D



                                                                   Incident Report


                          H EA M H AND SAFETY EXECUTIVE

                   RESEARCH AND LABORATORY SERVICES DIVISION

                         Harpur Hill, Buxton, SKL7 9JN



                    Audibility of the Public Address System
                        at Hillsborough Football Ground

                                       by

                          I R Price, BSc     MIQA   MSEE

                                                    IIVVNV/89/17




Distribution                                Issue authorised by: Dr A Jones
                                                           Date: 12 January 1990

The Court of Inquiry (5 copies)
ACC M Jones West Midlands Police
Mr D C T Eves
Dr J MoQuaid
Dr A Jones
Mr A Barrell TD
Mr P G Jones TD
Mr M S Nattrass FAID Area 14
Mr J P Giltrow HES (N)
Mr M R Stephenson NE FOG
Mr M Fountain TD3
Dr J H Foley
Dr C E Nicholson
Mr P F Heyes
Mr I R Price                                  TO KLSD/DIAS STAFF ONLY: NOT TO
Mr D Waterhouse                               BE COMMUNICATED OUTSIDE HSE
Mr G A C Games                                WTIHOOT THE APEK0VAL OF THE
Mr G Norton                                   AUTHORISING OFFICER
Mr M James TD3
Mr C J Pertee NE FCG
Mr J B Hibbs NE FCG
RPS
Library (2)                                     SMIV343/235/01
Registry File                                   NV/05/002/89
                                                                                 606
                                                                l ^ o c u m e R t No.   g   C O N T ’D


    1   INTRODUCTION

        As part of the investigation undertaken by the Health and Safety Executive
        into the incident at Sheffield Wednesday PC's Hillsborough football ground
        011                1989, I was asked by Dr C E Nicholson to investigate the
        audibility of the Public Address system (PA system) at Hillsborough. This
        report sets out the results of that investigation. Information on the
        design of the PA system and the equiment used in it was supplied by
                 [Contracts Director) of DP Sound Systems Ltd at a meeting on the
        8th June 1989 and in subsequent correspondence and telephone conversations.

        This report contains details of investigations performed both on site and in
        the laboratory. The work was carried out by me and by other members of the
        Noise and Vibration Section of the Research and Laboratory Services Division
        (RISD) working on my instruction and under my general supervision.

    2   DESCRIPTION OF SYSTEM

        I was informed by            that the PA system at Hillsborough wasdesigned
        and installed by DP Sound Systems Ltd of Sheffield. The principle
        components, loudspeakers and amplifiers, were made by TQA Electric Co Ltd, a
        Japanese company which is a specialist manufacturer of public address
        equipment of seme 55 years standing.

                    informed me that the PA system was installed primarily as a means
        of conraunicating with the spectators for crowd control or in an emergency.
        The system is controlled froon the police control booth located between the
        West and South Stands. In the booth is a control unit {TQA VR 1012) on
        which the microphone input to the system is located together with a button
        which activates the system when depressed. The control unit also has a
        series of buttons which enable sectors of the ground to be selected so that
        messages can be relayed to specific areas (see Figure 1). The PA system has
        been divided into eight sectors; inside and outside of each of the four
        stands (Figure 2). The outside sectors also include the passages leading to
        the upper seated accommodation in each of the stands. Any combination of
        the eight sectors can be selected or, using the button labelled 'ALL CALL'
        every sector can be selected. The sector outside the West stand also
        includes loudspeakers directed at the approach to the turnstiles at Leppings
        Lane. Thus it is possible for the police to talk to those inside the ground

%       independently of those approaching it or vice versa. It is also, for
        example, possible to talk to those inside and/or approaching the West
        stand/terracing independently of those anywhere else in or around the
        ground.

        A second input to the PA system has been provided for use by a Disc Jockey
        (DJ) to play music and jingles to the spectators and to make announcements.
        This input uses part of the same PA system, that directed at all spectators
        inside the ground, ie the four sectors inside the stadium. The DJ's input,
        whether music or speech, is automatically overridden when the police control
        panel is used. Thus a message frcm the police can be relayed to one portion
        of the crcMd whilst the rest hear the DJ. The DJ's booth is underneath the
        police control roam.

        The location of the loudspeakers in the West stand, inside and outside
        sectors, are shewn in Figure 3. These are controlled by buttons 1 and 7
        respectively. The 12 loudspeakers inside the stand are mounted under the
        front edge of the roof and are alternately directed into the upper stand and
        down to the terracing. These loudspeakers are TQA TZ 201 units. Outside


                                                                                            607
                                                             Document Mo.   8 9    C O N T ’D



    the stand TQA TC 15ML horn loudspeakers have been vised. Using TQA data for
    the loudspeakers calculations were made of the sound pressure level (SPL) at
    various locations inside and outside the ground (see Table 1).

3 NOISE LEVELS IN FOOTBALL GROUNDS

    No useful information on typical noise levels in football grounds was found
    in the technical literature. Consequently limited measurements were made at
    the first available opportunity which happened to be the Liverpool vs
    Arsenal match at Liverpool PC's Anfield ground on the 26th of May 1989.
    Tape recordings were made of the sound level at the pitch side and on the
    collar of a member of RLSD's Noise and Vibration       Sectionwho was a spectator
    in the 'Kbp'. The sound pressure level was also        logged as 1 minute averages
    using noise dosemeters in both cases. The pitch side microphones were
    located approximately lm from the goal line, 8m frctn the nearest goal post
    and 4m frcm the spectators at the 'Kbp' end of the ground. The equipment
    used is detailed in Annex 1.

    Plots of the 1 minute average sound pressure level (SPL) are presented in
    Figure 4. The match kicked off at about 20:15 and finished about 22:00.
    EXjring this period the 1 minute average level in     the Rapwas always greater
    than 90 dB(A) and above 100 dB(A) for much of the time.  The corresponding
    figures at pitch side are about 5 dB lower, viz 85 dB(A) and 95 dB(A).

    Unpublished data from a football match at Bristol, and from the Rugby League
    Cup Final, at Wembley, were made available to HSE. These data were obtained
    as 3 minute averages and are presented in Figure 5 together with the HSE
    data re-calculated as 3 minute averages. Clearly the HSE Anfield data shows
    much, higher levels than at Bristol and Wembley.

    The logarithmic units vised to measure noise as a 1 or 3 minute average can
    mask much lower levels which may have occurred during the period. Thus it
    is possible for the sound level to be relatively lew for a significant
    proportion of the time whilst the average level is high. A statistical
    distribution analysis of the sound levels illustrates this effect. Table 2
    presents such data for the Anfield recordings for 3 minute periods leading
    up to and just beyond the start of the match. Fran these data it can be
    seen that although the 3 minute average levels in the Kbp were between 97.9
    and 105.7 dB(A), the level was below 91.9 dB(A) for 10% of the total period
    (as shewn by I«q ) and below 96.9 dB(A) for 50% of the time (I«q ) •
    Figure 6 illustrates the relationship between the various statistical
    measurements of fluctuating sound for a 3 minute period of the Anfield
    recordings in the Kbp. In this period 108.2 dB(A) was exceeded for 1% of
    the time; 105.2 dB(A) for 10% and 97.2 dB(A) for 50%; whereas the average
    level (Leq) was 101.1 dB(A).

    In Figure 6 various crowd activities which give rise to high levels of sound
    are identified.

4   TESTS ON THE HILLSBOROUGH PA SYSTEM

    Recordings were made of speech relayed by the Hillsborough PA system at
    locations inside and outside the West stand and terracing. The locations
    are shewn in Figure 7 and described in detail in Annex 2. The recordings
    were made on the 7th June 1989 in an enpty ground. The speech was input
    vising either the microphone on the control panel in the police control room
    or the one in the DJ's booth and consisted of a reading of the team list
    from a match programme and other lists. Recordings were made for two
                                                              Document No.   89    C O N T ’D


    different voices, one male the other female. The recordings were analysed
    for their sound pressure level and amplitude fluctuation. The A-weighted*
    SPL at each measurement location is given in Table 1 together with the
    calculated performance of the PA system. As would be expected the measured
    sound levels from the PA system vary depending on hew loudly the passage was
    spoken, or indeed individual words in the passage. However, it is clear
    that the system is capable of producing the theoretical levels calculated
    frcm manufacturer's data inside the ground (Sector 1). Outside the West
    stand (Sector 7) the levels measured are somewhat less than those
    calculated.

    (* The 'A' frequency weighting is applied to acoustic signals to simulate
    the frequency response of the ear.)

5   INIELLTGIBILITY OF THE HILLSBOROUGH PA SYSTEM

    The 'Green Guide' (Ref 1) states, in Section 12:

    "There should be a ccnsnunications system capable of clearly relaying
    essential m essages to all parts of the ground in both normal circumstances
    and in an emergency."

    and in paragraph 194 iii:

    "Public address equipment should be installed so that broadcast messages can
    be heard under reasonable conditions (including emergencies) by all persons
    of normal hearing in any part of the ground to which the public has access.
    The system should be capable of being controlled from a central point and
    should ideally be capable of addressing messages to each major section of
    the ground. The power supply to the system should be such as to enable it
    to operate in an emergency such as fire or failure of the mains supply."

    I understand from DP Sound Ltd that the Hillsborough PA system was designed
    to fulfil this requirement.

    Whether a message can be clearly understood will depend on many factors but
    it was not possible to identify from the literature any criteria by which
    the intelligibility of speech frcm public address systems could be assessed
    directly. There are standards for emergency evacuation signals and guidance
    for selecting warning signals but these do not address spoken warnings from
    PA systems. Standards for assessing the intelligibility of speech in roams
    cannot be applied directly to sports stadia PA systems. Therefore it was
    not possible to assess the performance of the Hillsborough PA system against
    defined performance criteria in terms of intelligibility of messages relayed
    through it.

    Typically tests of speech intelligibility require panels of subjects to
    listen to standard word lists against appropriate background noises. Such
    tests were impracticable in this investigation. Instead an ad hoc
    assessment was made using recordings of announcements made at Hillsborcxigh
    and of crowd noise made at Anfield.

    In this ad hoc test twelve subjects (HSE staff of age range from 21 to 43
    years) were asked to judge if they could understand the recording frcm
    Hillsborough when replayed together with the recorded crowd noise from
    Anfield. It was not possible to reproduce the exact sound field present at
    Hillsborough at the time of the incident. Therefore the recordings were
    replayed in an anechoic chamber through a PA system which had been set to
    produce a uniform diffuse sound field at the listening position (see
    Figure 8). The two recordings were superimposed at known relative levels
    and the listeners were asked if they could hear the PA announcements and if
    they could understand them. The test was repeated at four relative levels
    of the two signals. Table 3 lists the level of the announcement relative to
    the crowd noise at which the listener could understand the announcement.
    Nearly all the listeners could understand the announcement when its average
    level (Leq) was 10 dB below that of the crowd noise.

6   DISCUSSION

    Mr          nformed me that in designing the PA system the installers had
    made the following assumptions in respect of noise levels at football
    matches: ambient levels 77-80 dB(A); average levels 85 dB(A); short duration
    levels 90-95 dB(A). The data frcm Bristol and Wembley would support these
    assumptions but the Anfield data would not. Obviously the noise level of
    spectators will depend on many factors such as: number of spectators; design
    of stadium; significance of the match; emotional state of the crowd. Each
    of the crcwd noise measurements presented in this report were taken at
    important matches but with very different crowd numbers and in different
    stadia. This accounts for the range of noise levels reported. It should be
    noted that the match at Anfield was the League Championship deciding match
    and Liverpool PC fans are noted for their vocal (choral) support for their
    team. The Anfield ground is very compact with roofing covering all
    spectator areas. All factors which would lead to a high crowd noise level.

    In general a wide range of levels will occur depending on the factors
    mentioned above. Daring any one match or even any period of a match, levels
    will fluctuate and although the average may be high this will be influenced
    by short periods of very high levels, leaving significant periods at lower
    levels (as illustrated in Figure 6). Messages from a PA system can be
    understood from information received in these periods. The simple listening
    test described illustrates this since messages with average sound levels
    10 dB (A) below the ambient level could be understood. Thus, whilst it is
    impracticable to design sound systems to overcome the highest levels, a
    criteria based on exceeding a particular level which it is assumed crowd
    noise will only exceed for short periods of time is perhaps more realistic
    (say L»0). There is, of course, a difference in the ability to hear and
    understand a message and actually listening to it. Spectators deeply
    involved in watching the game may not listen to messages they can clearly
    hear. At Anfield, and at a recently televised International rugby match,
    spectator safety messages were preceded by a chime which identified them as
    such. This facility seems a sensible way to attract the spectators'
    attention.

    In the particular case of the situation at Hillsborough leading up to the
    incident I have no information of crowd noise levels on the West terracing.
    Nor do I have such information for the areas inside and outside the
    turnstiles at Leppings Lane. Careful examination of a video tape, supplied
    by West Midlands Police, for the period 14:45 to 15:07 has not enabled noise
    levels at the West terracing to be determined since the 'effects' microphone
    is also picking up crowd noise from other parts of the ground. Up to 14:50
    it is not possible to identify any chants clearly related to Liverpool
    fans. Additionally, when spectators are at their most vocal they usually
    wave their hands, scarves and banners in the air en masse. There is no sign
    of this activity on this section of the video tape. Throughout this period
    music is being played on the PA system and can be heard clearly above the
    crowd noise. At about 14:50 the teams were announced over the PA system.
                                                                Document No.     8 9 C O N T ’D



        Fran then an there were the usual chanting of the fans as their team
        members' names were called and as the teams entered the pitch at 14:54 and
        the met-ch started. Between the announcements of the teams and the kick-off,
        music was being played and can be heard except during the loudest chants
        frctn the crcwi.

        The pattern of crcwi chanting seems much the same as that observed at
        Anfield though visual indications frcm the video tape suggest that a
        significant percentage of the Liverpool fans were not joining in the
        chanting. Thus given the open nature of the West terracing and the numbers
        of fans there it is reasonable to conclude that crow? noise levels at the
        West terracing would not have been as high as those found at Anfield. In icy
        opinion it is probable therefore that any messages relayed through the PA
        system would have been intelligible to the spectators. It should be noted
        that although the Hillsborough system is capable of having a chime, one was
        not fitted at the time of the incident. I understand from Mr I A Ramsay,
        Managing Director of DP Sounds Ltd that a chime has new been fitted
        following the publication of the Interim Report by lord Justice Taylor.
        (Ref 2)

    7   CONCLUSIONS

        Fran this limited investigation I have made the following conclusions:

        7.1   The Hillsborough PA system had been professionally installed using good
              quality canponents and meets the performance criteria to which it was
              designed.

        7.2   It is probable that spectators in the West terracing and its approaches
              could have heard any messages relayed through the PA system during the
              period encompassing the incident.

        7.3   There is limited information on crcwd noise in sports stadia and the
              necessary performance requirements for PA systems to ensure
              intelligible cantnunication.

    8   REFERENCES

        1.    Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (1986) HMSO
              ISBN 0 11 340840 4

        2.    The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster 15 April 1989
              Inquiry by the Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report   August 1989
              ISBN 0 10 1076525




t
                                              5
                                                                                        611
Tpn rdBfAl' i»aqin>i ingirte arei outside the West stand at the Hillsborough ground du r i m broadcasts from the PA system

Hie measurement positions quoted are shown in Figure 7 and described in full in       Appendix 2.

                  BRQADCAST                                                   SPL AT MEASUREMH'TF POSITION

                                                     A       B            C     D        E          F     G       H       I      J

Calculated level 1                                                                                                                    Notes

Assuming operation at rated power                   86       87           -    87      98      96         -      93      86     84    1   Calculated levels assume:
                                                                                                                                          - spherical propagation
                                                                                                                                            from a point source;
Measured levels for:                                                                                                                      - non-reverberant field.

Male voice speaking normally on DJ's                                                                                                  2   Measured levels are
system. Volume control set to the first dot.       76-80    76-81   68-72     79-82                                                       taken from a time history
                                                                                                                                          chart recording of a
As above but with the speaker using a                                                                                                     sequence of speech.
raised voice.                                      85-90     89      82        84                                                         The levels quoted are for
                                                                                                                                          the loudest passages
Female voice speaking normally on DJ's                                                                                                    excluding pauses.
system. Volume control set to the first dot.       87-90     91      83        90
                                                                                                                                      3   Distorted output.
As above but with speaker using a raised




                                                                     CO
voice.                                             90-943    913               923                                                    4   Very unclear
                                                                                                                                          reproduction.
Male voice speaking normally on the police
system to the inside of the West stand                                                                                                5   These measurements axe
                                                   75-78    71-76   67-73     75-79                                                       dominated by traffic
only.
                                                                                                                                          noise from the nearby
Male voice speaking normally on the police                                                                                                Leppings lane.
system to both the inside and cutside of
the West stand.                                     80      74-81    74       79-82

Male voioe speaking normally on the police
system to all areas of the ground.                   82     80-84    77       81-84

Male voice speaking normally on the police
system to the area outside the West stand.                                            84-87   80-84     74-77   81-84




                                                                                                                                                                      Document No.
Male voice speaking normally on the police
system to the inside of the West stand.                                               65-68    70       81       72

 Female voice speaking normally on DJ's
 system. Volume control set to the first
                                                            88-93             88-91                                      93     91
 dot.

 As above but with the volume control set
 to maximum.                                                 91                93                                        954    924




                                                                                                                                                                      89
 Female voice speaking normally on the police
 system to all areas of the grcund.                          80                82                                       83-87   82




                                                                                                                                                                      CONT’ D
                                                                       Document No.   89     C O N T ’D


    TABLE 2


    Statistical analysis of part of recordings at Anfield - 26 May 1989

                                         BEFORE START OF MATCH

    (A)     In Kbp

    START OF RECORDING                              SOUND LEVEL, dB(A)
          PERIOD                                                            Lgg        Leq
                                  h.         *10       %0        ^90
             19.50               108.2      105.2      97.2      90.2       88.2      101.1
             19.53               109.5      105.5      97.0      92.5       90.5      100.9
             19.56               108.5      100.5      95.0      91.5       74.0       97.9
             19.59               109.5      104.5      96.0      90.0       80.0      100.2
             20.02               110.5      104.5      97.0      93.5       91.5      100.7
             20.05               111.0      110.0     103.5      96.5       92.0      105.7
          19.50-20.08            110.4      105.9      96.9      91.9       85.9      101.5

    (B)     Pitch Side

    START OF RECORDING                              SOUND LEVEL,- dB(A)
          PERIOD                             ^LO       %0        ^90        Lgg       Leq
                                 h.
             19.55              106.0        99.0      88.0      83.5       82.0       94.8
             19.58              103.5        97.5      86.5      82.0       77.0       93.0
             20.01              110.0       106.5      97.0      88.5       85.0      101.5
             20.04              110.5       105.5      97.5      90.0       88.0      101.4
             20.07              110.5       106.0      96.5      91.0       88.5      101.6
          19.55-20.10           110.1       104.1      93.6      84.6       80.6       99.8

                                         AFTER START OF MATCH

    (C)    Pitch Side

    START OF RECORDING                              SOUND LEVEL,, dB(A)
          PERIOD                 %           *10       %0        ^O         Lgg        Leq


%            20.17
             20.20
             20.23
                                107.5
                                108.8
                                108.5
                                            101.0
                                            102.3
                                            101.5
                                                       92.5
                                                       92.8
                                                       91.5
                                                                 86.5
                                                                 86.3
                                                                 85.5
                                                                            84.5
                                                                            83.3
                                                                            83.0
                                                                                       97.2
                                                                                       98.9
                                                                                       97.7
             20.26              107.5       100.0      89.5      83.0       79.5       96.2
             20.29              100.5        93.5      87.0      83.0       80.0       90.6
             20.32              103.5        95.5      88.0      82.5       79.0       92.4
          20.17-20.35           107.6       100.1      90.1      83.6       80.1       96.4


    Notes:

    L^     is   the SPL exceeded for 1% of the time
    I^q    is    the SPL exceeded for 10% of the time
    I^q    is    the SPL exceeded for 50% of the time
    Lq q   is    the SPL exceeded for 90% of the time
    L^g    is    the SPL exceeded for 99% of the time
    Leq    is   equivalent steady level over the period (average level).



%
                                                                                               613
                                                                Document No.   89    C O N T ’D



    TABLE 3


    Results of listening tests - Relative level (Lea) of announcement from the PA
    system to the level of the background crcwd noise necessary for
    intelligibility.


           LISTENER     AGE    RELATIVE LEVEL OF ANNOUNCEMENT FOR INTELLIGIBILITY
                       (YRS)                          (dB)


               1        21                            -10
               2        22                            - 5
               3        24                            -10
              4         26                            -10
               5        26                            -10
              6         29                            -10
              7         29                            - 5
              8         30                            -10
              9         30                            -10
              10         35                           -10
              11         35                           -10
              12        43                            -10




I




%
                                                                                    614
                                               Documefit No.   CONT’D




                                      B




%   Figure 1   C ontrol u n it for PA system




%
                                                                615
 n o r t h      s t   ^ nd




  S   o u t h    s t n n d




                                                                          Document No.
                                                           Ou t s i d©j
                                                                      |
                                    West     Stand

                                    N orth    Stand   2

                                    Kop               ;;       9




                                                                          g9
                                    bouth     Stand   4




                                                                          CONT’D
Figure 2        PA system sectors
                                                             < o     Sector 7

                                                                     Sector 1 - down           > (M o u n ted on the
                                                              □
                                                                                                * u n d r r sid e o f the
                                                              m      S ector 1 - in to stand   j  fr o n t o f the roof)




      □   B . P B   U     SL, Q   ...B   U   . M   u




                                                                                                                         o
                                                                                                                         o
                                                                                                                         o

                                                                                                                         CD




                                                                                                                    OO
               Figure 3     Location o f loudspeakers in sectors 1 and 7                                            vD
                                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                                     2   :
617




                                                                                                                     H
                                                                                                                     d
                                                                                                   Document No.   89   C O N T ’D

                      Anfield Liverpool vs Arsenal
      120




(
uD
     100       -



O
d
 '
-j



      90 -




      80 -




      70
           18:00       19:00              20:00                   21:00                        22:00
                                 Time (hours:mins)




                     Anfield Liverpool vs Arsenal
                                   26th May 1989
     120




     100   -




     90 -



     80 -




     70                                                          nrniRif«iraiTfnnisRnMimbwr.
                       19:00              20:00                  21:00                         22:00
                                 T im e ( h o u r s : m in s )




      Figure 4     Plots o f 1 min. average SPL at A nfield 26111 May 1989

                                                                                                                         6 18
                      Anfield Liverpool vs Arsenal                                      #                        Bristol City vs Sheffield United                                             Wembley Stadium, Rugby League Cup
                                  In crowd. 26th May 19*.                                                                   In cio*d. I3lh Bay IS9).                                                                In rrond, 29lh April IS69




                                                                                            r\                                                                                   r\
                                                                                            r\
v<                                                                                          i
                                                                                            v/                                                                                   <
I                                                                                           0                                                                                    v/
                                                                                                                                                                                 0    100 T
0
V/                                                                                          0                                                                                    o
                                                                                            vy

                                                                                            7
J
                                                                                            I                                                                                    9
                                                                                            J                                                                                    J                                                         ao
c
I




     J pWlII in q n m n m iii im n p n m m | n n n n i]HrnTm | n u n m jm   irumiiiri                                                                                                   j-
     1759     18:29    18:59    19:29     19.59   2029      20:59   21:29   2159                 13:00   13:30    UflO   14JO   15fl0   15:30    16:00   16JO   I7 fl)   17:30          U ffl)   1330   Uffl)   14 30   ISrOO     15:30    I6ffl)   16:30   1700   1730
                                        ftn
                                          e(h
                                            rs
                                             rr«
                                               rrs
                                                 )                                                                              lim
                                                                                                                                  e(h
                                                                                                                                    rs
                                                                                                                                     :n
                                                                                                                                      w»s
                                                                                                                                        )                                                                               lime (hrs mins)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          o
                                                                                            Figure 5              Plots o f 3 min. average SPL                                                                                                                            o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          c:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          a>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          xO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          o
ON                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Z£L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          H
vO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        d
                                                                                       T I ME

      SO UN D P R E S SU RE L EV EL d B (A )




                                         X     -   Lx    -    108. 2 dB( A)      SPL ex cee ded         for    1'/. of      the time

                                        Y      -   L;,o ~     105.2 d B (A )              ::                  10'/.          ::




                                                                                                                                       Document llo.
                                         z     -   L-,<;. -    77 .2 dB( A)               ' •
                                                                                            '                 507.           ::

                                         0     -   Leq   -    101 . 1 d B (A )   Av er ag e     level    over         the   period




                                                                                                                                       89
                         Figure 6     Tim e-history o f n oise in the crowd at Anfield 26"“ May 1989 (3 min. period)




                                                                                                                                       CONTD
620
                                                             WflT




                                              Ln>S
                                                 »t*$isT
                                                   ATS  dM
                                                         o
                                                       ff"




Figure 7   Recording positions at H illsb o ro u g h 7,h J u n e 1989
                                                                     Document No.    89   CONT’ D




           A n e c h o ic Chamber


                                        Loudspeaker 1




                                                Subject


          L oudspeaker 3




                                                          Loudspeaker 2.




%    H illsb o r o u g h
                                    A ttenuator

     PA reco rd in g

                                                                        Mixer /
                                                                       A m plifier




     A n fie ld crowd
        rec o rd in g



    Figure 8      Set-up for listenin g tests




                                                                                               622
ANNEX 1


Equicroent used for recordings of Hillsborough public address system made on
7 June 1989

Tape recorder number 1 (Blue) - Nagra IVSJ s/n 4994

Channel 1:
B&K 4134 1/2 inch microphone s/n 736121
B&K 2619 microphone preamplifier s/n 462127
QSJP adaptor s/n 1200

Channel 2:
B&K 4134 1/2 inch microphone s/n 928525
B&K 2619 microphone preamplifier s/n 360352
QSJP adaptor s/n 340

Tape recorder number 2 (Black) - Nagra IVSJ s/n 1735

Channel 1:
B&K 4134 1/2 inch microphone s/n 666962
B&K 2619 microphone preamplifier s/n 702300
QSJP adaptor s/n 1210

Channel 2:
B&K 4134 1/2 inch microphone s/n 558290
B&K 2619 microphone preamplifier s/n 702305
QSJP adaptor s/n 149

Calibrators
B&K 4230 s/ns   542887
                419695


Additional equipment used at Anfield on 26 Mav 1989

Sony walkman professional cassette recorder
EuBont Mk III logging dosemeters s/ns   21639
                                        21632
                                        21627
                                        15997
                                                                Document No.   39    C O N T ’D


    ANNEX 2


    Positions of sound recordings made at Hillsborough on 7 June 1989

    The microphone positions given in this table are shown on Figure 7 and
    described in full below.

    Position A   At the front of the pen, 0.75m behind gate number 3 to the pitch,
                 adjacent to the step before the gate. Height above immediate
                 ground level 1.5m.

    Position B   At the back of the pen, 0.38m behind the side gate to the South
                 West pen, under the overhang of West terrace seating, 0.59m from
                 the rear wall above the second step from the wall. Height above
                 the step i.5m.

    Position C   Inside the tunnel to the centre pens, 10.5m from the end of the
                 extended walls at the terrace end of the tunnel. Positioned
                 equidistant from the side walls of the tunnel. Height above ground
                 level 1.8m.

    Position D   Adjacent to the end of the extended walls from the access tunnel
                 0.2m across from the second upright post of the dividing barrier
                 between the two centre pens. Height above immediate ground level
                 1.5m.

    Position E   In line with, and 0.5m from the end of the blue handrail between
                 the entrance to the West terrace standing turnstiles and the access
                 road to the South stand. Height above ground level 1.5m.

    Position F   In line with the grey sheeted fence separating the Leppings Lane
                 entrances to the West and North stand seats from the entrances to
                 South Stand and the West stand standing area. 10.2m from the end
                 of the fence outside the gates by Leppings Lane. Height above
                 ground level 1.5m.

    Position G    At   theentrance to the tunnel to the centre pens     equidistant from

%   Position H
                 the side walls. Height above ground level 1.5m.

                 In    thearea inside the turnstiles A-G, 4.5m from   gateC and 2.9m
                 from the wall of the turnstiles. Height above ground 1.5m.

    Position I   In the West stand seats; Row 11 next to the blue rail at seat 99.
                 Height 1.3m.

    Position J    In   theWest stand seats; Rcw 28 next to the blue     railat seat 99.
                 Height 1.3m.




%
                                                                                       624
Health and Safety Executive                       I D o cu m en t N ,        89     CONT’D
                                                                                                                  '1Lr •^
                                                                                                          2 -     W ’ ' ’ i- *t -
 TECHNOLOGY D I V I S I O N

Summary sheet of                                                        FCG (block caps)

FCG inspector's report
                                                                        NORTH EAST
Name of firm(s) (block caps)                                            Area no./PI group no.

SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB                           — t>—       Dr C E Nicholson - Deputy
                                                                        Director, RLSD
Address
                                                                        Area (name)
Hillsborough Ground
                                                                        South Yorkshire            &   Humberside
Sheffield
                                                                        Copies to
                                                                        Mr   J   B Hibbs - SI          N E /F C G


Subject of report
                                                                        FCG file no.     N E /F C G /1 3 6 /8 9

Condition of outer perimeter brick walls                                FCG job no.      1 4 /C /5 /8 9


                                                                        Date of report           May      1989


                                                                        Key words (block capsj


                                                                        SPORTSGROUND STRUCTURES




Initiation                                                              Date(s) of visit(s)
Request from Dr C E Nicholson                                           17/4/89 onwards
Visited by                                                              Relevant papers
C J Pertee
J B Hibbs



Persons seen (names and positions)
Club and Police Officials




Summary


Following suggestions that the condition of the perimeter wall, adjacent to Gate 'C',
may be relevant to the Hillsborough enquiry, a detailed examination of the wall and
parapet walls over the Leppings Lane turnstiles was made. The survey was
subsequently extended to cover the remainder of the perimeter walls. The wall in
question was found to be distorted and lacking in lateral stability and could be
made to sway when pushed by hand. The parapet walls over the turnstiles were found
to be dilapidated with a loose pier, loose copings and loose/broken infill railings.
Other than these parts of the perimeter the remainder was in a generally adequate
condition, subject to minor repairs and pointing. Recommendations are made
regarding the remedial works considered necessary to ensure the integrity, safety
and effectiveness of the wall and parapets over the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane
entrance to the ground.



Author's name       C J 'f E R T E E
                    Principal Specialist Inspector (Construction Engineering)
                                                                Document Mo.   8 9   CONT'O


    NE/FCG/136/89
    14/C/5/89

    1.   WALL BETWEEN GATE 'C AND SOUTH STAND AT SOUTH WEST CORNER OF GROUND

         1.1   The wall is approximately 71 m (233 ft) long, stretching from Gate 'C'
         to the brick building housing turnstile 19 adjacent to Gate 'D'. The wall is
         not perfectly straight but has a slight curve on plan, being concave when
         viewed from outside the ground, and having an oblique corner at a distance of
         46.8 m from Gate 'C'.

         1.2   It is constructed from 230 mm (9 inches) brickwork, laid in black mortar,
         to a type of Flemish garden wall bond with alternate header/stretchers in
         every sixth course. The rear, or inner, face of the wall is reinforced with
         700 mm x 115 mm (27*5 inches x 4% inches) buttresses at approximately 7 m (23 ft)
         centres. The wall is capped with a precast concrete coping approximately 75 mm
         (3 inches) high and the height to the underside of the coping varies from
         2.36 m (7 ft 9 inches) to 2.98 m (9 ft 9 inches). It is constructed on sloping
         ground and the height varies in steps along its length.

         1.3   Mild steel angle brackets, curved outwards and carrying three strands of
         barbed wire, are bolted to the top external face of the wall. Some of these
         were loose and all were rusty and dilapidated.

         1.4    The wall is distorted and bowed along its length and is also out of
         plumb, leaning inwards over parts of its length and outwards over other parts
          (see Table 1, Photographs 1-4).   The maximum deflection out of plumb is
         100 mm (4 inches) leaning outwards. No damp-proof course appears to have been
         provided when the wall was constructed and the mortar near the base has eroded
         and weathered due to damp and frost action. Both faces have been repointed in
         cement mortar in the past but the original black mortar can be seen where the
         pointing has deteriorated.    It is not known upon what type of foundation the
         wall is constructed. However, the base of the stretch between the corner and
         Gate 'D' shows stepped brickwork at the base and it is possible that this is
         the top of a stepped brick foundation.

         1.5   There was some diagonal cracking in the wall at a distance of 40 m from
         Gate 'C' and again at 50 m, the latter extending for the full height of the

%        wall. In addition there were areas of loose brickwork at the top of the wall,
         and in places the concrete coping was weathered and cracked, particularly
         where the top of the wall was stepped (see Photographs 5-8).

         1.6   It was found that the wall could be made to sway and oscillate when
         pushed. For example, when pushed near the comer, some 40 m from Gate 'C',
         the wall swayed and a wave travelled to the end such that the lamp pillar
         bolted to the wall near Gate 'C' could be seen to sway and shake. Similarly,
         if Gate 'C' was pushed the adjacent wall was found to shake due to the bolted
         connections between the gatepost and the end of the wall.

         1.7   Advice was given that the wall was significantly distorted, had failed
         as a structure and was unsafe. It was considered to be liable to topple during
         high winds, or if set oscillating by crowd pressure. Consequently it was
         considered that it should be either taken down and reconstructed or stabilized
         by buttressing or other equally effective means.




                                            1

                                                                                      6 26
                                                       Document No.   g ^   C O N T ’D



BRICK PARAPET WALLS AND INFILL RAILINGS OVER TURNSTILE BUILDINGS AT
LEPPINGS LANE ENTRANCE

2.1    The perimeter of the ground between gates A-C at the Leppings Lane end
is enclosed by single-storey buildings housing turnstiles 1-16 and A-G. The
outer face of the buildings has a 230 mm (9 inches) brick parapet wall
surmounted by brick piers with an infill of ornamental cast iron railings
 (see Photographs 17-20). As the railings do not present a barrier to climbing,
but rather the reverse as they provide hand-holds, the effective height of the
wall is 3.43 m (11 ft 3 inches) ie to the bottom of the railings.

2.2   The parapet walls, piers and railings are generally dilapidated with
loose and spalling brickwork in places, loose and broken sections of railing
and loose coping stones on top of the brick piers (see Photographs 10-16).
The 230 mm x 345 rm (9 inches x 13^ inches) brick pier adjacent to Gate 'C'
has become detached from the wall and is displaced (Photographs 9 and 10).
The end of the infill railing is fixed to the pier but the opposite end of the
railing is only loosely held by the next pier (Photograph 11). As a result the
pier and attached railing are loose and can easily be rocked by hand. They are
held in position by the wooden post of a large notice board which is positioned
diagonally across the corner of the turnstile building (see Photograph 9).
However, the effect of a number of people using the railing as a hand-hold to
climb over the wall could be sufficient to pull the railings and pier over
onto the crowd below. The coping belonging to the brick pier above turnstile
16, adjacent to Gate 'B' was lying on the ground adjacent to the exit from the
turnstiles (Photograph 20).

2.3   As can be seen from the Photographs, the front of the turnstile building
does not provide an effective barrier against determined assault. The fixed
guide barrier adjacent to Turnstile 'G' provides a convenient foothold and the
parapet railings a hand-hold (Photographs 17 and 19). Similarly, the panelled
gate adjacent to Turnstile 16, together with its stay and wall brackets,
provided convenient means of scaling the wall (Photographs 17 and 18). The cast
iron railings are, in fact, broken in two at this point (Photograph 18).

2.4   In view of the general condition of the parapet wall, brick piers and
railings, and their failure to provide an effective barrier, it is recommended
that consideration be given to dismantling and reconstruction of the parapet
as a solid barrier of sufficient height to deter climbers.

NORTHERN PERIMETER WALL

3.1   The northern perimeter comprises a 230 mm (9 inches) thick brick wall,
approximately 2 m high, surmounted by a mesh fence to a total height of 4.3 m.
The perimeter forms the rear boundary of the houses fronting Vere Road and thus
has no access by the general public. It is generally in satisfactory condition
and is not considered likely to give rise to any hazards.

REMAINDER OF PERIMETER WALLING

4.1   The remainder of the perimeter walling is generally provided by the outer
walls of buildings, such as turnstiles, the south stand etc and there are no
other substantial lengths of freestanding wall.




                                   2
                                                                            62 7
                                                             Document No.   89    COTTFD




     4.2   There were sane relatively minor defects noted that required remedial
     action and these are listed below.

            (i)   The brickwork above turnstiles 35/36 and the return wall
           behind the turnstile building required inspection and repointing.

           (ii)   The screen wall to the toilets behind turnstile 43 requires
           repairs to the brickwork at the top of the wall.

           (iii)   The parapet wall above turnstiles 82-88 requires repointing.

5.   CONCLUSIONS

     5.1   The North,South and East perimeter walls of the ground appear to be
     adequate apart from the relatively minor defects noted above.

     5.2   The freestanding wall at the South West corner, between Gate 'C1 and
     turnstiles 19-22 is distorted, has inadequate lateral stability for its
     height and is unsafe and liable to topple if subjected to wind or crowd
     pressure. As recommended earlier it should be taken down and reconstructed,
     suitably buttressed or stabilized by other equally effective measures.
     Whatever course is adopted the wall should be upgraded to meet modern design
     loading criteria for sportsgrounds.

     5.3   The parapet walls and infill railings surmounting the turnstile building
     1-16 and A-G, between Gates A-C at the Leppings Lane end of the ground are
     generally dilapidated and in poor condition. In addition, the adjacent barrier
     and gate and the infill railings provide hand and foot-holds facilitating
     climbing and unauthorised entry to the ground. I consider that this parapet
     walling should be taken down to sound brickwork and reconstructed as a solid
     barrier to a height that will effectively prevent unauthorised access.




C JXPERTEE
Principal Specialist Inspector (Construction Engineering)
                                                         Document No.          89   C O N T’D



                                      TABLE 1

                   CONDITION OF 9 INCH BRICK PERIMETER WALL
                   AT SW CORNER OF GROUND BETWEEN GATE 'C'
                           AND SOUTH STAND GATE 'D'



                      Height         Deflection mm
 Distance from        Metres        relative to base
  Gate C in        to underside   (+ve towards ground)
                                                                    Comments
     Metres         of capping
                       slab        Top      Mid-Height


 0 Gatepost 'C'      2.85         -    42       -   25   Adjacent to Gatepost
2                    2.70         -    50       -   20   Leaning outwards
4                    2.72         -    55       -   22         II       II

6                    2.71         -    14       -   14        II        II

8                    2.70               0            0   Vertical
10                   2.91         +    14       +   10   Leaning inwards
12                   2.87         +     6       +    5        II        II

14                   2.82         +    22       +   12        II        II

16                   2.70         +    31       +   19        II        II

18                   2.74         +    23       +   11        II        II

20                   2.76         +     9       +    7        II        II


22                   2.98         +    32       +   14
24                   2.880        +    53       +   24        II        II

26                   2.78         +    74       +   36        II        II


28                   2.72         +    77       +   37        II        II


30                   2.66         +    77       +   36        II       II


32                   2.58         +    71       +   32        II       II


34                   2.55         +    72       +   21        II       II


36                   2.81         +    71       +   31        II       II


38                   2.8          +    52       +   26        II       II


40                   2.79         +    26       +    7        II       II


42                   2.79         -    20       -    7   Leaning outwards
44                   2.76         -    72       -   38        II       II


45.8 at buttress     2.77         -    88       -   47        II       II


46.8 corner          2.76         -    68       -   43        II       II


48.8                 2.75         -   100       -   70        II       II


50.8                 2.78         -    64       -   53        II       II


52.8                 2.78         -    34       -   27        II       II


54.8                 2.36         +     2       -    9   (Near vertical but)
56.8                 2.43         +     4       -    8   (bulging outwards )
58.8                 2.51         +    10       -   11   (at centre         )
60.8                 2.65         +    21       +   13   Leaning inwards
62.8                 2.26         +    14            0        II       II


64.8                 2.46         +     5       -   13   Bulging outwards
66.8                 2.63         +     4       -   10        II       II


68.8                 2.76         -     3       -   13   Leaning outwards
                                                              II       ll
70.8 turnstile       2.510        -    16       -   17
      building




                                                                                        629
                                                                                                  '’9:f
                                                                                                     v '   '•>




                                                      Pf40 TOCKA P14 I                                                            (N£C £LSP2-\)
V '/£ v W      C>£       5 v J   p /± & .l/*1 £ 7 £ > L   w-4-<LC_         ^ * 1 S?*^ G / f r e     k:' T O       C fiW E iV .




                                        danger
                                        KEEP OFF




                                                                                                                 P ttO T O Q Z S tP rt       2.



                                                                                                                        <53       o*r    < 2 & /z .s )

I N . T £ iL a J / M —    V t a L*J   © /=   i u i    P   - - R . i n £ -T t~ & ~   W */-(-.                     G t^ T t-   C-    T O    O ^ A )*= > C .


                                                                                                                                                     630
                                                                                                                                 CONT’ D




%




%                                                                                                                       39 0<f O s / i

    S v^r   P c i 'L l m a T ir t^   w   / X   / C   ^ O   M   C T c i/^ /N < t/2 _   7 *o   S sW TW   5 r/t( s » £ >
                                                                                                                                631
                                                                                                                    CONT’ D




          P £ tL > M £ T C :/L           W A L L                                  T d   < S A ~ r&   C   '
Z -O E x S e   ^   ( C   X   ^   C   M   ^   y\T    TOP         © /= -   W   /fc C .




                                                                                                             83   & r   fis /j.


           PtLtL.)M iE~T£j2-,            Vs/ALL-     £ .© © .S > < £ :   c5t CX^Pt
S   T c tP    /rv vv A L i —                       -v-                       /^ d H
                                                                                                                         632
 O & T B <Z.)Q>lLA TfO A i                      E>Z.IO^LOC>/iK / f 7         ^>~Z(=P
 W>f i/          {+ & (< o rf~ 7      •*- O O T S * iD £ -           <2>(^ y ^ f A C J —




                                                                                                      | s £ < S 49 OV- Z l Y / >
                                      P < ^ o T O c S /2 .A P M <5

. S W ^/(M£Te/2.               w/VOC             ^C<uJC/!K 4 ✓                             S T E P /* *
^ M i-L .   & -& J G , f { ~        7£./Zj>^A C— f^ C x z -
                               'T - / A - i                                                                             6 J   J
                                         P#Q   TC xSO J^PH    S                               (N B G          c z rs f   H ?

P A fZ -s * P c ~ T   wALC   ^Ae>c_r<£    T tt^ M S T f L c       S o ( L D /N C       /4 ~<5      -<0 3/4C^07' T O
G ?A ~T&     C.




                                                                              P f± o   roG             lt >

                                                                            (iste       S3    df'r




                                                                               L C50b»<£_ £ » U C L .K P lC i L/C. A*JD
                                                                              LOOi£_ c o P w Q
                                                                              B4iZ.i^-(?crT W'fcU- OMrc/t
                                                                              ro/^u3r»c-e'cfr a o ^ w t
                                                                               t o     S -A T tS   C




                                                                                                                         634
                                                                                  o.                CONT’ D




                                                                                  /sea              ©--»   (2, -ift


     IN F-ILJL              A E aO U vt                       £ »SD    <2>f>f iz ± S * T i±
     /Lec^^G, ft/i/oc    f/& z .   SnOow/Ji   f M fUe>7x&te/±pm- re>




%                                                                            (   h b   <,     <©0 <S*- /2a/^5
                         P/fOTOG^PAf

    Top      /4r5soU2=    S>(OOC. tfriEtC.           To«<OS7^£ W                            ..       £ 7 C
    .^oco c^G               cr^P/rvjcs                                                               DJD
                                                                                    89    C O N T ’D




                                                                                   £Ci <g^>c»r / S ?,

    £>£/CX P/JZ/Z //O P*<APl= T                             TO<A>STCLfci >5- -<?
    ^/y-e>ijO/Ao<£» c_csoSC. C < £ > P ( M G




t




                              P /io T & d M    P M - (<+■

    A   S   A-£x?> O £ -
                                                                                                            CONT’ D




    S A   /C   X .   Pl6i.il.   (N (     PACJ±P&-r               <3iJ&tL.   T O ^ K iS 'W c .f c .S   A-Q
    <>Pto uC (fO G          C_C>€>s.<£       Ce-Pr/NfCi




%




t                                                                                                              ll& fz -i

                                       fYfO f o Q   iLr y i P f - l   11>

    p A rK O -P t^ T     S J c /l-                                     A 'G                       AaAO
                                                                                                                  637
    ^PALLJfHa             E>E->C K ^ O O C          GO *O a^A . W £                       ^
                                   D o c u m e n t No.            89       CONT’D




                                                           P H o T O G & A P H -                 (1                            (H £ & -     C   S f    !-)}

                  Ac.    u r£.rw          <S<=     C Z A -7 C .       &’   AJdtiS- W / 3 3 / O ^        CoP/ng           t o            A&c. / t o s ^ v T
TO    d_/4~     G A T ^S O 7            ^ M D ‘ C c L /M & fW Q A > D £ » '               P / Z c O iD f iO         P A *± & b U -£ &     O A ~TS ^   TC> U s i- T
M ^ D                                   ,50 /=o £ - & <3£e>ckO.O




                                                                                 h'a r m w   -
                                                                                nsnntmAVtr
                                                                                 n.OSKD
                                                                                 CIKdTr
                                                                               television




                                                           p / f o T O C f - I L ^ ^ <«                                          QNlX,          C3^       IB )

P A f l A I ? /Z '7   u O r \L -   C_    A *= >   A & O L /6      1    S .h £ > ^ ^ G >                       £ A < (-
                                                                                                         fwiii


                                                                                                                                       T o th e


                                                                                                                                SOUTH
                                                                                                                                 | VISITORS lSjiW
                                    IVISITORSl                fviSITOBS
                                                                                               VISITORS                              only   i^y]
                                                                                                 ONLY
                                       ONLY                      ONLY

                                                                                                •-        j r - ”— t   ■   HOTIC4 L         r
                                                 --   M SF,                                                                                                                     "•Ik •
                                                        111®      p P ,^     1     •   t b b | 7                       IfilB            b   |
                          IMIB                   b




                                                                      pH-Q r o C LA-Pf-h C*}                                                                          C 3 P f£)
j    t   )   t   T    W     E   .    '   i   M                T o i i A   i S T ( ,( _ e   S         A   —< »      A   O    ©     A.tV TVs      C < L ^ - M / 5 « ' ' N- iG >   ^ A   C   j L

PfL& 0 / 0            ££>       & /                               /is/      f c /<_c5<2><CQO*-XO




                                                                          P ^ o r«DciM W                 Z<3

    r’Ki T c i W ^ ^                O /£v-0           <3f= C A 7 £ -fS, S W o u S / O G Cc>*2><JL£sf£           CfcP/AiC ^ 0 4 C f c O
    F/-^M            & /Z ic s < ~       C (E -iL
                                                      a,(M ->l. T O A > /3 7 V i_ £ - / £ , A O S A C a ^ ' T T Z G ,A T i^/t-i=,T     6 3 9
Health and Safety Executive
TECHNOLOGY DIVISION                                                 Document No.           g9     CONT’ D

Summary sheet of                                              FCG (block caps)
FCG inspector's report                                        NORTH EAST
Name of firm(s) (block caps)                                  rtwcaraWqBMiqcs®.
SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB                             Dr C E Nicholson, Deputy
                                                              Director, RLSD
Address
                                                              Area (name)
Hillsborough                                                  South Yorkshire & Huirberside
Sheffield
                                                              Copies to

                                                              Mr C J Pertee, PSI, NE FCG

Subject of report
                                                              FCG file no.    NE/FCG/131/89
Examination of Turnstiles A-G
                                                              FCG job no.     14/M/19/89

                                                              Date of report / ( A f e y   1989

                                                              Key words (block caps)


                                                              FOOTBALL GROUNDS
                                                              (RUNSTILES)


Initiation                                                    Date(s) of visit(s)
Verbal via RLSD                                               24-28 April 1989 (Except 27th)
Visited by                                                    Relevant papers

Mr J B Hibbs (NE FCG)                                         Makers Leaflets - copies
Mr C J Pertee (NE FCG)                                        attached.


Persons seen (names and positions)

Club Secretary and Police Officers
at Engineering Control Room


Summary


Examination of turnstiles A-G confirmed that although old, somewhat worn and in many
cases in need of lubrication/routine maintenance etc all were vrorking satisfactorily
and would each allow at least 20 persons per minute throughput.

Data on load/pedal release pressure tests, throughput and corrputer count tests are
the subject of a separate RLSD report.




Author's name       J B HIBBS
                    Specialist Inspector (Mechanical Engineering)                                    640
FI 2501 (revS/84)
                                                               Document No. g        C O N T ’D


NE/FCG/131/89                                       Technology Division
                                                    NE Field Consultant Group
14/M/19/89                                          Health & Safety Executive
                                                    Woodside House
                                                    261 Low Lane
                                                    Horsforth
                                                    IEEDS
                                                    LS18 5IW



Dr C E Nicholson                                   c:   Mr C J Pertee, PSI, NE/FCG
Deputy Director
RLSD
SHEFFIELD

SUBJECT:     EXAMINATION OF TURNSTILES A-G
USER:        SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB, HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD

INTRODUCTION



I visited the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club ground during the week commencing

the 24th of April 1989 to continue investigations at your request and in accordance

with the wishes of the judicial enquiry team headed by Justice Taylor.



I was present on site between the 24th and 28th of April with the exception of

Thursday the 27th of April and on each occasion I was accompanied by Mr C J Pertee,

Principal Specialist Inspector, Construction Engineering, North East FOG.       During

the week I examined turnstiles 17-23 (A-G) and this report contains the results of

this examination.



TUFNSTILES



Hie general layout of the 7 turnstiles A-G which feed the west terrace at the football

ground is shown in Fig. 1 of my earlier report NE/POG 14/M/18/89 and details are

confirmed in Messrs Ralph Braid & Associates drawing no. 1340/Q^.
                                                               Document No. $ 9      C O N T’ D



A general view of the turnstiles from the approach side is shown in Fig. 2 and from

the egress side in Fig. 3.



All the turnstiles were of considerable age and were noted to have been manufactured

by Messrs W D Ellison & Co Ltd, Irlam, Manchester.    Details of the turnstiles and

their method of operation are shewn in the makers trade literature at Appendix 1.



All the turnstiles were of the low pattern type and turnstiles A, C, D, E, F and G

were fitted with convex arms.    Turnstile B was fitted with straight arms.



I took detailed dimensions in all the turnstile enclosures and assisted with

functional tests of each unit.



All the turnstile ratchets were working satisfactorily and although worn, all the

foot pedals and footstep motion cams were working correctly.     Some of the lower

mechanisms were in need of lubrication, however, this did not prevent the mechanisms

from operating satisfactorily and allowing at least 20 persons per minute to pass

through each turnstile.



I noted the patent numbers on the turnstil^| which were shown as 658191 and 658226

and were marked on several of the mechanical counter cover plates.     The serial

numbers were also marked in this area but were only present on turnstile C (serial

no. 14038), turnstile D (serial no. 13263) and turnstile G (serial no. 14039).



1 noted that all the doors at the front of the turnstile enclosure were approximately

0.63 m (25 inches) wide and the opening widths were between 465 mm and 555 mm

(18.3 inches and 21.8 inches).     The heights of the openings were approximately

2 m (79 inches).
                                                          Document No.   09     CO N T ’D




The passageways through each turnstile were approximately 2 m (6 ft 9 inches) long

and 0.5 m (20 inches) wide.    The ceiling height in each passageway was

approximately 2.25 m (7 ft 5 inches).



Bie height of the turnstile tables was approximately 1.04 m (3 ft 5 inches).        The

heights of the turnstile arms and their lower skirt plates etc and the gaps between

the ends of the arms and adjacent walls in individual passageways are shown in

Table 1.



Vertical blocks of wood were secured to the walls at the     entry side of the

turnstiles in all except passageway C where a box had been constructed        on thewall

opposite the centre of the turnstile spindle.     All blocks of wood in turnstiles

except C were approximately 14 cm x 14 cm x 61 cm long (5.5 inches x 5.5 inches x

2 ft long) which were positioned with their lower ends approximately 38 cm (15 inches)

above floor level an: their central axis approximately 30 cm (one foot) forward of

the turnstile axis.



The box mounted on the wall opposite the rotating arms of turnstile C was 46 cm

(18 inches) long on its front face and 61 cm (2 ft) long on its rear face.         The

box was 24 cm (9.5 inches) deep and projected from the wall by approximately 10 cm

(4 inches). The top face of this box was approximately level with the top face of

the turnstile arm.    (See Fig. 6).



Additional wooden blocks were also fitted on the walls opposite the turnstile arms

in passageways A and B only.    These blocks were mounted on the turnstile side of

the aforementioned vertical wooden blocks and had curvedform varying from

7.5 cm (3 inches) thickness at the ingress end to 9.5 cm      (3.75 inches) thickness at

a point opposite the turnstile axis centre.     These blocks were approximately 49 cm

(19.25 inches) long and 14 cm (5.5 inches) deep and reduced the gap at the end of


                                                                                     643
                                        3
                                                        Document No.   g ^   C O N T ’D



the turnstile arm to approximately 2.5 cm (one inch).



Photographs of turnstiles A to G taken from the egress side shew the aforementioned

features together with the respective footstep cams and pedal counterweights etc.

(See Figures 4-10).



I removed several of the foot pedals from the turnstiles and two of these from

units B and C are shown in Figs. 11 and 12 respectively.



Pedal return action was achieved by a counterweight mounted on the respective arm,

these weights can be seen in^Figs. 11 and 12.



OTHER OBSERVATIONS



Efcxring my examination of the turnstiles I noted that an electronic counting system

had been installed and that duplicate switching arrangements were present on the

majority of the units.



Small roller type limit switches were noted in positions immediately above the

central boss carrying the turnstile arm adjacent to the main rotating shaft.       These

switches were arranged such that they would be actuated at each quarter turn of

the turnstile.   The central switches at units C, D and E were the only ones

connected.



Additional rat-tail switches were seen to have been positioned on the wooden frames

at the egress side of the turnstile block and were actuated at each indexing motion

by the respective turnstile arm.    However, these switches ware disconnected and

had broken tails at turnstiles C, D and E, they appeared to be connected and



                                        4
                                                                                     6 44
                                                         | Document No,   89   CONT’ D j



functioning correctly at the other turnstiles A, B, F and G.



Ioad/pedal resistance testing and throughput rate testing of the turnstiles together

with checks on the mechanical and computer counting systems are the subject of a

separate RLSD report.



It was also noted that photoelectric emitters and sensors had been arranged in pairs

across each turnstile passageway at positions above the turnstile arms as well as at

table level at the egress side.   Examination of these devices indicated that many

had been either removed or disconnected and in some cases the wiring had been cut.

Hie latter was noted on the over/turnstile sensors at units C and F.



(INCLUSIONS



Examinations of turnstiles A-G confirmed that although old, somewhat worn and in many

cases in need of lubrication/routine maintenance etc.    all were working

satisfactorily and would each allow at least 20 persons per minute throughput.



Data and load/pedal release pressure tests, throughput      and computer count tests

are the subject of a separate RLSD report.



RECOMMENDATIONS



It is reoomnencted that the gaps between turnstile arms and adjacent walls should be

reduced to the minimum practicable safe dimension in order to prevent persons

gaining access without actuating the turnstile mechanism.



In my opinion the over/turnstile photoelectric devices should be reinstated to detect

persons climbing over without actuating the mechanism, alternatively, full height



                                                                                    6 45
                                        5
                                                            Document No.   g 9    CONT'D



turnstiles (floor to ceiling) should be installed.



Where necessary, individual turnstiles should be repaired at their broken table

supporting pillars in order to improve rigidity and several of the units required

re-levelling.



End float in all the turnstile spindles should be checked and adjusted accordingly

as many exhibited approximately 4 mm lift.



All ratchets, pedal mechanisms and cams should be suitably lubricated at appropriate

intervals.




J B HIBBS
Specialist Inspector (Mechanical Engineering)




                                        6
                                                                                  6 46
                                                                   Document No.    89   C O N T ’D
NE/FCG/14/M/19/89

                                        TABLE 1

                                  TURNSTILE DATA




TUBNSTIIE NO.           ARM - WALL                  ARM HEIGHTS (CM)


      -             APPROX GAP - (CM)        SKIRT      BOTTOM RAIL*        TOP RAIL*



     A                     2.5*               28*             58                  91


     B                     2.5*               Ztr             58                  89


     C                    11.0                25              60                  91


     D                     9.0                23              59                  90


     E                     8.5                21              57                  88


     F                     6.5                21              57                  88


     G                      10                24              60                  91




i> To curved wooden block

* To c/1 of rail




                                                                                        64 7
                                                      *o    • > /   c»   J


                                                                                                                                                                                 / *               '-


                                                                                                                                                                       C a 'iti         Sc     (   j a m   St /   l


                                                                                                                                                                        L   h   Y o u ? ^ .Vt.it ^ /


                                                                                                             M       l / '"                                                             I t2^o



                                                                                                             A''                                                                   <k - £’a.-»X--‘©o </
                                                                                                                                                                        ^ *       cm         > f
                                                                                 7       * * s .,
                                                                                     C              I > ‘i                                          a                            a^ j        /Z x tp L     /& .< .*
                                     A             - V “ -V J'
                                                                                 6 /r'-^VV     / S               H * *   t   H   * fr w
                                                                                                                                 J V   >
                                                                                     >¥ / £ c >/> *           *     it*1*  l     A * \w                                  * P      A "'                     /«£
                                                                                        ',.. / , ■*          .*  *\ A A A ^       " ,A
                                                                                                                          12 \ *■■\ . '
                                                                                                               » i7 .CIS-




                                                                                                                                              ^     T K f OWL i« o P



               'To 3.W,'TfL<f<M4
                     S‘T^n >/»v Ci
                                                                                                                                                        \ y
                                               YA«j)                                                 V/\„: f)


                                                                             To w t i r i* M b
                     T o W 6V 7
                          9fA7S

                                               "TJrWfc t-                                                                                                               \
                                                                                                                                           UfcitS

                                                  I—          1
                                                                                            i i..                                                                                                       vD\

      fc ,€ F G &   $ ||tvig
                                     LftblfS
648
      # F ig . 1 - Gates and Turnstile^^Layout West Side
         NEFCG 131/89 14/M/18-19/89


        Based on Easlwood & Partners
        drw. no. 6708/8A

        See also Ralph Brade
        drw. no. 1340/04




                                                                                           NORTH   stand
                                                                                                           \


                                   TO S.W. TERRACE
                                       Standing
                                                                         PRO GRAM M ES


                                                                                                       o        SHOP




                                                              YARD              TO       YARD
                                                                            WEST STAND
                                                                               Seats

                                       TO WEST STAND
                                           Seats
                                                          TUNNEL TO                                              TUNNEL TO
                                                        CENTRE TERRACE                                          N.W. TERRACE
                                                           Standing                                    LADIES     Standing

                                                 "     r—

                                 REFRESHMENTS        LADIES              GENTS            SUBSTATION
649
AT? P C   U   f lf /S * )        / ? [ * * * / f t [& $
                                                                                                         Document No.               89         CONT’ D

662




                                                                                                                       SOUTH
                                                                                     V IS IT O R S                          V IS IT O R S
                                                                                        ONLY                                    ONLY


                  VISITORS                      v is ito rs   a5%r                  VISITORS “ S S T -                     VISITORS " J S r,


                  B          B




 (le.ntuo A \Zi 4aaJ o f-        b jfr \s L 4 L e ^           A . £ 5 . fv a w x   c v P P rc ^-c V ^ S t d o .                                    C-   U-

Fi63>

r w       m         m            t




                                     <9*1  «_1
                                      _— . !        a           jM
                                                                I    l n




  Gferxifoi u'ieijv]c-P- bufOSfcALa-o                         ft—      . fvoroi    tVie. e^<3N?s_£           S \cI   o l
                                                                                                                                               650 £     3   .
               D o c u m e n t No.   Q9   CONT’D




• •




%




%

      NA   .




                                              651
                                                               Document No.   CONT D




n                         .                          *                            £_io
Varied   N A e c V ycuv / v a S.K H   CvJc   tofnStill W   '




%




                                                                                       652
                     Document No. 8 9   c o m   |




• •




I


      xfu(oSt'iiU^




                                         653
    D ocument No.   CONTD




%




%
                      654
          Document No.   g9   C O N T ’D



••




I

      I          0 3
     C~




                                      655
                                                  uni era        co ■ m j
                                                            89




                                                                  CLi   Lf
    eCclo_V   oAec.V'vcxwv s>ka   oJ l   t ju <




I




t
                                                                  656
                       Document Mo.    C O N T ’D

fie1!




xfuJr\^V^\6_
               v
               ' -D
                   ,              06




                                                    657
                                                              Document No.   89   CONT’ D




                                                                                   C 'b
    (Vvffi^K^xyvji s v-a .   c*JL   tx>f ir\s t ^ \ e   .t/




I




                                                                                     658
                        Document Mo.   39   CONT’ D




l a m s t a Ua_   tL.         c .C \




                                                 659
                                                    Document No.   g9   C O N T ’D




    Pari At- rv\ecKcu^.s.AA   cub   tj—>fA StA\o-




f




%
                                                                                6 6 0
                     DIoc um e nt No.    CO.IT’D


*   F\<o




t

           s   f 1             C .\° i




                                               661
                                        Dccumeiri; !,o.   89   C J i i T ’D




    o A aA .   oJc   tjJ/AS'tA\c-   £                              £.20




t




t
                                                                        662
                            D o c um e nt No,   89   CONT'D


0   pv.0 \ O




    '‘^uJrvs.L'kle   '& 1




                                                              663
                                                                                                           Doc um e nt No                 con r t f
Fie \Oft




^ ed aJu (Y\£cUzurvAS.<v\   CLt   L o rrv S tJ i W -                      £3




                                            T O O IS   *c   55 * c   »   «0   W   »   »0 3 Q O »   SO 4S   0 «   7 » « » W - 4 0 0 %< »
                                                                                                     D o c um e nt No,                                 CONT'D




                                          200 »   20   )0   40 SO   90   70   90 40 3
                                                                                    0010   > SO 43   9   M   70   85 4 0 4 0 0 ’ J   K
                                                                                                                                                tM M 11M11 H 1
                                                                                                                                         X <0 !C to to w wsooio m
                                                                                                                                               , '■ • L , V , I i l t ,i . :




    (\oLTV. OuDuCi   &   k'   P/2.cLoi_




f




                                                                                                                                                                               665
                                                    D o c um e nt No.   gg   C O N T ’D


fi&UB   .




                                      l-u   1   1      ' i rn
                  10 20 30 4 0 50 60 70
                  luu




  End       o f         fkd L c J L    S h o u i'v ^    w k jc x /      £l




                                                                                          6 6 6
                                                                                                      ................■   i I . .. . . .


                                                                                D ocument No.                g                    C O N T ’D




                             2 0 0 to 20 JO 40 50 68 79 W « 3 0 0 »     ^




Su&c.   csP Pedrd.   C




                                                                                0 W » » TO400 ® M »   «   SO t t T® » « S 0 0
                         2 0 0 1 0 20 »   40 SO 60 70 W « 3 0 0 ®   J   y> *o
                                                                                . I.!.••> •,J         •                   U         -
         Document No.     89   C O N T ’D


    hG




                        < -




t
                                            6 6 8
tLLISON’S                                                                                         Document No.            89       C O N T ’D


                                          HEAVY DEEP STRAIGHT
                                              ARM TURNSTILES
                                                                                                    The illustration shows two
                                                                                                    registering Turnstiles and one
                                                                                                    Barrier.
                                                                                                        This type of Turnstile is of 2
                                                                                                    very pleasing design and is
                                                                                                    generally used at Zoological
                                                                                                    Gardens. Museums, Art Galleries,
                                                                                                    etc.. where there is a steady flow
                                                                                                    of people and not sudden rushes
                                                                                                    as at football matches.
                                                                                                        It can be supplied either
                                                                                                    resistering, controlled by foot-
                                                                                                    lever. or non-registering for ex::
                                                                                                    onlv.




                                           Ellison’s                 may be lubricated by
                                       R ush-preventive ”            rem oving the oiling screw.
                                      Footstep Motion.                   T he spindle may be
                                 T his footstep is fitted to ail     raised o r lowered to com
                                 o u r turnstiles and ensures        pensate for wear by a djust­          Miutlinf
                                 free rotation o f the spindle       ing the hexagon nut as
                                 on bail, bearings which             shown.




                                                                                                                      Approximate Weights'.
                                                                                                                      Turnstiles J-cwts. each.
                                                                                                                      Barriers 2 cwts. each.



                                                                                                                             Prices on
                                                                                                                            application.


                                                              H e i g h t o v e r a ll   3' 5*.


 W.               T.   ELLISON                       &         COMPANY                                     LIMITED
                                           Turnstile               Specialists
 ) 2 3       B O L T O N   R O A D             P E N D L E T O N                    •      S A L FTe?eg* J ,: T ^m stU es. U J L *
 Telep h o n e:Pen 2030



                                                                                                                                           . "'   f




                                                                                                         •:r r
                                                                           Document No.               8 9     C O N T ’D




ELLI S ON S
    Ii
    I1




  lI


                                  Ellison’s                                                  6 -1 0
                             “ Rush-preventive ”
                              Footstep Motion.
                             T his footstepisfitted
                             to all o u r turnstiles
                             a n d ensures free
                             ro ta tio n   of    the
                             spindle on ball bear­
                             ings w hich m ay be
                             lubricated by re­
                             m oving the oiling
                             screw.
                                T h e spindle m ay
                             be raised o r lowered
                             to com pensate for
                             w ear by adjusting
                             the hexagon nut as
                             show n.



                                                                            H e ig h t O v e ra ll   3' 5”.


                                 The illustration shows two registering Turnstiles and one Barrier. This type
                                 of Turnstile has been specially designed with extra deep convex arms to prevent
                                 creeping underneath and also more than one person passing through for each
                                 payment. They are most effective in separating the crowd into units and are
                                 highly recommended where great rushes are anticipated.
                                     Can be supplied registering only, controlled by footlever, or non-registering
                                 for exit only.
                                      Approximate Weights:—
                                                             Turnstiles 4 cwt. each.
                                                             Barriers 2 cwt. each.
                                      P ric e s on application.
                                                                                                                    Series S o , 6.




w.        T.       ELLISON                      &       COMPANY                               LIMITED
                                       Turnstile        Specialists
323      B O L T O N   R O A D             P E N D L E T O N            S A L F O R D         6         L A N C S
Telephone. Pen 2030                                                            Te'fe^/amj. T urnstiles, M an ch ester
    E L L I S O N ’S                                                                         proved P a te nt Safetv
                                                     Documerit No                                                                 *



                                                                                                  OUNTER
                                                                                                    Patent No. 658191
                                                                                                    Patent No. 658226




                                                                                         E   gi.


                                                                                 m m ?



                                                                        «    «     «
      m     m    m   i                                                      m    a m




                              mm
                                                                       &

                                         m
                                                                                                        Screws Securing
                                                                                                        To   Turnstile
%
                Made in our own Works— strongly constructed, reliable and easily read.
              The cover and base are provided with two apertured lugs through which a screw is passed—
           thus securing the counter in position on the turnstile. Provision is made for sealing in accordance
           with the requirements of the Inland Revenue Authorities, so that any tampering with the counter
           cannot be concealed.
             - Prices on application.



    W.           T.       ELLISON                     &      COMPANY                              LIMITED
                                                 Turnstile    Specialists
    3 23        B O L T O N     ROAD         •     P E N D L E T O N        S A L F O R D            *     *      L A N C S
    T e lepho ne: Pen 2030.                                                         Telegra ms:   T u rm tile J , M a n ch eite
                                                                                                                                                            S eritt So.   1'

                                                                               Document No.                   89           CONT D




           ELLISON'S
                                                                                                              H e a y y

                                                                                                  0 n * e x                        A


                                                                                                 T u
                                                                                                              rr>stiles



                                                                                     Can be supplied either registering, controlled by
                                                                                 footlever. or non-resisterins for exit oniv.

                                                                                                                             6 '       IC T
The illustration shows two registering Turnstiles
and one Barrier. This Turnstiie has been specially                        *■ ■
designed to prevent more than one person passing
through for each payment. It proves its efficiency
where great rushes have to be coped with, as it is
most effective in separating the crowd into units.
                                                                         3'6
    Approximate Weight:—
Turnstiles, 4 cwt. each: Barriers,         eacn.
                      Prices on application.


                                                                                                                   IN                         IN
             to otl                                                                                                    O v e r a ll H e ig h t   3' 5'.

                                     E L L IS O N ’S “ R U SH -PR E V E N T IV E ” F O O T S T E P M O T IO N .
                          This footstep is fitted to all our Turnstiles and ensures free rotation o f the spindle on
                          ball bearings which may be lubricated by removing the oiling screw.
                              The spindle may be raised or lowered to com pensate for wear by adjusting the hexagon
                          nut as shown.




                                                                                                                                                           -.vs
                                                                                                                                                          - S- 'C lJ ji'C j,
                                                         v   j       .
                                               ...   .   *       ,




                                                                                  S i r } C T.'Sr i - c > -   •?   '            'V




                                                                                                                                                                     672
         o
                                                                             Document No.           09          CONT’ D




                     RUSH                       PREVENTIVE
      ELLISON'S                                                                               With
       PATENT.          T U R N S T IL E S                                                  All Latent
                                                                                          Improvements

       • THE                                                                                  BUY *
        ONLY
                                                                                               NO ,
     KELIABLE
     MACHINE.                                                                             OTHERS.

     No m a tte r how cheap aT u rn stllo m ay be, ft is NO USE unless ACCURATE,
                              ABSOLUTELY UNTAM PERABLE
        A re u n e q u a l l e d f o r DURABILITY. ACCURACY, a n d FINISH.
         The following List of Gubs and ttacecowrea, amonc others, that hava
          . been supplied by us will show tliat we are the Leading Makers of
                          Turnstiles, and bare a world-wide reputation.
        R acecourses.             A sso cia tio n         Barnsley                    Aberdeen
      Manchester                F o o t b a l l C l u b s Hull City                  Scottish
      Hay dock P a ri           Everton                   W est Bromwich A               Football Union
      ]Urmincham                Liverpool                 Southampton                Hamilton
    , Chester                   Stoke                     Preston North E.                    Academical!
      Keele P a rt              Glossop                   Wolvcrhamptn W. Heart -of
      Ain tree                  B urr                     Leeds City                    Midlothian. kc.
      Ludlow                    Aston Villa               Birmingham                           Irish
      Stockton                  Bristol Rovers            Brierley Bill A. F o o t b a ll C lubo.
      Bed car                   Bristol City              Middleabroush .. Glentoran
      Leicester                 Brentford                 Crewe Alexandra Distillery
      Hooton Par!:. See. Chelsea                          Newcastle United. Cliftonville
      C r i c k e t C lu b s . Fulham                                kc. .           Shelbourne
      LancashireCoun ty Tottenham H.                           S  c o t t i s h      Belfast Celtic
      Burnley                   Southport Central
      Somerset                  Sunderland                F o o t b a il Clubs. Bohemian. 4c.
      Worcester                 Bolton Wanderers Celtic                                      Rusby
      Leicester                 Sheffield United Kilmarnock                          F o o t b a ll C lu b s.
      Leeds, kc. - ■ Woolwich Arsenal Queen’s I’a ri .                               Salford
                                                          St. Mirren            : . Leicester
%      A th le tic
      Ean!ey Park
                                Portsmouth
              ' G r o u n d s . Blackburn Rovers Glascow j{angers Brouchton Rnzrj
                                Derby County . Falkirk • .                           Oldham
                                                                                     Warrington
      tu m le y Land k Notts County                       Morton
         Atliletic Co. L<1. N otts Forest                 P ort Glasgow              Runcorn             _ •
      Lecd3 Ath. Gmds. Manchester City Dundee                                        Hull Kingston EL
     Lambez (Ireland), Sheffield Wednsdy Airdrieonlans                               Swinton -
         *c.                    ManchesterU&ited Clyde                               Portsmouth, kc.
                                                       KXSO    s    s
      Glascow Undersrround                Victoria P kt. Blackpool Manchester                 Cor. B athi
                                                                               Blackpool Tower Oo
      Clyde Navigation ITun’l New Brighton Tower
      Glasgow New SubJRyCo Liverpool Overhead By. Chester HortlculL                                    boc.
     Victoria Iie r. ColwynUy North Pier. Blackpool Central                             Pier. Blackpool
                                                                               Wallasey Ferry
      Southport Pier            .         Swinton Baths
     Bridlinclon Parade             .• Blackburn Baths                         Stretford Baths •
     S t. Annea Pier                     AJtrincham Baths                      El land Baths, k c . .
                Festival ol Empire, C rrabl Palace, 1911. 108 lU d u n * .
          P rices on application.                                  Send for Testimonial*.
     W. T. ELLISON & CO., Ltd., ENGINEERS,
                         IRLAM8-0'-TH*-MEJQMT. M A N C H E S T E R .                        . __
      Telexmm* and ('a.biet: ~ fcixisoKS I.tp ^ I io a w o
            (Three v o d a j, Rational Telephone : £»<>. *0.



                                                                                                                          673
                                                                                                     r
      IMS
                                                                  Document No.                g 9      C O N T ’D
      Health and Safety Executive

4     TECHNOLOGY DIVISICN

     Summary sheet of                                               FCG I b l o c k   capsj

     FCG inspector's report
                                                                  I NORTH EAST
     Name of firm(s) ( b l o c k   caps)                          ; Area no./PI group no.
      SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FC                                      ; Dr C E Nicholson, Deputy
                                                                  ! Director, SEL 1 RLSD
     Address                                                      i
                                                                  : Area (name)
     Hillsborough                                                 ■ South Yorkshire & Huinberside
                                                                  I
     Sheffield
                                                                  i Copies to

                                                                  | Mr C Pertee PSI NE/FCG

     Subject of report
                                                                    FCG fileno. NE/FCG/131/B9
     Examination of Crush Barriers
     Leppings Lane End Central Pen                                 FCG job no. 14/M/13/89
                                                                                              I*"
                                                                   Date of report                   Mav 1989

                                                                   Key words ( b l o c k      caps/


                                                                   SPORTS GROUNDS
                                                                   (BARRIERS)


    Initiation                                                     Date(si of visit(s)
     Verbal following major incident.  (Initially via
     AD Area 14 to assist LA)_______________________               16, 17, 13 April 1989
    Visited by                                                     Relevant papers
     Mr J B Hihbs, SI NE/FCG (All Dates)                           HMSO Code of Practice
     Yourself (All Dates)                                           'Guide to Safety at Sport
                                                                   Grounds'.
     See separate list of other H & SE staff involved.

    Persons seen (names and positions)
     Mr D Perchon (Director - Health & Consumer Ser’/ices) ,j Sheffield MBC 17 4 89
     Mr P Jackson, SEHO,               "   "       "        ; (All Dates)
     Mr M Ford, EHO                    "   "       "        I (All Dates)
     Mr W Eastwood, Eastwood & Partners, Sheffield)Club Safety Consultants & Testing
     Mr R Eastwood,            "         "   "    )Engineers 17/4/89
    Summary

    Detailed examination of both halves of the central pen, the entrance/exit tunnel and
    the crush barriers was made.

    Site measurements were obtained and photographs were taken.

    3arrier tests by Mr Eastwood and his team were witnessed which revealed that the
    barriers tested met the load requirements for type 'A' installations as shown in the
    relevant Code of Practice.

    Barrier heights and spacings did not fully agree with the recommendations in the
    *    Code of Practice 'Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds'.




                        1 /                                                                                         67 4
    Author's name       J B HIBBS
                        Specialist Inspector (Mechanical Engineering)
                                                          Document No.   g ^   C O N T ’D




    Other HSE staff Dresent


    1.   Mr S Nattrass, Area Director, Area 14 16/4/89

    2.   Mr M Janes, PSI, HQ TD3                17/4/89
    3.   Mr C Pertee, PSI Construction NE/FCG   17 and 18/4/89
    4.   Mr D Waterhouse, G7 r l s d set .i     17/4/89

    5.   Mr P Heyes, G7 RLSD SEL 1              17/4/89




%




%

                                                                                            675
                                                         Document Mo.   g9   CONT’D




NE/FCG/131/89                                      TECHNOLOGY DIVISION
                                                   NE FIELD CONSULTANT GROUP
14/M/13/89                                         HEALTH & SAFETY EXECUTIVE
                                                   WOODSIDE HOUSE
                                                    261 LCW LANE
                                                   HORSFORTH
                                                   LEEDS
                                                   LS18 5TW
                                                         4—
                                                     5    May 1989

Dr C E Nicholson
Deputy Director
SEL 1
RLSD
SHEFFIELD

SUBJECT:       EXAMINATION OF CRUSH BARRIERS
USER:          SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FCG, HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD
MAKER:         NOT KNOWN
TESTED BY:     EASTWOOD & PARTNERS, KINGFIELD ROAD,SHEFFIELD      (LAST TEST JULY 1988)

INTRODUCTION

I visited the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground on the 16th, l~th and 18th of
April 1989 at the request of Mr S Nattrass, Area Director, H &, SE, South Yorkshire
& Humberside Area following the tragedy which occurred on the 15th of April 198S.

The initial purpose of my visit was to assist in investigating the incident with
particular reference to the crush barriers.

Other members of H & SE staff present during the      first 3 days of the site
investigation are shown on the attached list.

During t h e visits I S D o k e to Mr D Perchon (Director - Health & Consumer Ser’/ices,
Sheffield MBC), Mr P Jackson (SEHO, Sheffield MBC) and Mr M Ford (EHO, Sheffield
MBC) .

Mr W Eastwood and Mr R Eastwood of Messrs Eastwood & Partners, Kingfield Road,
Sheffield were also present on site on the 17th of April 1989 and conducted a number
of tests on the crush barriers which were witnessed.

CRUSH BARRIERS

Two types of barrier were seen in the central area, the older type having half 'A'
frames embedded in the concrete steps were reported to have been installed in 1966.

New types of barrier utilizing steel box section support pillars had been installed
at several locations and again the pillars were enbedded in theconcrete steps.
Both types of barriers carried horizontal tubular type handrails of between 60 and
75 mm diameter. In general the spacing across each handrail between vertical
supports was pf the order of 1.23 m (7 ft 6 inches). Barrier heights varied
between 0.82 and 1. 15“m and the corresponding details for each barrier in the
central pen are given in Table 1 and on Ralph Brade & Associates drawing No.1340/02.

Barrier height recommended by the Code of Practice 'Guide to safety at Sports Grounds
should be a minimum of 1.02 metres with a preferred height of 1.1 metres.
                                         1                                                676
                                                                   Document No.     C O N T ’D




 A site plan and end elevation is shown in Fig. 1 which also indicates soacincs
 between barriers etc and confirms the position of the two sections which collapsed
 Drawing1^ .^1340/02" Slmilar details ^    also included in Ralph Brade & Associates

 A s K l ^ 1t e S i n ? flto!?ei ! 4 W ? 3 f {it tUImel ls ShOWn ln Fig' 2 ^   in   Brade 5
 A general view of the collapsed section of barrier 124A is shown in Fig. 3 where
        j 6 seen t^lat both °f the horizontal tubes had been severely bent prior to
 the bending over and collapse of the leg supports. The bottom ends of the latter
 nad remained m position in the ground although the right hand front column at the
 en of the barrier had broken away a small section of the concrete step.

                the top of t h e central leg of this section of barrier designated
    /1 .1S shown in Figs 4 and 4A where it can be seen that the strap has remained
in position although distorted and the rear leg has t o m from a point adjacent to
           bolt hole. The horizontal tubes which were badly corroded in the areas
underneath each strap at the top of the respective pillars appear to have fractured
after i_he support pillars have been bent over and although the tube section is
considerably thinned it appears to have been capable of carrying sufficient shear
force at the strap positions to enable the vertical pillars to be bent over under
the pressure generated by the crowd.

An inner view of the top end of the right hand pillar at connection 124A/4 (see
Fig. 5) indicates the extent of corrosion underneath the strap and underneath the
pillar head behind the gusset plate and again confirms the tearing mode of failure
from the inner edge of the rear pillar at the section through the"lower bolt hole.
The metal angles forming the legs were nominal Iv 50 mm x 50 mm x 6 mm thickness
(2 inch x 2 inch x 0.25 inches).

The fracture of the tube section from connection 124A/4 is shown in Fig. 6 where
it can be seen that the end of the tube has been bent and approximately half its
section has broken away at the time it separated from the pillar connecting strap.

The tube which was originally Ln position between connections 124A/2 and 124A/3 is
shown lying on the terrace steps in Fig. 7 and the fractures at the corresponding
ends of this tube are shown in Figs 8 and 9 respectively. The grass at the left
hand side of the fracture in Fig. 8 confirms that the tube was recovered from the
pitch after the incident.

The top of pillar 124A/2 is shown in Fig. 10 where extensive corrosion can again be
seen, particularly at the gusset plate which has corroded through. This connector
had been repaired at some time during its life and it can be seen that a section of
steel tubing had been inserted inside the original tubing. The insert was found
to be 50 mm QD x 35 mm ID and was approximately 127 mm long (2.0 inches QD x
1.375 inches ID x 5 inches long).

BARRIER TESTS

Etaring my visit to the football ground on the 16th of April 1989 I was shown a test
rig used for load testing of the crush barriers under the supervision of
Mr W Eastwood of Eastwood & Partners, Kingfield Road, Sheffield who were the
Engineering Consultants to the Club and carried out routine tests annually on
barriers at the terraces. A general view of the front section of the test rig is
shewn in Fig. 11. The front pusher arms of the rig are designed with various
fulcrum points to enable a single load from each of the main pusher arms to be
distributed to 4 points equally spaced along each section of barrier rail. The


                                                                                                 6   77
                                             2
                                                          Document No.   g9     C O N T ’D




 main pusher arms were driven forward by a pair of hydraulic rams which were
 pressurized from a small hand operated pump unit with calibrated load gauge.
 A copy of a calibration certificate for the test rig is shown at Appendix I.

 During testing, the     forward load on   the barrier was gradually increasedto a figure
 of 1.4 tons in eachof the main pusher arms and simulated a load of 400 lbs/ft run
 across the barrier as recommended for class A barriers in the Code of Practice
  Guide to Safety at      Sports Grounds'   at Annex C paragraph 1. The forward deflectio
 of the barrier rail     was measured as   shown in Fig. 12 and the tests wereconducted
 in accordance with the Code of Practice.

The left hand end of barrier 136 in the south west pen adjacent to the central pen
was found to deflect by approximately 16 mm in the forward direction on application
of the test load. The barrier recovered fully at the end of the test.

Similar tests were performed on barrier 137 in the central pen area and this was
found to deflect by 13 mm on application of the test load (400 lbs/ft run).
Barrier 137 recovered fully at the end of the test.

A further load was applied to this barrier to initiate its failure and at
500 lbs/ft run the deflection was 20 mm which gradually increased to 29 mm. The
barrier recovered to 11 mm and had undoubtedly failed under this load. The
condition of the barrier after this overload test is shown in Fig. 13. Initiation
of fracture/tearing had been produced at the central leg immediately below the
gusset plate and adjacent to the lower of the 2 rivets in the rear section of the
leg as shown in Fig. 14. The commencement of twistinc of the leg is shown in
Fig. 15.                                             '

Further tests were also carried out on barrier no. 128 which was seen to have
already Deen damaged. One of its tubes was bent outwards by approximately 55 mm
and was also bent downwards by approximately 25 im close to its centre. These
tests were again carried out in accordance with the guidance given in the Code of
Practice and at a load of 1.4 tons (400 lbs/ft run) the rail deflected by a further
16 iron and returned to approximately 4 rrm. These figures indicate a 75% recovery
as required by the Code of Practice.

The load was then increased to 1.75 tons and later to 2.1 tons where a deflection
of 40 im was recorded together with a recovery back to 13 mn. This severe over­
load was equivalent to approximately 600 lbs/ft run on the barrier but its recovery
was outside the recommended levels.

CONCLUSIONS/BARRIER TESTING

The barriers tested were seen to meet the load testing requirements of the Code of
Practice 'Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds' Appendix C Para 1 for class 'A' type.
The results of tests carried out in July 1988 on the barriers in the central pen
also confirm that the units in this area met the load test requirements of the
Code of Practice at the time of their last test although barrier 124A did not
recover fully until the third of the 3 tests recommended by the Code of Practice.
(See Appendix II).

SITE DATA

As indicated earlier in the report a site plan to scale is shown in Fig. 1 and a
sectional plan of the entry/exit tunnel is shown in Fig. 2. These details are also
shown in Ralph Brade & Associates Drawings Nos. 1340/02 & 1340/03 respectively.


                                      3
                                                                                    6 78
    CDW

                                                                D o c u m e n t No. g g       C O N T ’D
                                            DRAFT


    NE/FCG/131/89                                     Technology Division
    14/M/13/89                                        NE Field Consultant Group
                                                       Health & Safety Executive
                                                       Woodside House
                                                       261 Low Lane
                                                       HORSFORTH
                                                       Leeds LS18 5TW

                                                      J .2   May 1989

    Dr C E Nicholson
    Deputy Director
    SEL 1
    RLSD
    SHEFFIELD


^^(.F°r insertion at Page 4 of my report prior to 'Conclusions/Terrace Layout'.)


    I also examinee gates 3 and 4 leading from the central terrace area onto the

    pitch.   These gates were of similar construction and opened outwards to the

    left as viewed from the terrace.



    The effective width of the gate openings were found to be 0.81 - 0.82 m

    (32 inches approx) for gate 3 and 0.77 - 0.79 m (30.75 inches approx) for gate 4.

    The gaps in the low wall at the gate positions were found to be 1.0 m wide

    (39.4 inches) and the walls were approximately 1.07 m high (42 inches) from the

    lowest terrace step.

%
   The effective opening heights at the two gates were found to be 2.11 - 2.16 m

    (83 - 85 inches).



    It was noted that the step configurations at the two gates were slightly

   different.   Both level concreted approach areas (plinths) commenced at the

   third terrace step level but at gate 3, two risers of 0.165 m (6.5 inches)

   and 0.22 m (8.6 inches) with an intermediate tread cf 0.480 m (19 inches)
                                 q l c r
   were seen. (See FIGJ16, Negs &9©4-3r067fc3€)• The approach plinth at gate 3 was

    found to be 1.185 m (46.75 inches) wide and the step-up from the lowest terrace step

    at each side was 0.340 m (13.5 inches high).                                          „         6 7 9
                                                              Document No.   89     CONT’D


^   At gate 4 the level concreted approach area (plinth) again commenced from

    step 3 of the terrace and extended forwards to the wall by a distance of

    0.86 m (34 inches) to a single step up through the gateway which was 0.340 m

    (13.5 inches) high.   The concreted plinth area to gate 4 was 1.125 m (44.25 inches)

    wide and the step-up from the lowest terrace step at each side was approximate1y

    0.190 m (7.5 inches). See FIGS 17 - 19 which confirm the step arrangements at

    gate 3 and 4.



    Further Text Addition on P 4



^   PEN CAPACITY



    The area of the central pen was approximately 376 square metres and allowing
                                   *
       persons per 10 square metres gives a maximum capacity of 2030 persons.       The

    rated capacity for the pen was stated at 2200 persons on the drawing of the

    site provided by the club.



    In view of the variations in barrier openings in the central pen, further

    calculations have been made of the per. capacity based on the recommendations

      Para 286 of the Code of Practice.



    The total length of barriers in the left-hand side of the pen behind gate 3

    including the 14.3 metres of the front fence was   approximately 45.5 metres,

    giving 45.5 x 3.8 x 5.4 =934 persons.



    The total length of barriers in the right-hand side of the pen behind gate 4

    including the 14.4 metresof the front fence was    approximately 48.3 metres

    giving 48.3 x 3.8 x 5.4 = 991 persons.

                                             2



                                                                                             680
                                                                 Document No.   89   C O NT’D




    The revised calculated capacity for the central pen was therefore 934 + 991 = 1925

    persons.



    DR NICHOLSON



    Note:-       Please amend figures on page 1 of my report to read



         'Barrier heights varied between 0.83 and 1.15 m          '



    to comply with the revised data in Table 1.




             /


    J E HIBBS

    Specialist Inspector (Mechanical Engineering)




t                                               3


                                                                                           681
                                                        Document No.   09   C O N T ’D



 The site plan indicates that many of the barrier spacings were outside those
 recommended by the Code of Practice where it is suggested that gaps between
 barriers should not exceed 1 . 4 m width.

The slope of the terrace was found to be approximately 14 degrees and Table 1 on
page 37 of the Code of Practice recommends a horizontal distance between barriers
in peak viewing areas for the type 'A' barrier of 3.8 m at a terrace gradient of
15 degrees. Examination of the site plan confirms that in general the barriers
were arranged within this figure and consecutive gaps between rows of barriers
were in accordance with Fig. 3 on page 36 of the Code except at the areas immediately
in front of the entry/exit tunnel area.

Steps on the terraces were found to be approximately 75 mm depth with 380mm treads.
These were within the limits laid down in the Code of Practice.

CCNCLUSIONS/TERRACE LAYOUT

The spacing_,of the barriers and gaps between barriers did not fully comply with the
recommendations laid down in the Code of Practice 'Guide to Safety at Sports
Grounds'. The areas giving rise for concern were those directly in front of the
entry/exit tunnel which was seen to have a down gradient of approximately 10 degrees
for a distance of some 8 - 10 m leading to the terrace doorway openings.

PEN CAPACITY

The area of the central pen was approximately 373 square metres and allowing 54
persons per 10 square metres gives a maximum capacity of 2015 persons. The rated
capacity for the pen was stated at 2200 persons on the drawing of the site provided
by the Club.

RECOMMENDATIONS

If the area is to be re-used as terracing it is recommended that a full site survey
of the whole of this terrace and the other terrace at the opposite enc of the
football stadium should be made by a competent authority.

Where necessary, it is recommended that barrier heights should be increased slightly
in order to comply with the guidance set out in the Code of Practice 'Guide to
Safety at Sports Grounds' and any barriers which are found to be suspect should be
either strengthened or replaced with barriers of the new design. The latter should
preferably be fitted with flat or box section top rails which should be of the order
of 100 rrm vertical depth. Barriers heights should be a minimum of 1.02 metres with
a preferred height of 1.1 metres.
Where necessary the spacing of barriers should be adjusted to suit the
recommendations given in the Code of Practice and additional barriers should be
provided across the entry/exit tunnel opening area.

The arrangements for the control of spectators in the area between the turnstiles
and the tunnel to ensure that the capacity of the central pen does not exceed the
rated capacity should be reviewed and amended accordingly. In my opinion the
capacity of this section should be reduced and at least be rounded off to the
nearest hundred below the calculated capacity.




                                       4
                                                                                 6 82
                                                     Document No.   89   C O NT’ D




FUTURE ACTION

Youmay wish to arrange confirmation of the above recommendations with the Football
Club via the H & SE Area Staff and the Local Authority as soon as the official
enquiry is completed and if the terrace is to remain, most certainly before it is
re-used.

It is anticipated that metallurgical work and an engineering assessment of the
design and strength of the failed barrier will be undertaken by H & SE RLSD staff
in due course. This work will be the subject of a separate report.




 /




J B HIBBS
Specialist Inspector (Mechanical Engineering)




                                      5                                          6 83
    CDW


                                                                    D ocument No.                89   CONT’D

    NE/FCG/131/89                           TABLE 1

    14/M/13/89                   SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FC
                                 LEPPINGS LANE TERRACE

                              LIST OF BARRIERS IN CENTRAL PENS
                                                                                   a
           NO.        TYPE^     LENGTH (M)          RAIL DIA (MM)      RAIL HEIGHT M
           149          N          7.0                   60             1.10 - 1.13

           136         0           5.5+                  60             0.83 - 0.86
           136A        0           4.5                   60             0.85 - 0.87

           124A        0           6.8                   60             0.95 - 1.00

           125         0           5.3+                  60             0.92 - 0.94

           1 2 y       0           1.8                   60             0.92 - 0.96
                       /-N
           144                     2.4                   60             1.08    1
                                                                                X
                                                                                          •* n
                                                                                        . i J




           150         N           6.0+                  60             1.12 - 1.14
           137         rw>.        4.5                   60             0.89 - 0.91

           138         0           3.6 +                 60             0.89 - 0.91

           132         N           4.6                   60             1.12 — 1 l^f*
                                                                                    .




           127         L-          2.3                   75             0.95 - 0.98

           128         w           6.9                   60             0.92 - 0.99

           126         N           2.3                   75            1.14 - 1.15

                                  <t>   0 = Old     N = New

                                   * To leg centres - overall

                                  □ From nose of step behind to top of rail

                                  + From      Fence

                                        In RH pen

          Note:     Minimum recommended barrier height 1.02 metres.
                    Preferred height 1.1 metres to top of rail measured
                    from the step behind the barrier. (See Code of Practice
                    'Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds').




t
                                                                                                          684
     # 1        - Sheffield Wednesday F.C. - Leppin^Plane end.                              Tunnel to central pen
     NEFCG 131/89 14/M/13/89


     Central pen:- 2200 persons

     All dimensions in metres
     Scale 1 : 100        £----- \-                                                     SLOPE                                                                                    u.
                                                                    in                  DOWN                                                                           UJ
                                                                    o
                                                                    CM
     Drawn by:- J B Hibbs - H&SE
     Date:-19. 4. 89                                                               ENTRY/EXIT
                                                                                    TUNNEL                                                                             x    UJ
                                                                                                                                                                       O =J
                                                                                  —     3 6 5 m -----                                                                  <r u-
     Older type barriers... [                                                                                                                                          Ql O
                                                                                                                                                                       cl < r
                                                                                                                                                                       <    CL
     New type barriers.

                                          REAR WALL                                                                                 REAR WALL

                GATE                                                     CO        DOORWAY                                                                                            GO;
                                                                                                                                                         tn
                                                                                                                                                         C\l
                                                                                                                         in
                                       149
                                                                                                                         co                 150
                                                                    6 ‘3m                                                                                                                   CO
                 1*1m                                                                                     144
                                                                                                                                                                                             co




                  136                                         136a                                                 o               137                  138                      u- I
                                                                                                                                                                                                  CM
           u.                                 2'2m                               2-0m                                                           i-7 m                 u.
     to                                                                                            132                                                                                             to




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Document No.
                                                                         in                                                                                    in
                                                                         co                                                                                    co
                                      2 SECTIONS
                   124a               COLLAPSED                   125                                               7     127                           128
                                                      1*5m                                               1 '9 m                                                                                         CM
                                                                                                                   lin
                                                                                                            126                                                                                          iin
                          to                                                CO                                                                                 CO                                         CM
                          co                                                CO                                                                                 CO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   89
                                3 0m HIGH FENCE                                                                     CM        3 0m HIGH FENCE
                                                                                                                                                                                                             'O
                                                                                                                                                                                                              CO
                                                                                                                  GATE 4                                 FRONT WALL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CONT’ D
                  FRONT WALL                           GATE   3
                                                                                                                                     144m
                PLAN VIEW
O
OO
                                                 #                                %


      Fig.2 - Sheffield Wednesday F.C.                      Leppings Lane end. Tunnel to central pen
      NEFCG 131/89 14/M/13/89

      All dimensions in metres
      Scale 1 : 100 0■------.------.------
                            1   2         3
                                           1



      Drawn by:- J B Hibbs - H&SE
      Date:-19. 4. 89




      „___365m
            INSIDE



         DOORWAY                                         TUNNEL ROOF PROFILE
                                                     T
                                                     E                                                     DOORWAY
                              ENTRY —►
                                                                                  EXIT TO
                                                                                               CENTRAL
                                                                                  TERRACE
                                               TUNNEL FLOOR PROFILE                            DIVIDING




                                                                                                                          Document Mo.
      END VIEW FROM
                                                                                               FENCE
      TURNSTILES
                                                                   205m                                   END VIEW FROM
                                                                                                          TERRACE




                                                                                                                          89
                                                                                                                          CONT’ D
686
N ie   p c   ©   i 3 . i i« a R

       3

                                  Document No.   89   CONT’ D
                              Docunfent No.   89   CON I ’ D
Fm &   w- a




Connection.   1:
               2m - A   /4-                                    688
                 Document No.   09   CONT’ D




"T T a Jc u ?-
                                                                   D ocument No.          C O N T ’D
                                                                                   89
F t&   io




Gtewev'oJL ^          c^- ^rewV   cwvi.           4e£Jc'   ojf-   nj£   PevA   J^iuL'ruva^' Veo>rwA^ A(s
O^-    L •W . <f2wA    o-^   bo^rrvJ3_V   (3fc>
                                                                                                      D o c i ^ n t No           q   c)   C O N T ’D |




                                                                                      " v

                                                                                                 »        3
                                                                                                     s*       1
                                                                                                              J




                                                                        . r>'

                                                             -     Vr-                -
                                                    51           ..i- M' 'Jr'
                                                                 . 1-     g  y ' w /»»-•
                                                                                     H  C    ^   • J ( 9      f   *
                                                                        -jf* *> ■           r&$rfHwf$S
                                                         &              - 'V * ,               ••*’.- r V -i



              Xi. t 5 8 » »        •>




                                                                                                                      "•   .a*
                                                                                                                      -      # "a
                                                                                                                              ♦ i         *




                      s?- -- ' " -}>••■ •   ■
                          0tli ilfes J*ir

                      ■                         %




I2i+   A |a    F / a c K ,^ !                                                                                                                            A|tT
                                                                                                                                               691
89   C O N T ’D I
                                                           D ocument No.       C O N T ’D




                             Ovevloox*   to^Jr/ NiGtc.   cvx<JrL<xKcv'     4
    lOCX'TYXfiV   1 ^ 1 12




t
                                                                                    693
—    ■!_       t    r                        A
 1v\us.r o n       cvUj^   oveAcxxck t&cfc




                                                 694
             Document No.   39   C O N T ’D




fife ik> A




                                        695
                         Document No.   89   C O N T ’D




    B   f   im   m   m




%

                                                     696
                                                                                                                                    Document No             C O N T ’D
                                                                                                                                              - - * 33 ' *
                                                                                                                                                     *-'.'Jn,
                                                                                                                                                        'o'- ", •

           Received from Eastwood & Parfnpr*
           Monday, 24 April 1989                                                                                                                      i 1 ' ’ v r.’-. .




        Ac.-^. 1          -r^                            -if-'-'>
       «?£*.*                                                                  .
                                                                                           *7^-.*■-Vrg gSw^a* ^
                                                                                                     . . . . . .            .




                                                                        C&RTITICATE 0? CALIBRATIOH

                                                                                    SERIAL NUX3ER                          N0154




                                                                                                                                     CTI



                                                                                     •i'   -’ .   . »   A . . - -*




                                                                                     ~Z^          ,’
                                                                                                   **2 3K*V




                                                                                                                                                                  r- '!?-ir305 ?a*%:v_'




                      -.                                     ’‘ *       -           ?^*55raSS<3f'-•

                        ^wfeteSi-; r £s-3 s a & « s
                                                                                                                                                     *V
                                                                                                                                                          ivr--
                                                                                                                                                      -i*:•;.£v-i


aSsBrer^
                                                                                   ,*W*                    '_./U .




                        '^SajSSesriK ~ -
                   .■ - *'t-~-*-**?•
                        '-
                                     *i5»*•-.“’
                                              ■-
                                              --■ -
                   — . •T          «tV                   ?
                     \ , r * » -   *• . • *   ■ *■ — —   .v
                                                                        -            ^vV"'
                                                                    . *•• » .-*
                                                                              vrx
                   • **-:*•                   *-•’**-,: *-
                                                                    -
                                                                    *.•t-.&
                                                                               •**■£<> -a.r*■-: -                                                                                         697
*tM'
                    .•* »y*
                        < »* w i n j r • y*«»-■*-
                                            <w«»«                   v
                                                                    .-v- #••             ^~^                         • ■

                      * ■-^.3-                                *:                                                                -             ■**   .' * • _ r^'*H        j^rrr •,
•-•-i.r',"■.-                                                                                                                   ;C                ■'r-r -•■*•'-\T^%iK4>-'?-v -
                                                                                                                                           -ff^>s “■          * -k'■« •vj.’V .;•• •*
                                                                                                                        DATE of iss u e
                     CERTIFICATE OF CALIBRATION                                                                           15th J u l y 1988
                                                                                                                        SER Al NO.
                                                            SHEFFIELD TESTING WORKS LTD.                                         H0154
                                                            Nursery Street                                              page      op    pages
                                                            Sheffield S3 8GP                                                1               2
                                                            Telephone (0742) 726581/2
                                                            Telex (547676 Chamco G) STW




                ISSUED TO:                                                                                  Document No.        39     CONT’ D
                                                      Eastwood A P a r t n e r s
                                                      23 K in g fie ld Road
                                                      S h effield .
                                                      S11



                ORDER Ho.                             Verbal, K.E.Pinhorn.


               KADE BY:                              Enerpac


               DESCRIPTIOK:                          One h y d ra u lic pump complete w ith two h y d r a u lic c y l i n d e r s .
                                                     Tne force on the c y l i n d e r s , under an a p p lie d f o r c e i s
                                                     measured by a p r e s s u r e gauge mounted on the pump.


               IDENHFICATIOK:                        Pump: D94S005
                                                     Gauge: BG? 166 SF.
                                                     Cylinder 1: 0*77?                  Model RC 53AP9K
                                                     Clyinder 2: 0*772                  Model RC 530J8N


               KETHOI

               The c a l i b r a t i o n was c a r rie d out in a Grade C.? l e v e r arz t e s t i n g machine                                 in
               terms of the Technical u n it of f o r c e the ton f o r c e ( t o n f ) . The u n c e r t a i n t y                             of
               the f c r c e s a p p lie d during the c a l i b r a t i o n i s +C.$$.
i              Three t e s t s were made on each c y l i n d e r .

               T e s ts were made to determine the re a d in g i n d i c a t e d on the gauge a t f ix e d lo a d s .




               DATE OF CALIBRATION: 6th Ju ly 1988




      Tbis certificate is issued on the uA deiviudi& i that tt may not be reproduced
    I o th er than la full except w ith the p h o t w h ite s approval of the Issuiac
      L aboratory. All fitu n * are a c o rrect record of the measurements B ade and          Certified .
      are traceable to United Ki& fdota national itajsdardi aad to the units o f                                    A uthorised Signatory
      m easurem ent reaiised at the N ational Physical Laboratory.
                                                                                                                                                698
                                                                       Document No.    89         CONT’ D

                                                                                            SERIAL NUMBER
   CERTIFICATE OF CALIBRATION
                         SHEFFIELD TESTING WORKS LTD.                                                 N01 5<i


RESULTS
                                                C y lin d e r 04773
           ?orce                                   Heading on Gauge in n e r s c a le
               Tons                                           Tons
      Conroresaion                 Tesi                      T est 2         Test 5         Average
                0.5                  0 .5                     0.5             0.5             0 .5
                     «
                     I                    1                       4
                                                                  1               1               1
                1.5                  1 -5                     1 -5            1 *5            1.5
                     2                   <*■*
                                         C                        2            2                  2
                2.5
                                                              VJ1
                                    2.5
                                                              (V)
                                                              •
                                                                              2.5            2-5
                     3                r
                                      s                           >            3               3
                3*5                 3*5                                       3--15          3*5
                 4                    4                        4               4              4




                                           C y lin d e r 04772

          -0   rc °                               Heading on Gauge in n e r 3 c a ls

           Tons

     Compression                   Test 1                   T e st 2        T est 3         Averags
               0 .5                0 .5                      0-5             0.5            0-5
                 1                   1                        4
                                                              i               1               4
                                                                                              i




               1• >                 1 -5                     1.5             1.5             1 *5
                2                    2                        2               2               2

               2.5                 2 .5                      2.5             2.5            2.5
                ty                   3                        3               3               3

               3 -5                3-5                       3-5             3-5            3 .5
                4                    4                        4               4               4



                                                                                                                699
                                                                                   PAGE 2 OF 2 PAGES
  /     5HEFREID WEDNESDAY FC PIC
                                     BARRIER TESTING RECOUP SHEET
                                                                                                                       EASTWOOD * PARTI
                                                                                                                       CONSULTING ENGI1
        HILLSBOROUGH                                                                                                                            -Xi
                                                  COM PLETED           BY   ^>G                                        ST. ANDREWS HOUi
        SHEFFIELD                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                       2 3 KINGFIELD RO,     S o
        S6 1SW                                                                                                                               O. CO
                                                  DATE       i*r'*          n^ff                                       SHEFFIELD,               H**
                                                                                                                                             i<     <
                                                                                                                       Sll 9AS.              -      CO
                                                                                                                                                    Q.
                                                                                                                                             r\j
                                                  job   no    in/,01                                                                                *-*>
                                                                                                                                                    o
                               TEST LOAD                                     ALL DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETRES                                   H* PI
                                                                                                                                                 H-> W
IRIER   BARRIER SIZE                                    TEST 1                              TEST 2                           TEST 3              — * cf
                                                                                                                                                 vO K
        A No. OF            ifm /m    APPLIED                                                                                                    CD O
                                '     LOAD                                                                  U/LOAO           RES!     LOAO       vO O
                                                                                                                                                     a.
        SPANS                                                        LOAD   U/LOAO          RES!     LOAD
                                      TONNES
                                                                                                                                                        rT3
                                                                              O      /o o                            /OO      Cj>

                                                                              o      lo o    o                       to o




                                                         o                    o                               o      /oo     o


                                            I ’
                                                                                     /o o            IS              I o o    o




                                                                                                                                                        a
                                                         O                           loo     o                                                          o
                                                                                                                                                        o
 181                                                                                                                                                    c




                                                                                                                                                          o
                                                                                                                                                            o
                                                                                                                                                            z



   o
   o
                                       BARRIER TESTING HECOltD SHEET                                                       EASTWOOD « P A R S E R S ,
                                                                                                                           CONSULTING ^ p T H E E R S ,
          SHEFFIELD WEONESOAY FC PLC
                                                     COMPLETED BY          c,r. •/.cv'.'a/-;                               ST. ANDREWS TlOUSE,
          HILLSBOROUGH
                                                                                                                           2 3 KINGFIELD RO*~*,
          SHEFFELD                                                                                                         SHEFFIELD,
          S6 1SW                                     DATE        rC" rx.— . i*W<                                           Sll 9AS.
                                                     X)n »K» lO'.Bt
                                                                              ALL DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETRES
                                  TEST LOAD
                                                                                                 TEST 2                            TEST 3
iarrier   BARRIER SIZE                                   TEST 1
                               KN/M       * PPLIED                                                                                 REST     LOAO   1 U/LOAO
>OST                                    I LOAD                                                   RES1     LOAO   U/LOAO   %REC
                                                                    LOAO   IU/LO AO   *k REC
JO.        SPANS                        I TONNES
                                                                                                                          /o o                        o
                                                                                        lo o      o

                                                                                       loo        o                        /o o
                                                            CD                 o


                                                                                                                   C>                O
                                                            o                           /OO
                                                                                                                    o      io o      o
                                                                                         Ioo
                                                            o


                                                                                                                            fO O
                                                                                o                  o
                                                                                                                     o      lo o                          o
                                                                o                CD       loo      o
                                                                                                                                                          o
                                                                                                                                                          o
                                                                                                                                                          o



                                                                                 o        /o o
                         l-Z



                                                                                                                                                              o
                                                                                                                                                              o
                                                                                                                                                              z
o
                                               BARRIER TESTING RECORD SHEET
           *      IIEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FC PLC                                                                                                EASTWOOD ft PAR
                 HILLSBOROUGH                                                                                                               CONSULTING ENGINEERS
                 SHEFFtLD
                                                           COMPLETED BY                <•                                                   ST. ANDREWS HOUSE,
                 SA 1SW                                                                                                                     2 3 KINGFIELD ROAD,
           ..   < <                                         DATE                       ,r»^K                                                SHEFFIELD,
                                                                                                                                            Sll 9AS.
  \«\.
                                                            JOH m      KKBI


                                         TEST LOAD                                     ALL DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETRES
tRRIER          BARRIER SIZE
)ST             * No. OF               KN/M     APPLIED         TEST 1                                    TEST 2                                 TEST 3
).              SPANS                           LOAD
                                                TONNES          RESI      LOAD       U/LOAD    *L REC     REST    LOAD          U/LOAD   •AREC   RES1   LOAD    U/IQAG   */•RE(


 121                          1-2                     /         O             /<o     O        loo        O                       O       ioo    O                O        NX


                              2-3       6?            1 Ltl,    o             "l       o        1O O      O                       o       fOO    o        »5     O        IOC




 )Z Z                         1-2        L>           1 Lf-l,    o            Ki       o        loo        o          n           o       IOO     o       r?      O        lex


                                                                                                                                                                            o
                                                                                                                                                                            O
  IZ3.                         1-2      (o           »           o            10       o        lOO       o                       o       •o o    o       XI      o        l©<
                                                                                                                                                                            CO
                                                                                                                                                                            r-H
                                                                                                                                                                            o’
                                                                                                                                                                . ,,1
                                                                                                                                                                         1 oo
                                                     1 M-t|-         a    tr» pi fekG             N£l J       CCI >       l?G
 J2-M-                        1-2       (o
                                                                                                                                                                              o
                                                                                                                                                                              o
                                                                                                                                                                         .. .. 3JE
                                                                                                                                                                              -4
 JZt+-A                       1 -2 .     6?           | l<t|     o            2 C\     IZ        f>r|      O          11          5       7<l-    o       n       o        £1^!


                              Z -h       (c>          1 U l,-    c>           21       5         K*        O          1%          O       IC O    o       IQ>     o        lex



     O
     (X)
                                           BARRIER TESTING RECORD SHEET
             # C FRELD WEDNESDAY F C PLC                                                                                   EASTWOOD I PARTN1
               HILLSBOROUGH                                                                                                CONSULTING ENGINEERS
               SHEFFIELD
                                                        COMPLETED BY          r4>                                          ST. ANDREWS HOUSE,
               S6 1SW                                                                                                      2 3 KINGFIELD ROAD,
                                                         DATE        ''f*       ,r>««                                      SHEFFIELD,
                                                                                                                           Sll 9A S .
                                                         JOO MO KX.01


                                     TEST LOAD                                  ALL DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETRES
*RIER          BARRIER SIZE
;t             « No. OF            KN/M     APPLIED          TEST 1                                TEST 2                       TEST 3
               SPANS                        LOAD
                                            TONNES           RE SI     LOAD              "A. REE   RES!     LOAD        •AREC   REST     LOAO    U/LOAO   7.REC


12 5                       1 -2     (&            1 HU        o                          l( ( j     O               o   /oo               m               lOO




IZ<S                          1      (s>          1 u i \-    o         n       o         /oo       o               o    ICO    O         l(p      O       'O O




                              1                   1           O                     o     loo      o         •5     o    /oo    O                           IO O
iz i                                 (o




                                                              o                     CJ    loo       o        K |-   o   /O O     o                 O       Io    c
12%                       1- Z       (o           1 M-f                 m i                                                               )q


                         2-S         (a          1 *♦-<-#     o                     o      io o     o               o    lo o    o        /(c?    O        IO O


                                                                                                                                                              a
                                                                                                                                                             oo
                                                                                                                                                            "*£=

 12*8 A                    l-Z       Co          1 M-t|-       o        Z\          o      io o     o               o    loo      o                O       o<§,
                                                                                                                                                             r-h
                                                                                                                                                             zz
                                                                                                                                                             o

                                                                                                                                                             OO


                                                                                                                                                             o
       o                                                                                                                                                     o
       Osl
                                       BARRIER TESTING RECORD SHEET
      g fe F IE L D WEDNESDAY FC PLC                                                                       A
                                                                                                                                     EASTWOOD « P A R T N E ^ P
      ^USBOROUGH                                                                 ^
        SHEFFKLD                                  COMPLETED BY             f> G i l i f - c . / f / ' j
                                                                                                                                     CONSULTING ENGINEERS,
                                                                                                                                     ST. ANDREWS HOUSE,
       S6 1SW
                                                                                                                                     2 3 KINGFIELD ROAD,
                                                  DATE              »*?“' i...-, rifift                                              SHEFFIELD,
                                                                                                                                     SII 9A S .
                                                  JOB NO    KM.8I


                                 TEST LOAD                                   ALL DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETRES
IER    BARRIER SIZE
       * No. OF               KN/M      APPLIEp      TEST I                                               TEST 2                            TEST 3
       SPANS                            LOAD
                                        TONNES       RCSI       lOAO       U/LOAO                                  LOAO   U/LOAO            REST   10AO

                                                                                                          o                                 o             o       I   oo

                                             I                              o               lo o          o                        loo                    o

                                                                Z3                                                         o       loo      o                     /o o

                                                      o         ZZ                                                         o                              o       /o o

                                                                                             lo o                                  /oo                            lo o




So                                                                           o             lo o                                o   loo                            loo




                                                                                                                                                                           Document No.
                    1- 2                                            in        o                           o                        /C X )    o            o




                                                                                                                                                                           89
                   / ~z_                              o                                                   o                o




                                                                                                                                                                           CONT’D
 o
                                   BARRIER TESTING RECORD SHEET
            ELD WEDNESDAY FC PLC                                                                                        EASTWOOD A PARTNEifl^
      HILLSBOROUGH                                                                                                      CONSULTING ENGINEERS,
      SMEFFIQ.D
                                                       COMPLETED BY f           ‘ cc.iti *i
                                                                                                                        ST. ANDREWS H O U S E ,
      S6 1SW                                                                                                            2 3 KINGFIELD ROAD,
                                                       DATE       IT*' V — , lri^                                       SHEFFIELD,
                                                                                                                        Sll 9A S .
                                                       X)H IN)   KK8t


                             TEST LOAD                                       ALL DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETRES
IER   BARRIER SIZE
      A NO. OF            KN/M      APPLIED                TEST 1                             TEST 2                          TEST 3
      SPANS                         LOAD
                                    TONNES                RESI      LOAD   U/LOAO             RESI     LOAD   U/LOAO          RESI     LOAO   U/LOAO


                                                                                      loo      o                       lo o    o                       lo o


                                                            o                         lo o     o                o                                      lo o



3 3                                     I   if - 4 -                        o         lo o     o                       IC O    o               o       io o




                 /-z                                                                                                           o                        IC O


                                                                                               o                                                CD




                                                                                                                                                               Documor.tKo.
                                                            o                                 o                        /or.                     o


                                                           O                            /O                             /o o




                                                                                                                                                               89
                                                                                                                       /co                      o




                                                                                                                                                               CONT’D
                                        B A R R IE R T E j ^ p c    RECOUP SHEET
       (j^ F flE L O WEDNESDAY FC PLC
          HILLSBOROUGH
                                                                                                                EASTWOOD I PARTNERS,
          SHEFFB.D                                       COMPLETED BY           f*r, u,cc.,r^
          S6 1SW
                                                                                                                CONSULTING ENGINEERS
                                                                                                                ST. ANDREWS HOUSE
                                                         DATE       k^i*. ;\.^H i'Xjm                           2 3 KINGFIELD ROAD,
                                                                                                                SHEFFIELD,
                                                         Mfi   rn   HUB)                                        Sll 9A S .

                                 TEST LOAD
RIER    BARRIER SIZE                                                             ALL DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETRES
        A No. OF     i KN/M               APPLIED              TEST |
        SPANS                             LOAD                                                  TEST 2
                                                                                                                     TEST 3
                                          TONNES


                                                                                                             lo o




                                                                                                                                              Document No.
                                                                                                                                              89
                                                                                                                                              CONT’ D
                                                                                                                                       /o o
                                    BARRIEP TFSTIMfiMttErnup SHEET
     S H IE L D WEOKESOAY F C PLC
                                                                                                                        •                                                       •
                                                                                                                                            EASTWOOD A PARTNERS,
     HILLSBOROUGH
     SHEFFIELD                                        COMPLETED BY              r. n                                                        CONSULTING ENGINEERS,
                                                                                                                                            ST. ANDREWS HOUSE,
     S6 tSW                                                                                                                                 2 3 KINGFIELD ROAD,
                                                      DATE      cl"' \ .   I'l<y^                                                           SHEFFIELD,
                                                                                                                                            Sll 9AS.
                                                      JOB NO    met


                              TEST LOAD                                      ALL DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETRES
ER   BARRIER SIZE
     * No. OF              KN/M      APPLIED             TEST 1                                    TEST 2
                                     LOAD                                                                                                            TEST 3
     SPANS
                                     TONNES              RESI     LOAO     U/IOAO      *A REG       RESI          LOAD      U/LOAO       %REC        RESI     LOAO     U/LOAO       V. Rt C

                                                                            O          io o              O                    o           fOO            O               o           •oo




                                                                            o          loo               o        Z8         O           lo o            o    2 ft      o           /CO


                                                                                                                                                <*
                                                                                        Ho          o             an        Zl                           O    3    /        /       °)7
                                                                                        ry<-.d   C c i i< I# 1   >>i •»y l'( <><*    I               )


                                          I   Lf-iy                                     lo o                       /ft       o           loo             o     *8       O            »oc



                                                         O                              loo              o                   o           /oO             o    /9         o          /o c



                                                                                        fOO
                                                                                                         O         II         o           /CO            o    /z        o           /Cr


                                                                                                             >                                           o
      ~^sl                                                                              1< <         i             i{.       r           /r r                           <0          /r»
      o
                                                                                        Document No.       89      CONT’D


Dr C E N icholson



HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - CROWD DENSITIES AND PRESSURES


1       F u r th e r to ray n o te of th e 1 May.            I have been a b le     to make some p ro g r e s s w ith
       my e n q u i r i e s and d is c u s s th e s e below.


A The capacity of the terraces
2      In correspondence o b ta in e d from Dr Eastwood i t appears from h i s r e p o r t to th e
       d i r e c t o r s of S h e f f i e l d Wednesday F o o tb a ll Club Ltd and from th e a p p l i c a t i o n he
       made on t h e i r b e h a l f fo r a s a f e t y c e r t i f i c a t e d a te d 12/1/79 and 1 7 /1 /7 9 , he
       proposed t h a t th e numbers o f p e rso n s u s in g th e Leppings Lane t e r r a c e s should
       be r e s t r i c t e d to 7 ,200.       This i s 10% l e s s th a n th e maximum t h a t could be
       allow ed i n th e a re a u sin g th e Green Guide f i g u r e of 5A p erso n s to 10 sq m.
       The 10% being deduced because t h e r e were no gangways w ith in th e t e r r a c e a r e a .


3 The rough f i g u r e s used to c a l c u l a t e th e a re a o f th e t e r r a c e s to o b ta in the
       crowd c a p a c ity a re a ls o on th e f i l e and from th e s e i t i s p o s s i b l e to p l o t on
       drawing 1610/6AE th e a re a t h a t was c o n sid e re d in making th e s e p r o p o s a ls .              This
       i s th e drawing I have been giv en as showing th e c u r r e n t p o s i t i o n o f th e
       t e r r a c e c a p a c ity .   This drawing i n d i c a t e s t h a t th e t o t a l c a p a c ity o f th e same
       a r e a s of t e r r a c e s r e f e r r e d to i n th e Jan u a ry 1979 correspondence i s s t i l l
       7,200.


A From drawing 1510/6AE th e a re a s of th e pens and th e numbers of p erso ns who
       could use them a t 5A persons p e r 10 sq m l e s s 10%,                     a re shown i n th e ta b le
       below t o g e th e r w ith th e c a p a c i t i e s giv en on drawing 1610/6AE.

                                                                                                      Numbers given
                                                                                                      on drwg 1610/6AE

 S.W. c o rn e r pen                          532.6 sq m               x 5.4 x 0.9 = 2588                       2600

 C e n tra l pen                              198.8 sq m(190.8)                         966(927)      )
                                                                                                      ) t o t a l 2200
    C e n tra l pen                           201.6 sq m(192.A)                         979(935)      )

 N.W. end pen                                 322     sq m                             156A                     1600

    N.W. (lower) c o rn e r pen               206.7 sq m                               10CA                      800

    T o ta l                                 1A61.7                                    7101(7018)               7200


                                                               1
                                                                                                                     708
                                                                                         Document No.           89       CONT’D




The d i f f e r e n c e in th e a re a from t h a t g iven in th e correspondence and t h a t
 worked ou t from th e drawing in th e above t a b l e i s p a r t l y accounted fo r by th e
 c o r r i d o r now i n p la c e between th e c e n t r a l pens and th e NW pen.                          From drawing
 1610/64E t h i s has an a re a o f 26.6 sq m.


 I t should a ls o be           n o ted t h a t th e c a l c u l a t e d a re a s o f th e c e n t r a l pens have
n o t been reduced             to deduct th e a re a s a t th e mouth o f th e tu n n e l hatch ed on
 s i t e in yello w .       Presumably t h i s a re a i s so marked to keep i t c l e a r o f
s p e c ta to rs.     T h e re fo re th e f ig u r e s i n b r a c k e ts i n th e t a b l e would be th e
a re a s i f t h i s h a tc h ed s e c t i o n o f t e r r a c e was ig n o re d .


From th e t a b l e i t can be seen t h a t th e c a p a c i t i e s o f th e two c e n t r a l pens has
been o v e re s tim a te d by n e a r l y 12% on th e b a s i s o f Dr Eastw ood's o r i g i n a l
f i g u r e s (or 18% i f th e h atched a re a i s d e d u c t e d ) .               However th e b a s is o f th e s e
o r i g i n a l f i g u r e s , p a r t i c u l a r l y th e 10% a r b i t r a r y r e d u c tio n , i s q u e s tio n a b le .


Advice given i n th e Green Guide and a ls o a p p a r e n tl y r e i n f o r c e d a t a seminar
g iven by th e Home             O ffic e when th e Guide was launched i n 1972, i s t h a t th o se
b a r r i e r s which don o t meet th e Guide s ta n d a rd sho uld                      be ig n ored when
c a l c u l a t i n g th e a re a a v a i l a b l e fo r v iew ing .       Although th e Green Guide
o nly mentions spacing and s t r e n g t h i n t h i s r e s p e c t , Mr S t i c k l e y says he
in c lu d e d r e f e r e n c e s to h e ig h t i n h i s sem inar.


On t e r r a c e s which s lo p e a t around 15°, as a t th e Leppings Lane end t e r r a c e s ,
and where th e b a r r i e r s have been t e s t e d to th e 6 KN/m p ro o f lo a d , th e n an
a re a e x tend ing 3 . 8 m max behind th e b a r r i e r should be used i n th e
c a lc u la tio n .


Working from th e Ralph Brade and A ss o c ia te s drawing 1340/02, th e drawing o f
t h e i r surv ey o f th e c e n t r a l t e r r a c e s , t h i s shows many b a r r i e r s a re f a r below
th e Green Guides recommended h e ig h t o f 1.02 - 1.1 m.                                 I f th o se b a r r i e r s which
a re lower th a n 0.92 m h igh a re ig n o red i . e . allo w in g b a r r i e r s up to 100 mm
low by Green Guide s ta n d a r d , th e u s a b le t e r r a c e a re i s 119.51 sq m and
135.14 sq m which a t th e f u l l 54 p e rs o n s /1 0 sq m would o nly allow 645 and
729 p erso n s r e s p e c t i v e l y to use th e t e r r a c e s .


T h e re fo re by g e n e ro u sly a p p lie d c r i t e r i a , u s in g th e Green Guide as a b a s i s ,
th e d e s ig n a te d numbers were 60% more th a n th o s e which could be regarded as
                                                                                         Docurtrent No.       8 9      CONT’ D




         a c c e p ta b le even when c o n s id e ra b le l a t i t u d e had been g iv e n .          For in s ta n c e i f
         o nly th o s e b a r r i e r s which meet th e Green Guide recommendations were used in
         t h i s c a l c u l a t i o n , th e a llo w a b le numbers o f person s a b le to use th e c e n t r a l
         t e r r a c e s would drop to 389 and 540.


    12   A s e a rc h through th e correspondence may throw more l i g h t on how th e
         d e s ig n a te d numbers were chosen and a c c e p te d , and on why o th e r b a r r i e r s were
         i n s t a l l e d a t l a t e r d a te s as shown in th e r e v i s i o n n o te s on drawing 1610/64E.


    13   I t i s p ro b a b le t h a t a member o f th e S a f e ty Committee a tte n d e d th e Home O ffic e
         Seminar i n 1972 r e f e r r e d to in p a ra 16 and should t h e r e f o r e have been q u ite
         c l e a r how th e Green Guide was to be a p p lie d even though th e Guide i t s e l f i s a
         l i t t l e ambiguous.           I hope to o b ta in th e d e le g a te l i s t o f th o se who a tte n d e d
         th e Seminar.


    14   I t i s c l e a r t h a t some b a r r i e r s have been removed from th e c e n t r a l pens over
         th e l a s t 10 y e a rs when Dr Eastwood made h i s o r i g i n a l p r o p o s a ls .               I f l e f t in
         p la c e some o f th e s e could have in c r e a s e d th e a re a c a l c u l a t e d in p a ra s 9, 10
         and 11, which could be d e s ig n a te d fo r s p e c t a t o r s .             F u r th e r se a rc h e s w i l l have
         to be made to f in d out t h e i r d e t a i l and th e h i s t o r y o f t h e i r removal.


    15   A ll which I have s a id above assumes t h a t th e b a r r i e r s a r e p e r f e c t l y adequate
         to c a r r y t h e i r lo a d s , and ig n o re s th e e f f e c t o f co n n ec tin g a downward slo p in g
         tu n n e l, o f th e le n g th noted a t H ills b o ro u g h , d i r e c t l y in t o th e t e r r a c e s .



t   16   From c o n v e rs a tio n s we have had so f a r w ith Dr Eastwood I query w hether th e
         t e s t p ro c e d u re s u sed , could c a t e g o r i c a l l y g u a ra n te e th e r e l i a b i l i t y of th e
         b a rrie rs.       That i s w hether th e t e s t s would p ic k up a l l th e weaknesses in th e
         b a rrie r.


    17   I t appears t h a t th e t e s t p roced ure was o nly n om in ally as r e q u ir e d by th e
         Green Guide i . e . i n lo a din g th e b a r r i e r s t h r e e tim e s .            I do n o t b e lie v e a t
         th e moment t h i s would be v e ry s i g n i f i c a n t , as th e r e q u ir e d proced ure seems a
         l i t t l e e x c e s s iv e .   However as an i n d i c a t i o n o f th e s i a t e o f a f f a i r s , i t seems
         t h a t Dr Eastwood and h i s s t a f f th o u g h t th e y were i m p l i c i t l y fo llo w ing th e
         Guide.




                                                                3
                                                                                            I                                   710
                                                                                             Document      No.     89       CONT’D



    18    The p roced ure as I p r e s e n t l y u n d e rs ta n d i t , could have r e s u l t e d i n th e end
          frame i n bay 1, n o t being measured f o r permanent d e f l e c t i o n .                         (See th e n o te s
          o f my te le p h o n e c o n v e r s a tio n w ith Dr Eastwood, 5 /6 /8 9 i n r e p ly to
          q u e s tio n 3 ).


    B    The recomnendatons of the Green Guide in respect of the barriers and
         crowd densities
    19    I have had d is c u s s io n s w ith B ria n S t i c k l e y o f th e Home O ffic e P ris o n S e rv ic e .
         He i s th e s t r u c t u r a l Engineer who worked o u t th e s t r u c t u r a l p r o v is io n s i n th e
         Green Guide and i s p ro b a b ly th e most informed p erso n about what was intend ed
         to be i n i t and what r e s e a r c h o r o th e r in fo rm a tio n was a v a i l a b l e as a b a s is
         f o r th o s e p r o v i s i o n s .


    20   Mr S t i c k l e y c l e a r l y b e lie v e d t h a t b oth th e p r o v is io n s o f th e Green Guide were
         exceeded and had th e y been complied w ith , th e n th e number o f i n j u r i e s could
         have been g r e a t l y redu ced, i f n o t avoided a l t o g e t h e r .               The b a s is o f t h i s
         comment was n o t j u s t t h a t th e d e s ig n a te d crowd d e n s i t i e s were too high
         because o f th e p o s i t i o n , number and h e ig h t o f th e b a r r i e r s , b u t a ls o t h a t th e
         G u id e 's recommendations on stew arding were n o t fo llo w ed.                           C le a r ly a huge
         i n f l u x o f fans down th e tu n n e l, whatever th e le v e l o f occupancy o f the
         t e r r a c e s , was p o t e n t i a l l y hazardous.


    21   However th e r e a re c e r t a i n i n c o n s i s t a n c i e s w ith h is comments.              Mr S ti c k le y has
         a g reed t h a t many of th e p r o v is io n s of th e Guide a re vague, alm ost ambiguous.
         (This i s f u r t h e r d is c u s s e d in Appendix 'A' g iv in g a b s t r a c t s from th e Guide
         w ith comments).             He s t a t e d t h a t t h i s was d e l i b e r a t e because th e r e a re so many
»        grounds w ith w id ely d i f f e r e n t c h a r a c t e r i s t i c s t h a t i t would be im p ossible to
         g iv e d e f i n i t i v e c la u s e s w ith o u t e i t h e r u n n e c e s s a r ily p e n a l i s i n g some and
         b e in g too l e n i e n t w ith o t h e r s .     However i t was e x pected in th e Guide t h a t th e
         e n g in e e r working f o r th e club would use th e background p h ilo s o p h ie s from th e
         Guide and r e l a t e th e s e to any p a r t i c u l a r ground.               Hence when th e Guide was
         launched in 1972 a seminar was o rg a n is e d by th e Home O ffic e fo r members of
         th e s a f e t y co m m itte e s, i n which Mr S t i c k l e y e x p la in e d how th e e n g in e erin g
         p r o v is io n s o f th e Guide should be a p p lie d , in p a r t i c u l a r how to work out th e
         s a f e number o f p e rso n s who should use th e t e r r a c e s .


    22   While t h i s may seem r e a s o n a b le , a problem could have been caused because th e
         Green Guide does n o t c l e a r l y d e s c rib e th e d i f f e r e n c e between i t s g e n e ra l


*                                                                4
                                                                                                                                711
                                                                                             \ Document No.     89      CONT'D
(


         p h ilo so g h ^ and p r a c t i c a l p r o v is io n s (so much so t h a t th o s e d e a lin g w ith th e
         spacing X h e ig h t o f b a r r i e r s a r e n o t s t a t e d as being th e a b s o lu te minimum).
         I t i s t h e r e f o r e d i f f i c u l t to see how competent e n g in e e rs l i k e Dr Eastwood,
         can be c r i t i c i s e d too much fo r n o t s t r i c t l y follo w in g th e Guide or because
         th e y were too l i b e r a l in i n t e r p r e t i n g i t s recommendations.


    23   In a d d i t i o n , Mr S t i c k l e y i s now g iv in g s u p p o rt to th e I n s t i t u t i o n o f
         S t r u c t u r a l Engineers working p a r t y which i s w r i t i n g guidance c a l l e d th e
         'A p p r a is a l o f S p o rts G ro un ds', e x p r e s s l y to giv e l e s s ambiguous guidance to
         e n g in e e rs .   This s u g g e s ts some degree o f r e c o g n itio n o f th e Green G u id e's
         sh o rtc o m in g s.


    24   The re f e r e n c e s i n th e Guide to r e s t r a i n i n g crowd su rg e s s u g g e s ts t h a t i t s
         a u th o rs c o n sid e re d i t s recommendations would p re v e n t t h e s e .              Although th e
         h e ig h ts o f b a r r i e r s must have a b ig in f l u e n c e on t h i s , h e ig h ts a r e only
         mentioned i n p a ra 110.                However th e p a ra g ra p h o n ly p ro po ses i t s th e
         recommended h e ig h t to enab le th e body to t o l e r a t e th e crowd p r e s s u r e .                 There
         a re o th e r o p p o r t u n i t i e s to r e f e r to h e ig h t when d is c u s s in g crowd s a f e t y bu t
         only p o s i t i o n and s t r e n g t h a re m entioned e . g . p a ra s 118, 221, 226, 227 and
         th e p r e lim in a r y to C hapter 9.


    25   From th e video p i c t u r e s i t i s q u ite c l e a r t h a t t h e r e was a c o n s id e ra b le
         amount of sway or surge in th e crowd.                              This seemed to be r e l a t e d to th e crowd
         d e n s i t y , la y o u t o f th e b a r r i e r s and presum ably b a r r i e r h e i g h t .


    26   I t i s a ls o q u ite c l e a r t h a t a t H ills b o ro u g h th e b a r r i e r s f a i l e d to b reak up
I        th e crowd p r e s s u r e as recommended in p a ra 21.                      However th e use o f b a r r i e r s to
         c o n tr o l th e e x i t from an a re a as recommended i n th e Guide could allow surges
         in th e crowd as th e two recommendations may n o t be c o m p a tib le .                          This
         c o n t r a d i c t i o n a ls o appears i n p a ra s 113, and 114, le a v in g c o n s id e ra b le
         d i s c r e t i o n to th e l i c e n s i n g a u t h o r i t i e s .


    27   In a s i m i l a r way th e d e sig n o f a la y o u t to h e lp a crowd to d i s p e r s e when an
         ev en t f i n i s h e s may r e s u l t i n in c r e a s i n g crowd p r e s s u r e s where th e r e i s a
         sudden in g r e s s o f p e o p le .           The fanning out p h ilo so p h y f o r p e rso n s moving i n
         one d i r e c t i o n can e a s i l y form a s t e a d i l y r e s t r i c t i n g fu n n e l when th e y move in
         th e o p p o s ite way.          In g e n e r a l, in g r e s s w i l l norm ally be a t a t r i c k l e so t h a t



%                                                                     5
                                                                                                                          712
                                                                                           Document No.            89      CONT’D




       th e f u n n e llin g e f f e c t i s o f l i t t l e consequence, w hile e g re s s w i l l n e a r ly
     always be i n mass when th e fanning o u t e f f e c t i s h ig h ly d e s i r a b l e .


28 The guide i s re a so n a b ly firm about th e h e ig h t o f th e b a r r i e r s alth o u g h the
     s t r e s s on th e id e a t h a t i t i s a " v o lu n ta ry code" and "should be i n t e r p r e t e d "
    a t th e b eginning o f th e Guide could weaken th e im portance o f having b a r r i e r s
    a t th e c o r r e c t h e ig h t.      The Wheatley R ep o rt, from which th e Guide was drawn,
    e x p re ss e s th e h e ig h t recommendations much more s t r o n g l y e . g . th e h e ig h t o f
    cru s h b a r r i e r s should p r e f e r a b l y be 3 '- 6 " above th e ground".                      In a l l cases
    th e y should be between 3 '- 4 " and 3 ' - 8 " ' .                   Clause 23.5 'R ep o rt o f th e In q u iry
    i n t o Crowd S a fe ty a t S p o rts Grounds' by th e Rt Hon Lord Wheatley.


29 The recommendations concerning h e ig h t appear to have been determ ined " In o rd e r
    t o l o c a t e th e top r a i l a g a i n s t t h a t p a r t o f th e body most a b le to t o l e r a t e
    p r e s s u r e " (p ara 110).        There seems some evidence t h a t depending on th e d e n s it y
    o f th e crowd, a low b a r r i e r allow s a body t o bend over t h e b a r r i e r , p a ssin g
    th e fo rc e i t i s s u b je c te d t o , to th o se i n f r o n t .              This a c t i o n could make low
    b a rrie r s la rg e ly in e ffe c tiv e .


30 The t e s t i n g o f b a r r i e r s d e s c rib e d in Annex "C" f a i l s to make a recommendation
    about th e maximum d e f l e c t i o n .           S t r i c t i n t e r p r e t a t i o n could r e s u l t i n b a r r i e r s
    t h a t move 1 mm y e t f a i l to re c o v e r 0.5 mm being f a i l e d , w hile th o se t h a t move
    100 mm and re c o v e r 75 mm being p a ss e d .                  Although th e examples given a r s
    extreme th e y do i l l u s t r a t e t h a t w ith o u t s k i l l e d exam ination and i n t e r p r e t a t i o n
    o f th e r e s u l t s , th e t e s t s could encourage th e acc e p ta n ce o f weakened b a r r i e r s ,
    w hile r e j e c t i n g o th e r s t h a t were s a t i s f a c t o r y .     Paragraph 6 o f th e Annex does
    p o in t out t h a t b a r r i e r s should be examined i f any doubt e x i s t s about t h e i r
    s t r e n g t h , b u t th e la c k o f more p o s i t i v e a d vice cou ld e a s i l y le a d to a wide
    v a r i e t y in th e q u a l i t y o f b a r r i e r s a c r o s s th e c o u n try .


31 Paragraph 6 o f Annex "C" says t h a t d e t a i l e d i n v e s t i g a t i o n s should be c a r r i e d
    ou t where t h e r e was doubt about th e s a f e t y o f t h e b a r r i e r , such as might be
    in d i c a t e d by th e d i s t o r t i o n o f c o n n e c tio n s .    Q uite a few o f th e b a r r i e r s now
    show d i s t o r t i o n and I q u e s tio n when t h i s o c c u rre d .


32 When r e f e r r i n g to th e packing d e n s i t y on t e r r a c e s in p a ra 221, l i t t l e or no
    guidance i s given on th e c r i t e r i a which should be used to govern th e v a r i a t i o n
    between 27 and 54 p erso ns p e r 10 sq m e tre s .
                                                                                   Document Ho.          89     CONT’ D




 33 In th e 1946 Hughes Report on th e d i s a s t e r a t B olten Wanderers F o o tb a ll ground
     a maximum packing d e n s it y            o f 6.5 perso n s p e r metre was recommended.                 This was
     reduced to 5 .4 i n th e Wheatley R epo rt.                   Dr Eastwood has su gg ested t h a t average
     d e n s i t i e s o f around 8.5 were achieved imm ediately p o s t w ar,,w h ich i s s im ila r
     to t h a t which must have o c c u rre d on th e t e r r a c e s a t H illsb o ro u g h .


34 Examination o f th e             videos appear to show an in c r e a s in g v a r i a t i o n in d e n s it y
     from th e back to th e f r o n t , w hile th o se a t th e c e n t r e o f th e t e r r a c e do not
    appear to be unduly w o rried by t h e i r s i t u a t i o n .              I n i t i a l e s tim a te s from th e
    video su g g est th e d e n s it y v a r ie d from about 6 t o 10 o r 11 p erso ns p e r sq
    m e tre , so t h a t th o s e in th e c e n t r e were a t around 8 p e rso n s p e r sq m etre.


35 This r a i s e s th e q u e s tio n o f what a re s u i t a b l e d e n s i t i e s ?     I f 6 .4 was
    a c c e p ta b le i n 1946 and 5.4 in 1972, should th e Green G u id e 's c r i t e r i a be
    r e v is e d again?       I t might be t h a t peop le to d a y a re g e n e r a l l y l a r g e r and more
    r e s t l e s s , r e q u ir i n g more sp ace, a p a r t from any tr e n d towards th e p u b lic
    e x p e c tin g more com fortab le c o n d itio n s .


F u r th e r work
36 The maximum crowd d e n s i t i e s fo r v a rio u s s i t u a t i o n s sh ou ld be more a d e q u a te ly
    re s e a rc h e d .   Some work might be p o s s i b l e from th e photographs and videos of
    H ills b o ro u g h , counting th e number o f perso n s in th e s i t u a t i o n s where they a re
    o b v io u s ly a) c o n te n te d , b) overcrowded and c) in d i s t r e s s .             This work could be
    r e i n f o r c e d by packing people i n t o given a re a s and c o un tin g th e number of
    t e e n a g e r s , women and mature men t h a t w i l l a cc e p t v a rio u s d e n s i t i e s .


37 Work should be un dertak en to check ou t s u i t a b l e h e ig h ts and c o n s tr u c t io n of
    b a r r i e r s , i n p a r t i c u l a r measuring th e most e f f e c t i v e h e ig h t t h a t w i l l stop or
    s u i t a b l y reduce a crowd su rg e .


38 F i n a l l y , r e s e a r c h should be u n d ertak en in t o m odelling th e p r e s s u r e s and
    d e n s i t i e s in th e crowd a t H illsb o ro u g h so t h a t a l t e r n a t i v e la y o u ts can be
    t r i e d o u t and th e most s u i t a b l e la y o u t o f b a r r i e r s and e x i t s can be
    d is c o v e re d .   I o r i g i n a l l y c o n sid e re d t h a t a h y d r a u lic model might be s u i t a b l e
                                                                                 Document Mo.        89     CONT’ D




k
       b u t having seen th e v i d e o s , which appear to show a v a r i a t i o n in d e n s i t y a c ro ss
       th e t e r r a c e , I am now n o t so s u r e .   I w i l l t r y to o b ta in f u r t h e r a d vice on
       th is.




    M JAMES


    6 June 1989




t



#
                                                                                                                   715
                                                          8
                                                                                                 Doci                    8 9 CONT’D



        APPENDIX A



        P rrIc":Fr S 1 ^ r USE^ , ^ LE“-MT 10 C0NTR0LLING THE d e n s i t y o f s p e c t a t o r s oh
        _^RRAC^S FROM THE                GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS" (THE GREEN GUIDE)----

        -     This b o o k le t p ro v id e s guidance t o ground                          The guide c o n t i n u a l l y
              management, l o c a l a u t h o r i t i e s and t e c h n i c a l            s t r e s s e s i t s v o lu n ta r y n a tu re
              s p e c i a l i s t s such as e n g in e e rs on measures f o r              and t h a t a c o n s id e ra b le amount
              improving s p e c t a t o r s a f e t y a t e x i s t i n g s p o r ts       of in te rp re ta tio n is
              g rounds. I t i s a v o lu n ta r y code and has no                          p e r m is s i b le or even
              l e g a l fo r c e .
                                                                                           d e sirab le.
              The problem o f crowd s a f e t y a t s p o r t s grounds
              i s complex and cannot be so lv ed sim ply by                                Once a g a in g r e a t s t r e s s i s
              e n su rin g t h a t each component o f a ground,                            l a i d on th e need fo r
             such as s ta ir w a y s , p a ssa g es o r s e c t i o n s o f
                                                                                           i n t e l l i g e n t assessm ent o f th e
             t e r r a c i n g , i s s a t i s f a c t o r y i n i t s e l f . The         g u id e ' s p ro v is io n s .
             i n t e r - r e l a t i o n o f th e s e and o th e r components
             ^s e s s e n t i a l : none o f them can be c o n sid e re d
             i n i s o l a t i o n w ith o u t c o n s id e r a tio n o f i t s
             e f f e c t s on th e o t h e r s , and th e y sh ou ld a l l be
             co m p a tib le and combine to form a b a la nced ~
             u n it.                                        “    -----------------

             D e v iatio n s f r om i n d iv id u a l g u i d e lin e s a re
             g o s s i b l e w ith o u t n e c e s s a r i l y d e t r a c t i n g from    As above.
             th e o v e r a l l s a f e t y o f th e ground. The
             v a r i e t y o f ty p e , f u n c tio n and la y o u t o f
             s p o r t s grounds and th e i n t e r - r e l a t i o n s h i p o f
             th e d i f f e r e n t p a r t s o f them means t h a t a
             f l e x i b l e approach should be m a in ta in e d to
            ta k e account o f th e p a r t i c u l a r c irc u m stan c e s
            a^ in d i v i d u a l grounds, f o r th e s e re a so n s th e
            Guide does n o t a tte m p t to s e t a minimum
            s ta n d a rd which would be a c c e p ta b le f o r a
            w e ll- a tte n d e d stadium bu t e x c e s s iv e f o r a
            s m a l le r , s p a r s e ly - a tte n d e d ground; or which
            would be an a p p r o p r ia te s ta n d a rd f o r th e
I   8
            l a t t e r b u t i n s u f f i c i e n t fo r th e form er.

         I t should be borne i n mind t h a t , when u sin g
         th e Guide t o a s s e s s whether e x i s t i n g
         c irc u m stan c e s p ro v id e a d e q u a te ly f o r th e
         s a f e t y o f s p e c t a t o r s , th e c r i t e r i o n to be
         aimed f o r i s t h a t o f a re a so n a b le degree o f
         s a f e t y . I t would be u n re a s o n a b le , even i f i t                  Such term s a r e m ean in gless,
         were p r a c t i c a l , to seek th e a b s o lu te s a f e t y                  how many i n j u r i e s a re
         o f everyone a tte n d in g a ground.                                            a c c e p ta b le ?
    —                      th e guide i s an a i d t o , n o t a
         s u b s t i t u t e form, p r o f e s s i o n a l judgement and
         common s e n s e .

    13 x t fo llo w s thttJrin g e n e ra l i n a ground where
       i t i s propsed to r e t a i n a high s p e c t a t o r
       c a p a c i t y , th e measures needed to be ta k e n to
       accommodate s a f e l y such la rg e crowds a re
t      p o t e n t i a l l y more e x te n s iv e .

                                                                                                                                  716
                                                                                            Document No.           8 9 CONT’D
c
V




    16        The second type i s f a r more im p o rtan t and
              in v o lv e s crowd p r e s s u r e s . When la r g e crowds
              a re p r e s e n t and d e n s i t i e s a r e h ig h , p r e s s u r e s
              b u ild up w ith in th e crowd e i t h e r through
              motion or swaying which make i t d i f f i c u l t , or
              even im p o ssib le f o r in d i v i d u a l s to c o n tr o l
              t h e i r won movements. Under th e s e c o n d itio n s
              crowd p r e s s u r e s can e s c a l a t e t o a dangerous
              l e v e l and i f a p erso n stum bles or f a l l s th e
              crowd cannot ad ap t to a v oid him o r t o s to p to
              h e lp . Since t h i s type o f danger a r i s e s from
              crowd p r e s s u r e s i t s remedy l i e s i n t h e i r
              removal or r e s t r a i n t w ith in s a f e l i m i t s .
              These dangers a r i s e i n p a r t i c u l a r on t e r r a c e s          To some e x t e n t th e r e i s a
              and e x i t r o u t e s , and so c a r e f u l a t t e n t i o n            c o n f l i c t o f i n t e r e s t s in
              must be p a id to r e s t r a i n i n g su rg e s and                       " r e s t r a i n i n g surges" but
              s i m i l a r p r e s s u r e s on th e t e r r a c e s and to              " e n s u rin g f r e e movement"
              e n su rin g f r e e movement thro u g h o u t th e e x i t                 th rou g h th e e x i t system s.
              system s. Such f r e e movement i s dependent                               Comments about th e h e ig h t of
              upon th e c a p a c ity o f a l l th e v a rio u s s e c tio n s            b a r r i e r s would have
              o f th e e x i t systems and i n t e r a c t i o n s between                been p a r t i c u l a r l y u s e f u l
              them.                                                                       h e re .

         21               B a r r ie r s n o t o n ly serv e t o b reak u p               Gaps i n b a r r i e r s which w i l l
              crowd p r e s s u r e s b u t a ls o a s s i s t in                         allow f i l t e r e d approach to th e
              c o n t r o l l i n g movement o f f th e t e r r a c e s by                e x i t s can a llo w crowd surges
              r e g u l a t i n g th e r a t e of a r r i v a l a t e x i t s to          to d ev elo p.
              s u i t t h e i r c a p a c ity , and encouraging th e
              fo rm ation o f queues so t h a t s p e c t a t o r s a r r i v e
              a t e x i t s i n an o r d e r l y fa s h io n .

         P relim , to Ch. 8 - T e rra c e s and Viewing Slopes

              Arrangements should be made to encourage th e                               I t seems q u ite c l e a r t h a t th e
              even d i s t r i b u t i o n o f th e crowd on th e                         la y o u t a t th e Leppings Lane
              t e r r a c e s to pro v id e ease o f a c c e ss and                       t e r r a c e s d isco u rag e d an even
              e g r e s s : to c o n tr o l and f a c i l i t a t e movement,             d i s t r i b u t i o n o f p e o p le ,

t             p a r t i c u l a r l y i f a lo c a l emergency should
              a r i s e du ring th e e v e n t; and to c o n ta in
              p r e s s u r e s b e fo re th e y re a ch dangerous
              p r o p o r t i o n s . The p r o v is io n s s e t out h e re
                                                                                          encourage i s a r a t h e r weak
                                                                                          re q u ire m e n t, t h i s p r o v is io n i s
                                                                                          e s s e n t i a l . I f th e p ro v is io n s
                                                                                          w i l l o n ly a s s i s t th e n
              w i l l a s s i s t i n a c h ie v in g th e s e c o n d itio n s           a d d i t i o n a l e n g in e e rin g in p u t
               ( i . e . p a ra s 89-109).                                                i s r e q u ir e d IN ADDITION TO THE
                                                                                          GUIDES RECOMMENDATIONS.
         96   The aim should be to ensure t h a t every
              s p e c t a t o r on th e t e r r a c e s i s w ith in 12 m etres
              o f a gangway or e x i t , so t h a t s p e c t a t o r s can
              move q u ic k ly on to e x i t ro u te s a t th e end o f
              an ev en t o r i n th e ev en t o f emergency. . . .

         99   Where sin k in g gangways, l a t e r a l o r r a d i a l , i s              " ad v ise d " by sig n s i s r a t h e r a
              n o t tho ug ht to be p r a c t i c a l , t h e i r b o u nd aries          weak p ie c e o f a d v ic e .
              sh ou ld be h i g h l i g h t e d w ith p a i n t and
              s p e c t a t o r s ad v ise d by s ig n s n o t to s ta n d
              th e re .



$
                                                                                                                                  717
                                                                                     D o c u m e n t No.   89     CONT’ D




    102       Each o f th e major s e c tio n s should be
                                                                                     To minimise sway e t c . , th e
              su b d iv id e d by such means as gangways and
                                                                                     b a r r i e r s must be of a ’s u i t a b l e
              c ru sh b a r r i e r s , arra n g e d so as to minimise               h eig h t.
              th e sway and surge o f s p e c t a t o r s .

        P re lim , to Ch. 9 - Crush b a r r i e r s and h a n d r a i l s

             Many o f th e hazards a r i s i n g from crowd
             p r e s s u r e on t e r r a c e s can be e lim in a te d by
             p r o v is io n o f w e ll c o n s tr u c t e d , c o r r e c t l y
             p o s itio n e d and p r o p e r ly mounted crush
             b a r r i e r s (p a ra s 110-119).

       110 In o rd e r to l o c a t e th e top r a i l a g a i n s t t h a t
           p a r t o f th e body most a b le to t o l e r a t e                     I f t h i s i s so th e n t h e r e i s no
                                                                                    excuse f o r a llo w ing b a r r i e r s
           pr e s s u r e , th e h e ig h t o f c ru sh b a r r i e r s should      o f o th e r h e i g h t s .
           be between 1.02 m etres and 1.12 m etres above
           th e nosing o f th e s te p im m ediately behin d th e
           b a r r i e r , w ith a p r e f e r r e d h e ig h t of
           1.1 m e tr e s .

    ’ 111 cA**’ 'fl th o u 2h a b a r r i e r w ith a top r a i l o f
          50 mm i n t e r n a l d iam eter tube has been
                                                                                   Again i f t h i s i s so then a
          favoured a t many s p o r ts grounds, r e s e a r c h has
                                                                                   programme o f m o d if ic a tio n
                 t h a t t h e r e would be advantage i n th e                     sho uld be advocated.
          use o f a f l a t r a i l o f 100 mm v e r t i c a l d e p th .

      113 I d e a l l y , cru sh b a r r i e r s should be p ro v id e d
                                                                                   I f f u l l le n g th b a r r i e r s a re
          a ^°n2 th e f u l l w idth o f a t e r r a c e , w ith gaps              i d e a l l y th e b e s t th e y should
          o nly a t th e r a d i a l gangways.
                                                                                   be f o r c e f u l l y recommended.
      114 Where b a r r i e r s a re n o t continuous between
          r a d i a l gangways, th e align m en t o f gaps in
          s u c c e s s iv e rows o f b a r r i e r s on a t e r r a c e ,
          should form an an gle o f l e s s th an 60° to th e
          b a r r i e r s . There should be no more th a n 2
          c o n se c u tiv e gaps in any l i n e of gaps.
t    115 Where th e r e a re gaps i n th e l i n e of crush
         b a r r i e r s th e s e should be a t l e a s t 1.1 m etres
         and no t more th a n 1.4 m etres i n w id th .

     117             , The peak view ing a re a s a re p a r t i c u l a r l y
           a s s o c i a t e d w ith f o o t b a l l grounds and a re
           t y p i c a l l y behind th e goal a r e a s . ___

     118 l u t i n g c ru sh b a r r i e r s and h a n d r a i l s should
              cap ab le o f r e s i s t i n g th e fo r c e s in d i c a t e d
         i n th e e x i s t i n g t e s t lo a d columns of Table 2
         o v e r l e a f when a p p l i ed i n a t e s t as d e s c rib e d
         i n Annex C.............




t
                                                                                                                         718
                                                                                              Document No.   Q 9 CONT’D


%                                          ° " t e r r a c *s should be s t r i c t l y
                    7% r : ^ led ln o rd e r t0 g ^ e th e p o lic e ~ th e
                   D r o b W ° PPO:         t t y f ° r Crowd ^ n t r o l .        Less
                   as f i r L         r •k? 611•^ -rraces are
                   hnth       5 P o s s i b le in t o s e c tio n s by use of
                   which^ h o u l r i ^ 1f t e r a l b a r r i e r s o r r a i l i n g s
                          . should comply w ith th e s t r e n g t h
                   req u ire m e n ts s e t ou t in Ch. 9

        209       7TCf SS           PTt-nh must be made as d i f f i c u l t
                  —■ P o s s ib le m normal circum stances ......... .........

       215       v iith T T S - r ° th e r                       '—      -1
                 S o v id L f    ~     SlWuld n o n e th e le s s be~------
                 p ovided f o r use m an emergency ___
       217
                           ^                se f t i o n s u g g ests a method of
                  s^ fe li                8      ! n™ ber ° f PM Ple t h a t can be
                 ii nn tteerraacct ti ioonns s ^between t h e s te *k
                                                                    j j iid“i«v iidnut a° l
                 j g g tu r e g and where th e r e a re d e v ia tio n s from
                           gui e l m e s . The follo w in g p aragrap hs
                         S thf
                  n view of th e neCf
                                  wide Svi tayr i e t y o f types « Ss iz
                                                                        S e»s n—.

                and c o n d itio n ^ ° f SP° r tS 8 r °'“ d S ’ t h k r u s e ’
     221
                Where crush b a r r i e r s meet th e s t r e n g th and
                S H c in g g u id e lin e s o f Ch. 9 th e c a p a c ity o f a
                fr o m ^ h ° r Vlewing s l °Pe should be a s s e s s e d
                fn       he a re a a v a i l a b l e fo r s ta n d in g by
                     owing a packing d e n s it y o f between 54 anH
               i L person s p e r 10 sq m etres depending upon
               th e c o n d itio n o f thP                 0; 3 l 0 ? l '

    222(b) 27 p erso n s p e r 10 sq m etres when i t
                              d e v ia te s from th e recommended
           g i d e l i n e s , so as to c o n s t i t u t e a p o s s ib le
f t        hazard to i n d i v i d u a l s c l o s e l y packed.
    223        . . . . . When th e p o s i t i o n i n g and le n g th o f
              g r c T 7a            n° t ®eet w ith th e recommendations
              o f Ch. 8, p a ra s 96-100, an a p p r o p r ia t e
              r e d u c tio n should be made to th e a re a
              a v a i l a b l e f o r s ta n d in g .
    224
              gven d i s t r i b u t i o n o f s p e c t a t o r s on th e
              t e r r a c e may be d i f f i c u l t to overcome
              SS£i£i£hstnaid£g th e measures i n t h i s guide
              because s p e c t a t o r s may p r e f e r to g a th e r i n ’
              c e r t a i n p a r t s o r p a r t s o f a t e r r a c e . Ground
              gggagement should t h e r e f o r e tako such f l ^ s
              l e v e l s CC°Unt - hen a s s e s s in g s a f e e a p a r i t v




                                                                                                                    719
                                                                                             Document No.          89     CONT’D




    226      When th e s t r e n g t h o f cru sh b a r r i e r s conforms             No r e f e r e n c e to th e h e ig h t
             w ith th e g u id e lin e s b u t th e sp acin g o f such                 o f th e b a r r i e r s .
             b a r r i e r s does n o t , th e c a p a c ity i s c a l c u l a t e d
             from th e p r o v is io n o f crush b a r r i e r s in th e
             area- a v a i l a b l e f o r s ta n d in g (as d e fin e d in
             p a ra 221) as fo llo w s:

             (a)    Where a t e r r a c e c o n ta in s e i t h e r "peak
                    viewing a re a s " o n ly o r " o th e r viewing
                    a r e a s " , by m u ltip ly in g th e t o t a l le n g th
                    o f th e crush b a r r i e r s by an a p p r o p r ia te
                    d is ta n c e between b a r r i e r s (as g iv en in
                    Ch. 9, p a ra s 116-117) o r th e e x i s t i n g
                    d i s t a n c e , whichever i s th e        l e s s , and
                    m u ltip ly in g by th e a p p r o p r ia te
                    packing d e n s it y .

      227 Crush b a r r i e r s which do no t meet th e
          g u id e lin e s on th e s t r e n g t h s e t o u t i n Ch. 9
          sh ou ld m gane r- a l , be d isco u n ted f o r
          c a l c u l a t i o n p u r p o s e s , alth o u g h where crush
          b a r r i e r s a re w ell c o n s tr u c t e d , c o n s id e r a tio n
          may be given to a llow ing a lower packing
          d e n s i t y fig u r e fo r th e purpose o f th e
          c alcu la tio n .




t




t                                                                                                                                720
              RecommenJed Route
              Alternative Routes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4
              M o to rw a y   ju n c tio n s




                                                                                                                                         M62 June 2 1 - 2 2
                                                                                                                                        Contraflow
                                                                                                                                        lOoc 45 9. St S17)




                                                                            M62 June IS
                                                                            3 rd Lane closed
                                                                            0 8 3 0 - 1 3 30
                                                                            ID o ctS y . St 515.5171

                                                           M62 Wof June IS
                                                          RTA     1106
                                                          lOoc 4 5 91
                                                                                                                                                 M67 End o f M way
                                                                                                                                                 Mottram in Longendale

                                               M 6 3 June 2 - 3
                                               3 rd Lane closed
                                               lOoc i S 9. St 21i . S I71                                 MANCHESTER


       LIV E R P O O L




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       300 ddO
              l. 5


                                                                                                                                                                       waylas
                                                                                                                                                      Portwood Roundabout
                                                                                                                                                      lOoc 32S, St 2 t i . 3 3 1 . U 0 l    AS7 Approaches
                                                                                                                                                                                            to Sheffield
                                                                                                        M63 June } ~6                                                                      I S t 7SI
                                                                                                       Contraflow
                                                                                                       IO oc3 0 1 .3 26 .iS 9 . St 2S2. S I 7}




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              06
-**4
ro     GRG 8 - Recommended and Alternative Routes taken betveen L.verpool and Sheffield.                                                                                                                     JhlOt   h 0 »V
                    showing Locations of Delays                                                                          _____
                                                    DPP DOC                          91



                     ____STTS ______
                     e a a ti
                                    rwfctii w^/TV
                         orwm w lctf done




                                 »*» —<




 I
I!

                                                    Ralph Brade & Associates
                                                    C o n su ltin g Engineers

                                                    3&WW Lane.
                                                     & m* mc   S 119AE
                                                     T * 0 M 2 ) 552255




                                                      /fcUW * SAfiF/T EXECUTIVE




                                                     tot r«-

                                                      SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY
                                                           FOOTBALL CLUB
                                                           HILLSBOROUGH
                                                     o
                                                     —
                                                               CENTRAL TUNNEL
                                                           TO CENTRAL PENS

                                                                     PLAN        7 2 2

                                                    v
                                                    ~ 1:100
                                                    u
                                                    "                     |u
                                                                           ~" U / R'~s
                                                                                 1AfiorcN*
                                                           7
                                                           J40
Me ou<jw« *mk t»irwK*iTi
5*4 O**.iJ*0/«*A *>0< M.CTIOIV
                                                                mo/oi rA
                                                                                                                                                                *         iiriw   i ciAtf »• at* i<>i<a 'S*«/aj.
                                               ►. < s w /f c i M B
                                                                       i                                                                                        t    ^8* QMkTMU*riSM TMt^UOM (4«<TOU.
                                                                                                                                                                              f© W wK6 '3*0/01
                                                                                                                                                                a    ff~ rn rftf r n m iW l <M>itAJ« 0 % iM I ■ m» IX.S
                                                                                                                                                                     B t f n w i - v a g H X . i» t im ir - ,s<» 3,
                                                                                                                                                                                  <Nf»f                -4*»«*««*
                                                                                                                                                                     MkJ nMi -                  «e<B««MV iIe«l04H3
                                                                                                                                                               V aitAMJt tmmwt +** ‘-Tiiiif- Mtwi »*jcr
                                                                                                                                                                 n « A U tn v V# r» l«« ^ CM< - c»Y f T©
                                                                                                                                                                 JtCTOfW- 0«M4MG*S««/OSMC Wflfl
                                                                                                                                                               S M irons ©*■         r«iinnTl > ** PQfcJ
                                                                                                                                                                 > » O U f t u r e ^ ■ w w c i ’ «#>uC.
                                                                                                                                                                 Tft -f ^eA) » bw«




                                                                                                                                                            DPP DOC
                                        i__r




                                                                        ZZZ




                      HkMUTl
                                                                                                                                                   If 7 £


                                                                     >»• at, w*», — «r         i ta-i-*»




           Mm.OM-K,
                                                                                                                                                            Ralph Brade & Associates
                                                                                                                                                             Consulting Engineers bXftf
                                                                                         >,'       >4 ^ «   . > * + - i r*
                                                                                                                                                             M d M lv A O w it m
                                                                                                                                                             3 S fw ro » L a n e ,                              \s
                                                                                                                                                             S hatfm k! 5J1 9AE
                                                                                                                                                             T «. 0 7 4 2 ) 552255




                                                                                                                                                              HEALTH      i    SAFETY EXECUTIVE


i * ♦* .




                               GATE 3                                               GATE 4                                   CATE S
                                                                                                                                                              SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY
                                                                                                                                                                     FOOTBALL CLUB
                                                                                                                                                                      HILLSBOROUGH
                                                                                                                                CMC a* MASS *m*i             Ik*««U
                                                                                                                                                                         WEST TERRACE
                                                                                                                                                                      PLAN DETAILS OF
                                                                                                                                                                        CENTRAL PENS
                                                                                                                                                                                                         72       .

                                                                                                                                                                    1:100
                                                                                                                                                                                               _
                                                                                                                                                                     3 5 89           IIt>mnk W
                                                                                                                                                                     mo
                                                                                                                                                                                      I Oar*«t I A«aow«n
                                                                                                                                                                                     i.          !
                                                                                                                                4>*it L W fc

                                                                                                                                                                        1340/02
      DPP DOC

t=r




      Ralph Brade & Associates
      C onsulting Engineers            jv    .
             B a r* Chamtars
      ZStmnom                          \t\~~%
      S M « S 1 1 8 AF                 g g f^ ;
      T« 0 7 4 2 552255




       t£ A L T H t SAFETY EXECUTIVE




       SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY
           FOOTBALL CLUB
            HILLSBOROUGH


            CENTRAL TUNNEL
            ir WEST TERRACE

         LONGITUDINAL SECTION

          1:100
                                                                                                                                                                                          ©


                                                                                                                                                                                          Ralph Brade & Associate
                                                                                                                                                                                          C onsulting Engineers


                                                                                                                                                                                                     silBAE
                                                                                                                                                                                              •7 0    §52255



                                                                                                                             SHEETED


                                                                                                                                                                                           HEAlTH t SAFETY EXECUTIVE

                                                Tirt&tfr
                                                   OB tp v U a Z jf        Tunsttle Ltbcto
                                                                      0
                                                              G \o               TERRACE                                                                      T u rrts f*
                                                                F \          .   STAm N C                                          WEST STAND
                                                                                                                                      SEATS     NORTH STANO
                                                                                                       CATE C                                      SEATS
                                                                                                                                                                                           SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                FOOTBALL CLUB
                                                                                                                                                                  wTBtteDesentians              HILLSBOROUGH


                                                                                                                                                                                              LEPPINGS LANE END
                                                                                                     TARO OATS
                                                                                                                                                                                                 - WEST TERRACE
                                                                                                                                                                                                           PLAN


                          t—»/DktST STAND                                                                  TV WEST STAND
                                                                                                              SEATS    IT                                                                      7 5 89
                                                                                                                 i « M«j

                                                 TUNNEL TV*               S ip o * r * n t r * K *        \ \          U ---------- []                                        TUNNEL TC
                                            CENTRE TERRACE                *5 TANDINC k t lt r s iBOmm                                                                       fiW TERRACE
                                                 STANDING !               h tg h mr y                                                                                        STANDING

                                                                                 Q                                                                                                                    m        o   m
         wnkim
*~S TA fiE (N G '(ettvs
  90mm h ig h M n n
                                                                                                    15 MAY 1989                           N O TE i;-
                                                                                                                                          J- /vOOiT1onitM_ s. to. F. C. OvrveeA-
                                                                                                                                          _ £ki sr, <Sur a*jE. mot SKoconi

                                                                                                                                          2. H£.ie>nrs o f eAJ“ie&&»s a/Zje.
                                                                                                                                               NOT&O A S M<=Te*5 ■ A fS ooe.
                                                                                                                                               O«J0imA jvIC£ OA-FUM TH U S :~
                                                                                                                                              'u f e V E L - : 7 0 - S 7 m '




                                                                                                                                          D DOC
             S .W -F . C
            cu^ezfi-1 & L
            £•“*■65 1 -8
            L E o> £(_: 6 6 T ? m




        S. W . F. C
  C A j ^ e z A . <4-
 -G.AJS5 = M 6
             68- OS «>
                             u

                                                                                            f = t o c jc e   C X ^ e fS A .    2 ..




                                                                                                                                       Rev.         Date                    Oesotocion

                                                                                                                                      ©    Copyright




                                                                                                                                      Ralph Brade & Associatt
•S.W . F .C . C ^ M 6 ? A        12.
 - & f t c e s   a.—    g-

  t-£V£L: 6 S /7/h
                                                                                                                                      Consulting Engineers
                                                                                                                                      M idland B ank C h a m b e rs
                                                                                                                                      3 S h arro w Lane,
                             H                                                                                                        Sheffield SnSAE
                                                                                                                                      Tel. (0742) 552255


                                                                                                                                      CKent


                                                                                                                                                    A/54Z.W & w £ 7 y
                                                                                                                                                           EXECUTIVE
                                                                                                                                      A rch rn ct




                                       Po<_ice                I—<■-                                                                         CLOSE CIRCUIT
                                       C A « e £ /< 1.
                                         us^ & l .-. 7*J S 8 ^        H -' p o u c e .
                                                                           tA n e « A S
                                                                                                                                          TELEVISION CAMERAS
                                                                      i-£v&- 6 2 «T<4-«
                                                                                                                                            LOCATION PLAN
                                                                                                                                       Drawing Title


                                                                                          P su c fe                    9-.                SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY
                                                                                          U~u£U 70-ZS
                                                                                                                             ■© ■              FOOTBALL CLUB
                                                                                                                                                HILLSBOROUGH
                                                                                                                                                                                               72
                                                                                                                                      *“*          7 : 500
                                                                                                                                                                                 by ^   Q
                                                                                                                                      °~ 11-5-89                      D ra w n



                                                                                                                                                                      Cbee*>*d              Aoptovsd
                                                                                                                                      JobNo' 134-0
                                                                                                                                      Drg. No.                                                | Rev


                                                                                                                                                      1 3 i0 /0 5 A
                                                                                                                               SCALE



                                                                                                                                                        JO f e e t




              5,




                                     L IG H T IN G COLUMN
                                     FACING T U R N S T I L E S
                                                                               CROWD C ON TRO L
                                                                               B A R R IE R




                                                                                                                  -BRICK
                                                                                                                   STORE




                                                                                                                           GATE B
                                                                  V YN Y L COVERED M E T A L R I B B E D G ATES
                                                                                                                                       TU R N ST IIiS
                                                                                                                                            A -G
                                                                                                                                                               U urvtyed 27/U 89)
DRG 5 - Layout of Turnstiles 1 to B and 9 to 16
      DRG   - Layout of Turnstiles A to G




                                      l ig h t in g colum n
                                      fa c in g t u r n s t il e s


                                                                             RAILING S [height   3'fl"(1.12m)J
                                                                                                                         W
                                                                                                                         AL
                                                                                                                          L-U
                                                                                                                            NST
                                                                                                                              ABL
                                                                                                                                E




                                                                                         PE R IM E TE R   D RIV EW A Y
728




                                                    ______ p£?lMiIfR fence                                                    U u fy r y e d 2 6 / * ./6 S
4
                                                                                        WOODEN AftNELlING




                                                                                      WIRE MESH




                                                                                      WOODEN BLOCKS




                                                                                       WOODEN PANELLING




                                                                                       TURNSTILE




                           ELEVATION OF TURNSTILE




                                                 WOODEN BLOCKS            PARTION FROM ADJACENT
                                                                          TURNSTILE [ e x c e p t C)




                                                                                         ENTRY TO GROUND




                                        DIRECTION OF          TURNSTILE
                                        ROTATION
                                                       W IR E MESH
                                                       PARTITION


                                                 SA L E S   COUNTER

                                                                          SHELF
                         TICKET SELLER'S KIOSK




                  PLAN   OF TURNSTILE                                 SCALE

                                                                      0                 05                   1 m e tre
                                                                                       _i_                  _i
                                                                                                       3 feet                 7 29
    DRG 6   Detail of Turnstile                                                                                  [su rv ey e d 2 6 /4 /6 9 ]
                         POLICE                     CONTROL                        BOX.


                               —      HILLSBOROUGH —
                                                                                                                                            99




                             1.C1 m
                         (3 ‘3 V )                                                        R2
                        WINDOW                                          WINOOW




                                                                            Telephone /    . .
                                                                             Battery
                                                                           Equipment




                                                                                                        CONTROL PANELS / MONITORS

                                  FRONT         E L E V A T IO N
                                                                                                        1          LEPPtNGS        LANE      ( o a t side   ground

                                                                                                         2         PEttfSTONE        *d .     1--------   -----
                                                                                                         3         GROUND COVERAGE                { colour }

                                                                                                        4          SPIOH    KOP
                                                                                                         5         LEPPMGS LANE             END
                                                                                                 3Z71   R1
                                                                                                                   RECORDING
                                                                                                        R2
    B a tte r y /
Radio / Telephone
    Equipment                                            radios
                       map
 Beneatn Qesk
                                                                                                                   TELEPHONES


                                                                                                        T1          CLUB      INTERNAL

                                                                                                         T2          HAMMERTON Rd. PS.
                                                                                                                   ( in te rn al t e x t e r n a l)
                                                    S 9 t.                        Px.
                                                                                 RYAN                    T3         EXTERNAL        LW£
                                                   GODDARD




                                                                                                                       RADIOS


                                                                                                              rl       CHANNEL 19

                                                                                                              et       SPARE ( e f t )

                                                                                                              ri       CLUB     INTERNAL

                                                                                                   {/         rk       U.H.F. SET


                    CAMERA     COWTROl      DESK


                                           R2




                                          ?x.
                                      BICHARO




                                      plan           e l e v a t io n
                                                                                                                                                                                                            *




                                    Plan View of Tunnel




                                                                                                        UND ERNEATH OF WE ST S TAND
                                                          roof   of   tunnel




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   o
TO TURNSTILES                                                                                                                                                         OIVIOING FENCE THROUGH
                                                                                                                                                                      CENTRE OF TERRACE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                FENCE
                                                                                                                    S * * *   floor

                                                                                                                                                                                                                FENCE SUPPORT



                                                                                                                                                                                                                        QAROINGS
                                                                                                                                                      TERRACES




                                                                                                                                                                            GRADE 23%
                                                                                                               GRAOE 1 7%             LEVEL
                                                                           GRADE 8 5 %    GRADE 12.5%                                                                             1 in 4.5
                 GRAOE      6 Vo             GRAQE 2.1%
                                              1 in 47                          lif t 12
                      1 in l6


                                                                                                                                              SCAII
                                                                                                                                              0--                                                 75
 ''v l
                                                                                                                                                        *1       io          15              20    25   SO1*1
 ’ si
                       3           Long Section through Tunnel and Terraces showing Approximate Gradients                                                                                                           {surveyed 2S/4./89)
                DRG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 o
                                                                                                                                P O S I T IO N S   OF A D V E R T IS I N G   H O A R D IN G S

                                      P O SITIO N S   OF   A D V ER T ISIN G   HOA RD IN G S

                                                                                                                                                                      in place             ?n place   in ptace
                                                                                         missing
                                                                                                                         GATE              GAT
                                                                    GATE




                                                                                                                                   GATES
                                                                                                              HOARDING
                                                                                                   HOAROING
                                                                               HOBOING
                                    HOARDING




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GATE!
                                                                                                                                                                                      SCALC


""4
0-1
N > n n r   1 . W p c t ^ ta n rt   and   Tprraces, Leooinqs Lane End, Hillsborough Ground
                                             CENTRAL PEN                   WEST STAND HILLSBOROUGH (2200 Persons)                                                                                              K>
                                            t t s a s a i g g a s f . a 1" ■l'M = g = g = s = s a ! S ! =a s a ! ! m a g s a i B g a a 8 S a = g =; := S i a ^ =^   ^




                                                                                                                                                    ELEVATION, PERIMETER FENCE

   rvj
   o

                                              126
C O
d m                      12B         127                             12S                                      124

i r —t
fansas
                                                 132


                               137                                               136 A                              136
             138


                                                                                                                                    -Fenct
CD       i
                                            1U
                   150



                                                                                                                                                                                 ac
                                                                                                                                                                                 CL

                                                                                         PEN No.3.
                                                                                                                                                                                 -<

                                                         Apprat14
                                PLAN VIEW




                                                                                                                                                                                  z

                                                                                                                                                                                  to
                                                       Approx 1-1S




                                                                                                                                                                                       No U n au th o ris# H
                                                                                                                                                                                             Copymp




                                                       m                                               SCALE 1:100
                                                                                                                                                                                           PRIVATE AND
                                                                                                                                                                                           CONROENTTAL




                                           SHEFFIELD HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES. 1 BARKERS P O O L . SHEFFIELD S1 1EN                                                                            »


      #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PILLAR         CATE CATCH      GATES
                  PILLAR                                                                  PILLAR                         TUNNEL                                PILLAR


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             X           —       -7—       5




                                                                                                                                                                                                Design A,ht 3*11"   11.2m)
                  Design A, ht 3*11" <1.2m)


                                                                                                                                            Design B, ht 3 11* ( 1 2 m )




                                                                                                                                                                                  Bowed outward


                                                                                                                                                            DesignB, ht 3 '2 " (0.975 m)                      Design B , ht 3*2 “ (0 .97 $ m )
              Design B.ht   3 ’1* 1 09 5m )                             Design B,ht 3 '1 " (0 95m )




                                                                                                                                Design A .h t 3'11M12m)



                                                                                                                                                                                           Bowed outward
                                         Barriers and supports broken
                                                                                                                                                            Design B, ht 3 '6 " (1 05m J   Design B .h t 3*6" <1-05 ml
             Design B ht V 5 " - 3*8" (1.03-t12m]          ( Design B)___________ Design B, ht 3 ’ 6 ‘* h 05m)




                                                                                                                                         Design A .h t W O ' " 11 22 m)




                                                                                                                                                  Gate (.
                 ~f           ”     " "j         ”        (   G»1t 3          T                                                                                                  Fence^broken       Fence broken         Fence broken
              Pence bowed         Fence bowed        Fence bowed          Fence byw«d                            Fence broken
              outward             outward            outward              outward




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DPP DOC
                              CRUSH BA R RIERS          ARE   OF    TWO    DES IG N S -


                                  A                             B




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         men :s

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               30 feet




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  103
7 3 4




        DRG 2.- Middle Terrace, Leppings lane End, showing details of Crush Barriers and Fences
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  {surveyed 7 V W B 9 - 7S/V89)
    TYPlfA l   BARRIER CONSTRUCTION
         CENTRAL PEN , WEST STAND, HILLSBOROUGH
                                                                                                       HEIGHT FROM STEP 'A‘                                                H*. FROM STEP A

                                                                                                       HEIGHT FROM NOSING'B‘                                               Ht. FROM NOSING B'




                                                            CONCRETE STEPS                                                             CONCRETE STEPS



                                                                   OLD TYPE                                                            NEW TYPE
                                                  50mm « 50mm ANGLE IRON POST AND              SCALE                              150mm * 100mm BOX SECTION VERTICAL
                                                  STRAINER WITH MILD STEEL REINFORCING                                            STEEL POSTS WITH 60mm Dia. TUBULAR
                                                  PLATE BOLTED AT THE TOP                                                         STEEL BARKER,
                                                  8mm THICK BRACKET BOLTED TO POST
                                                  AND STRAINER TO CONTAIN 60mm Dia.
                                                  TUBULAR STEEL BARRIER.
                                                                                                                                                                        N o U n a u th o ris e d
                                                                                                                                                                             C o p y in g


                                                                                                                                                                           PRIVATE AND
                                                                                                                                                                           CONFIDENTIAL



                                                                                                                                                                       •ham 4   M   wiC   m m   Sm+m




                                                                              SHEFFIELD HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES.          1 BARKERS POOL. SHEFFELD SI 1EN.
s                                                                                                                                    B12
                                                             DPP DOC 105
 TYPICAL DETAIL OF PERIMETER FENCE
         CENTRAL PEN, WEST STAND, HILLSBOROUGH




           0/A HEIGHT
           APPROX 2950




                         TYPIC AL DETAIL   OF   PERIMETER   FENCE
                         TAKEN AT GATE     TO   PEN No. 3              NO U n a u t h o r i s e d
                                                                                Cop/inq

                                                                         PRIVATE AND
                                                                         CONFIDENTIAL
                         SCALE   1-20
                                                                    D n c a r gt Hm Mi m l Ccntuma S a n a




SHEFFIELD HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES. 1 BARKERS POOL, SHEFFIELD S1 1EN.

                                                                                                   736
                                                                                   C12
                                               GROUND                    CONTROL                       BO

                                                        -HILLSBOROUGH-




                                                               P olice momFors 1 to 4
                                                             ( see DIR 1 fo r d e ta ils )


                                                                                                            A to G and
                                                                                                             Gate C \                      1 re 12




    T u r n s tile     M onitors                                                                               T u rn s tile    Monitors




                                                                                                                13 > o 11



0                                                                                                                                 Gate A looking
                                                                                                                               towards M»e approaches
                                                                                                                                 to NORTH STAND




                                                             FR O N T ELEVATION



                                                                    MONITORS




                                   recording uniK'”^                                    radio
                                        c o n tr o l dftit




                                                                                               TABLE
     VIDEO           BANK




                                                                  plan      e l e v a t io n




                                                                                                                                                     OLR   5 1 *0
                                                                                                                                                                      Figure   :Sheffield Wednesday
                                                                                                                                                                                Football Club.
                                                                                                                                                                                Hillsborough Ground




                                                                                                 Gymnasium




                                                                                                               r — r
                                                                                                                                                        Lighting
                                                                                                          ‘            k   ^ Police                     Tower
                                                 Lighting                                          First Aid                 R00m
                                                 Tower                                             Room

                                                                                       NORTH STAND

                                                                                                                                                                   CCTV

                           Porta




                   Cabin



                                    Tunnel




                                                                                                          n a y e rs
                                                                                                          Tunnel


                                   CCTV                                                                                                               L ranting



                                                                                       ▲
                                      Lighting              Police                  CCTV                 CCTV
                                      Tower                 Control
                                                                                            SOUTH STAND
                                                                      nn    m     nn
                                                                                                                                      nn m
                                                                                                                                      30*32   34-36
                                                                           23-28— H
                                                                                             j y~
                                                                                             |    'D irectors Entrance !
                                                                                O fficial                              Car Par*


                                                                                                  ower

        50metres                                                                                  DON
100   150 feet
                     »             C ftrtg ftfl             Po?I7ioiV3
                                                                       p

                                                                            M D       C M e s th n f-tS    AT
                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                    H I L L S tpfi. OUG'H                  Of!             S i.



                                                                                                                                         4




     ©
     f


<v. v n c
  l" / W f S T
t\bov£              RowS
                                                                                                                                                                           @ -
     2          '   X- 3                                                                                                                                                                           *T> p«c
 9 ^ t5
                                                                                                                                                                                               c

                                         Ww/T
                                 C/lMt/lfl,                                                                                                                                       * fA ff ^9


                                                                                                                                                  Ostm)                           \5*C¥€r
                                  r /T C «                                                          - ®
                                                                                  ( O b * vaT? -»               S fl ( ■ '   ( n * * n n f*-7               .                                        C O
                                                                  ■ ■ 1*>                                                          /’ lA Y /X S T V v ^ E X )
                             Ar-rC A                          -— •t D                                                                          I ■ ■ —|
                           /A fc .'P e * m                                                                                                    £3L                                                    o
                                                                                  ^                 n n ^
                                              fk -o c tW f.
                                                                                                                                                                C 6^«c«
                                                                                                                                                                                   C a m . S *|.     L&
                                                   P&WS Nf o( p
                                                                                                                                                                      (U w ^

         O sl
                                                 S C rtts
                                                                              T V            G - M        T ^ y                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                       0 0 ?r, 6 4 l O M       1^-/9
         vO
                                                Part II
                                              Appendix 'A'




                          fOAWAKAV /UNITY,


                 WEST MIDLAND POLICE




                 STATEMENTS
                     OF

                Arthur BUTLER
  ( Principal District Surveyor, Sheffield City Council)

                         and
          David Malcolm BOWNES
( Chief Licensing Officer | General ] Sheffield City Council)
                                                                          STATION

                ARTHUR
                B U TLER


ADDRESS:        BUILDING SURVEYORS DIVISION, DEPT OF LAND AND PLANNING,
                SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL, TCWN HALL, SHEFFIELD SI 2HH

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 21 100

OCCUPATION:     PRINCIPAL DISTRICT SURVEYOR


Who states:- This statement consisting of 015 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.




•
DATED: 270790                                                 A BUTLER (SIGNED)



           I am employed by Sheffield City Council in the Building Surveyors

       Division of the Department of Land and Planning.      Since commencing

       employment with the City Council in November 1985 (001185), I have held

       the position of Principal District Surveyor.

           I am the service manager of the division's Site Supervision Unit,

       currently consisting of 24 staff, whose main functions are to carry out

       inspections of building works in progress within the City boundaries,

       enforce Building Regulation requirements, and to carry out inspections

       of licensed premises and to advise on their constructional and

       structural suitability.

       The Division also incorporates a General Assessment Unit for the

       examination of deposited Building Regulation applications, a Structural

       Assessment Unit, a Public Safety Unit, and a Geotechnical Services

       Unit.      Each Unit is headed by a Principal Surveyor or Principal

       Engineer, and all are directly responsible to The Building Surveyor.

           I am a fellow of the Chartered Institute of Building, a fellow of the

           Incorporated Association of Architects and Surveyors, and a member of

       the Institute of Building Control.
BUTLER                ARTHUR                                              2


My first involvement with Safety of Sports Grounds was in mid March

1986 (000386), when I attended a meeting to discuss the transfer of

duties (on the first of April 1986 (010486) frcm the South Yorkshire

County Council to the City Council.   Specific involvement with

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club began in early July 1986 (000786),

when I attended a meeting of the Officer Working Party, where the

predaninent discussion was of the new construction to cover over and

extend the Spion Kop, the construction of which had already commenced.

On both these occasions, the Principle Engineer (Mr. SHERIFF) from the

division's Structural Assessment Unit also attended.   This officer had

been involved with the subject of Safety of Sports Grounds since 1976

(000076).   He had acted as the Division's liaison officer with the

County Council, on behalf of the Building Surveyor, who was nominated

by the City Council to be the officer representing the Building

Authority, and hence a member of the Officer Working Party.

The Principle Engineer had attended most of the meetings of the officer

working party, with either one of my two predecessors (Mr MILLS and Mr

ROBERTS both of whom have now retired) or relevant members of my staff

who dealt with the geographical area of the City appropriate to the

sports ground under discussion.   During this period, it was seen to be

appropriate that site inspections and meetings were attended by members

of both the Structural Assessment Unit and the Site Supervision Unit,

since in addition to the professional advice (where the guide to safety

of sports grounds was taken into account, where appropriate) given

to the Working Party, and subsequently the Advisory Group, many of the

works required to be carried out for Safety of Sports Grounds purposes

also required Building Regulation approval and supervision.   The role

of the district surveying staff was to ensure that proposals could

comply with Building Regulations, and that they were constructed so as
BUTLER                   ARTHUR                                                3



to comply with that legislation and any additional requirements made by

the Officer Working Party.        Many issues were discussed by that group

concerning works required and proposals relating to the football stadia

in the City.       Discussion and agreement by the group was reached before

works were undertaken and proposals implemented.       During that time

there was never a case where consensus was not reached by the Working

Party.   The minutes of the meeting of the Officer Working Party dated

12th February 1979 (120279) (Ref AB1) (Exh            ) discussed four items

of relevance to the West end of the Hillsborough ground -

1.   The reasonableness of applying the "guide."

2.   The unknown reasoning for the 1.1 metre width of gangways;

3.   The requirement for an additional stairway to be provided to the

     West Stand;

4.   Regarding the West Terrace, the minutes read, "In view of the lack

     of depth of this terrace, the Club's offer to reduce the spectator

     limit to 7,200, and the discharge time to 6.6 minutes, the Working

     Party AGREED that it would be unreasonable to insist that gangways

     or additional exits would be provided.      However, even if the

     existing crush barriers were to pass the tests, the Working Party

     AGREED that the barriers would require special attention in view of

     the apparent sharp edges, corrosion etc."

At a further meeting on 30th March 1979 (300379), (Ref AB2) (Exh          )

the discussions on the above four points were developed.       Regarding the

reasonableness of applying the guide, "the Heme Office had said that

the maximum flexibility had to be maintained in the case of existing

structures and differences in such matters as age, size and mode of

construction had to be taken into account."

It is noted that the Heme Office had not provided any guidance for the

reasoning of the widths of gangways.       In relation to the fourth point
BUTLER                   ARTHUR                                                4


the following is minuted, "As well as the condition of the crush

barriers, the Building Authority drew attention to the poor condition

in places of the terracing in small areas near to the stand.         The

cross-fall on the steps on the North West co m e r exit would also

require attention as it tended to throw people forward.        The height of

the crush barriers mentioned in regard to the Spion Kop (ie below the

recommendations of the "Guide") also applied.         It was AGREED that all

these points must be drawn to the Club's attention.         In accordance with

the Hone Office recorrmendations, flexibility in the use of the "Guide"

was used in the subsequent detailed discussions held between the Club's

engineers and staff of this Division since the height of the crush

barriers remained unaltered.      The General Safety Certificate for the

ground was issued on 21st December 1979 (211279) by the South Yorkshire

County Council.      The minutes of the Officer Working Party dated 8th

June 1981 (080681), (Ref AB3) (Exh        ) state:-

"Following experiences at the F.A. Cup Semi-Final match, the Club were

considering revised arrangements on the terracing in front of the

(West) Stand.     An assurance was given that the Officer Working Party

would be consulted when these had substance."     This is the only

reference in the Division's files to an incident on the terraces in

1981 (000081), and this matter was not brought to my attention by any

other source.

The design work for the installation of radial fences to the West

Terrace was carried out by the Club's engineers, and was submitted to

the officer working party with covering correspondence on 2nd September

1981 (020981), (Ref AB4) (Exh          ) and was discussed at a meeting on

11th September 1981 (110981).     The minutes of that meeting (Ref AB5)

(Exh     ) state:-     "Whilst there are drawbacks to the division of the

terrace into approximately three equal areas, each served by it's own
BUTLER                ARTHUR                                             5


entrance, the Working Party felt that increased control on the terrace

should result from the proposals.     For instance there could well be

problems with opposing fans mixing at the rear of the West Stand and/or

the final exit gates, but the police considered that they could cepe

with any problems of this nature.    The adequacy and positioning of the

gates to be installed at the rear of the radial barriers was also

discussed, as well as the use of the existing gates in the pitch

perimeter security fence at the front of the terrace."

One of the conditions of acceptance of the proposals by the Working

Party was that the new gates at the rear of the Terrace be under police

control.   The representative of the Building Surveyor's Department on

this occasion was Mr SHERIFF.

In 1985 (000085), the Club submitted further proposals to subdivide the

West Terrace, by the installation of additional radial fences.     The

minutes of the meeting (attended in this instance by Mr ATKINSON on

behalf of the Building Surveyor's Division), held on 18th April 1985

(180485), (Ref AB6) (Exh       ) state:-

"The Police representatives pointed out that the proposals had been

prompted in the main by comments they had made to the Club." The main

purpose of the proposals was to segregate home and visiting

supporters at the West end of the ground.    At that meeting the

proposals appear to have been discussed in detail, and it is minuted

thats-

"The proposals now outlined by the Club were generally acceptable to

the Police representatives, subject to:- (a) additional gates being

provided between turnstile no. 16 and the wall of the inner access

road; (b) the central area of the terrace (indicated as a neutral area

or visiting supporters' terrace) being divided in half by a new central

radial fence running from the tunnel entrance to the pitchside security
BUTLER                ARTHUR                                                 6


fence with gates erected so as to permit entry to be diverted to either

half as appropriate (the proposed new secondary radial fence adjacent

to the exiting fence indicated on the plan to be abandoned); (c) the

right hand area of the terrace (indicated as heme supporters' terrace)

also to be divided in half by a new central radial fence r u n n in g from

back to front with two gates (the existing radial fence dividing the

present two terrace areas - neutral area and home supporters - to have

a second gate installed; (d) the existing pitch perimeter fence to

have additional exit gates installed - one in the neutral area and one

in the home supporters area.    The County Fire Service saw no objection

to the proposals, subject to more detailed investigation of the means

of escape aspects, and the Building Authority similarly saw no

objection, subject to submission of detailed plans and calculations

under both the Safety of Sports Grounds Act and Building Regulations."

It is apparent that discussions on the proposals took place outside the

formal meetings of the Working Party subsequent to that date, since the

proposals had been modified (to those actually installed), by the time

they were next discussed at the meeting on 29th July 1985 (290785),

(minutes included as Ref AB7) (Exh        ) where the scheme was accepted

subject to the installation of a further pitch perimeter gate.

Throughout the period of consideration of radial barrier installations

on the West Terrace, the County Council document (Ref AB8) (Exh        )

was in vogue which indicated primary and consultation Authorities for

various purposes in the implanentation of the sports grounds

legislation.   It is clear from the list of subjects that the Building

Authority was primarily responsible for all the structural aspects of

the grounds, including the spacing of crush barriers, and that the Fire

Authority was primarily responsible for all calculations for means of

escape.
BUTLER                ARTHUR


In retrospect, it is known that the drawings of the West Terrace used

by members of the Working Party were dimensionally incorrect, showing

that the terrace was deeper than it's actual dimension.    It is also

known frcxn minutes of meetings that the original capacity of 7,200

was an agreed reduction from the computed capacity, and that the

works carried out in 1981 (000081) and 1985 (000085) were done to

increase safety, to reduce the danger of lateral surges, and to

facilitate more efficient police control of insurgents. Signs app=>ar

to have been considered by the Working Party in respect of indicating

exit routes, particulary for means of escape.   Signing for ingress

purposes was not, to my knowledge, discussed at any meeting of the

Officer Working Party/ Advisory Group which I attended.   Whilst

signing a means of escape was clearly within the remit of the Fire

Authority, the Building Surveyor's representative is on record in

correspondence dated 21st March 1980 (210380) (Ref AB9) (Exh          ) as

commenting that exit signs were not clearly displayed.    This is a

clear example of the professional interaction of members of the

Working Party.   Coincidental to the transfer of duties under the

sports grounds legislation from the County Council to the City Council

a number of factors were appreciated within the Building Surveyor's

Division which had an effect on the future representation at meetings.

The recent ill health of the Principal Engineer, and a knowledge that

further hospitalisation was imminent played a major part, however it

was also a time when an internal restructuring process was being

considered in anticipation of a major increase in workload due to the

regeneration of the Sheffield economy and the anticipation of staging

the World Student Games.   A third sports ground in Sheffield was also

expected to be designated for the purposes of the Act, and it was

appreciated that a considerable input would be required in this
BUHER                 ARTHUR                                             8


respect.   In order to achieve continuity and apply similar standards

to all the grounds, my role in the representation of the Division

changed over a period of months as I became increasingly involved with

the reconstituted Working Party.   During this initial period of

involvement, I had reviewed consultative documentation frcm the Heme

Office on the Fire Safety and Safety at Sports Venues, and had read

the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds for that purpose, and for the

resolution of issues in connection with the ongoing construction of

the extension and roofing over of the Spion Kop at the Hillsborough

ground. Regarding the removal of parts of barrier 144, this matter was

raised by the Police representative whilst carrying out the bi-annual

inspection of the ground on the 7th August 1986 (070886).   This

inspection was attended by representatives from the Police, Fire

Authority, Administration & Legal Department of the Council, Building

Surveyors Division of the Department of Land and Planning of the

Council, and the Club's engineering consultants.   Whilst considering

the effectiveness of the recently installed radial fences on the

terracing, it was reported to the Working Party that fans were coining

out of the tunnel and stopping behind barrier 144 rather than

travelling further into the terrace area.   This was causing a crowd

movement problem to the Police, particulary in pen 3, although similar

problans were occurring in pen 4 to a slightly lesser degree.   The

Police representative therefore suggested the removal of parts of

barrier 144.   Corroboration of the problem is contained in paragraph

46 of Dr EASTWOOD'S statement (Ref AB10) (Exh      ) to the TAYLOR

Inquiry, which states, "Spectators tend to congregate at the top of

the West Terrace rather than at the bottom by the perimeter fence

because their view will not be obscured by the small mesh of the

perimeter (fence). The request for try caments provoked considerable
BUTLER               ARTHUR


thought, since I was aware of the normal desirability to have a

barrier in this position, yet officers who regularly manned that area

were informing the group that it's presence was causing concern for

the safety of spectators. My ccarments to the group were favourable to

the removal of the parts of the barrier, since I considered that it

would alleviate the problem of spectators backing up within the tunnel

that any incoming crush would be seen on the terracing rather than be

hidden inside the tunnel, that any problems on the terrace could also

be easily seen from the police control box which was relatively near,

that the means of escape from the area was excellent from both pens,

at that point, due to the existance of the tunnel, and that it was

understood that the area of the tunnel mouth would be kept clear

throughout the duration of the game by the Police, who in that

position could easily monitor and resolve any incidents of

overcrowding and localised crushing. I believe that I expressed a

reservation that the removal of the barrier could cause the next

barrier directly in front of the tunnel mouth to receive a greater

loading, and it was therefore necessary for the spectators to be

encouraged to spread into the other areas of the pens.   I am also of

the belief that I suggested marking out the area to be kept clear in

front of the tunnel mouth with painted hatching. The effect of the

removal of the barrier was to be the subject of future monitoring by

the Police, since installation of new barriers and the alteration of

others may have been required if they had thought it necessary*    No

adverse comments were made by the Police, Fire Authority or the Club's

engineers represenative at the time (or subsequently) and I advised

that it was appropriate for action to be taken to remove the relevant

parts of the barrier. It must be appreciated that it was assumed that

spectators would be entering the areas at turnstile speed only.    It
BUTLER                  ARTHUR                                            10


was never envisaged that an external gate would be opened to allow a

mass entry of spectators.     The recent disaster at the Bradford City

Football Club ground had the effect of considering the effects of mass

evacuation, not mass admission of spectators.     These notes of that

inspection are produced from memory only since it was assumed that the

items raised at that inspection were being noted and minuted by the

representative from the Administration & Legal Department of the

Council.     No personal notes were taken at the time.

As far as I am aware, no further discussion took place on this matter,

involving any officer from the City Council.     I am also unaware of any

subsequent correspondence seeking or granting consent for the works

which were carried out.

At the time of the inspection, it was not considered necessary to make

any adjustment to crowd capacity in consequence to the removal of parts

of barrier 144.    This barrier was positioned across the line of the

tunnel mouth, and as such, the space between the barrier and the rear

of the terrace acted as a continuity of the entrance/exit route, for

which there should not have been an initial capacity calculated.

Indeed the reason for the discussion on that day was the requirement of

the Police to keep that area clear of spectators.        Other barriers

appeared to have been reasonably spaced for the purposes of the "Guide"

and in retrospect the actual barrier spacing was proven to be less than

the demensions permitted by the "Green Guide" for that gradient of

terracing.    The height and type of the remaining barriers were not

reconsidered at this time, since it was assumed that such a

consideration had been part of the process of acceptance of the scheme

to carry out the recent works on the terrace.    The possibility of crowd

movement effecting barrier 124A, as a result of removing parts of

barrier 144 was never envisaged.
BUTLER                ARTHUR                                             11


The implementation of the barrier removal was arranged by the Club's

engineers.   A contractor was subsequently instructed by the engineers

to carry out the work.   I am sure that if the Club's engineers thought

this or any other proposal to have had a detrimental effect on

spectator safety, they would have made suitable representation before

giving instructions, on behalf of their clients, to any contractor.

During September 1986 (000986), discussions took place within the

Division to review the procedure for implementing Safety of Sports

Grounds matters. A Divisional Memorandum was produced and issued in

October 1986 (001086) (Ref AB11) (Exh      ) indicating which of the

Units of the Division would take the primary co-ordinating role.

Where a Building Regulation consent was necessary for the work, it was

determined that the General Assessment Unit would adopt the primary

co-ordinating role and agree in consultation with the Site Supervision

Unit and the Structural Assessment Unit (at Principal or Assistant

Principal level) matters of compliance with the Green Guide.   Where the

proposal would not require Building Regulation consideration, the Site

Supervision Unit would adopt the primary co-ordinating role, would

conduct any necessary liaison with external Departments and bodies, and

would agree in consultation with the Structural Assessment Unit and the

General Assessment Unit (At Principal or Assistant Principal level)

matters of compliance with the Green Guide.   In November 1986 (001186),

the Home Office issued the revised version of the "Green Guide."    This

document was distributed to the three relevant Units of the Division.

The two versions were compared and the apparent differences were

discussed.

There was a review of the administration system undertaken by the

Administration and Legal Department, which in September 1987 (000987)

established a Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group to replace the
BUTLER                ARTHUR                                              12


Officer Working Party.   This change was also coincidental to the

formalisation of an advisory input from the Department of Health and

Consumer Services of the Council, and the simplification of the areas

of responsibility of each of the constituent Authorities of that Group.

The responsibilities of the Building Surveyor then became;-     All

matters relating to the struture of stadia, including crush barriers,

walls etc.

The South Yorkshire Fire Authority were given the responsibility of

Fire precautions, fire alarms, means of escape, emergency lighting,

stadium capacity.

As it's name inplied, it has been an advisory group with the

constituent members providing professional advice for discussion by the

group.   An example of a document giving such professional advice from

the Building Surveyors Division to the Advisory Group was 'the Report

of the Works required to be carried out to satisfy The Safety of Sports

Ground Act 1975 (000075)', in relation to the Sheffield Sports Stadium,

Ctoderton, Sheffield, Ref AB12 (Exh     ).   One of the effects of this

change, was that each of the Authorities were requested to carry out

site inspections and prepare their individual reports on a submitted

proposed or a required inspection.    The group have therefore rarely met

at the stadia for the purpose of a joint inspection since that time. At

site meetings, various members of the Working Party/Advisory Group have

discussed matters together as they have inspected the various stadia,

and seme of these matters have been discussed and resolved, although

not agenda items or minuted.   At more formal meetings agenda items have

been followed, and therefore unlisted items of interest to the group

appear to have been missed.    In this context, I refer to crushing

incidents in 1987 (000087) and 1988 (000088) which do not appear to

have been brought to the attention of the Group.
BUTLER                 ARTHUR                                           13


Throughout this period I have been conscious of the fact that I should

act as a professional advisor to the Working Party/Advisory Group and

not be a decision maker.    Being employed by the same body as the

Certificating Authority, I have been aware that any personal decision

which was contrary to the thoughts of other members of the Group/

Working Party could have caused embarassment for the Authority and

confusion to the recipient of such a decision.    To this end, I have

usually made informal communication with the other external constituent

members of the Group/Working Party and the clubs through the Licensing

Section or have advised them informally (personal discussion or

telephone call) of such a liaison.

It must however be appreciated that in respect of many of the schemes I

have had two roles; the enforcement of Building Regulation requirements

as a statutory duty; and the provision of advice to the Advisory

Group/Working Party.   In many instances the club's engineers have

designed the building proposals and have acted as agent for their

clients in the implementation of the schemes.    In this respect contact

with the engineering consultants has professionally been unavoidable

and care has been exercised to separate those two roles as much as

possible.

The Internal Divisional Memorandum was revised in October 1988

(001088), (Ref AB13) (Exh       ) to take account of the Building

Surveyors role in the Advisory Group.   The document states:- "The role

of the Building Surveyors Division is that of "Building Authority", as

defined in the Act, and will normally be represented at the advisory

group meetings by the Principal District Surveyor or the Principal

Engineer as seems appropriate for the case in question, or by both."

The latter statement was modified by an internal memorandum from the

Building Surveyor to the Administration and Legal Department, dated
BUTLER                ARTHUR                                            14


29th September, 1989 (290989) (Ref AB14) (Exh        ) where the last

paragraph includes:- "Except where I attend Advisory Group in person, I

am content that Mr BUTLER represents the Division.    Where it is

necessary, however, he may be substituted by another appropriate

officer, or be accompanied by another officer, for example, Mr LEVERS

or Mr SHERIFF."

Whilst I have no reason to doubt the accuracy of this statement, I

reserve the right to append, amend or clarify any of the matters at a

later date.

INDEX OF REFERENCES APPENDED TO THIS STATEMENT

AB1      Minutes of Officer Working Party 12th February 1979 (120279).

AB2      Minutes of Officer Working Party 30th March 1979 (300379).

AB3      Minutes of Officer Working Party 8th June 1981 (080681).

AB4      Letter from Eastwood & Partners to South Yorkshire County

          Council 2nd September 1981 (020981).

AB5      Minutes of Officer Working Party 11th September 1981

          (110981).

AB6      Minutes of Officer Working Party 18th April 1985

          (180485).

AB7      Minutes of Officer Working Party 29th July 1985

          (290785).

AB8      South Yorkshire County Council documents- Implementation

          of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (000075) - Area

          Officer Working Parties.

AB9      Letter from the Building Surveyor to the South Yorkshire

          County Council 21st March 1980 (210380).

AB10     Paragraph 46, Page 18 of the Statement of Dr W EASTWOOD

          submitted to TAYLOR Inquiry.

AB11     Building Surveyor's Divisional Memorandum No 26 (October
        BUTLER                   ARTHUR


                   86) (001086) - Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975 (000075).

        AB12       Report of the Works required to be carried out to satisfy

                   The Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975 (000075) - Sheffield

                   Sports Stadium, Gvlerton, Sheffield, by the Building

                   Surveyor's Division, Department of Land and Planning,

                   Sheffield City Council - September 1989 (000989).

        AB13       Building Surveyor's Divisional Memorandum No 26 (October

                   1988) (001088) - Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (000075)

        AB14       Internal Memorandum from the Building Surveyor to the Head

                   of Administration & Legal Department - 29th September 1989

                   (290989).




                                                             A BUTLER SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:                DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:      S U O N J DAVIES LEGAL REP
1          b y                 [^ 2 /7 9 .                                        V   ♦V



                   SAFETY OF SPCB73 GROUNDS .*CT 1975

                 Noto o f a T.Ieettng o f the O fficer Working Party
                                /Sheffield D istr ic t)

     New Town Hall Extension, Sheffield : 12th February, 1079

     PRESENT:         F.Davis (South Yorkshire County F ire Service)
                      H.B. Dunstan (South Yorkshire County F ire Service)
                      B.A. E llis (South Yorkshire County F ire Service)
                      D.H urst (South Yorkshire Police)
                      K.Jones (South Yorkshire County F ire Service)
                      A.Mills (City of Sheffield Metropolitan D istrict Council)
                      D.Mutlarky (South Y orkshire County Council - A rchitects Division)
                      W. O'Neill (South Y orkshire Police)
                      D.S herriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan D istrict Council)
                      D.J . Shirtcliffe (South Yorkshire County Council - A dm inistration
                                                                             Department)
                     D. L Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council - Adm inistration
                                                                             Department).

    3_.      P urpose of Meeting

    Following the Working P a rty ’s meeting with the representatives of the
    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd. on 13th Decem ber, 1978, the
    S ecretary of the Club had (by le tte r dated 22nd January, 1979) circulated a
    B eport, together with P lans, drawn up by D r. W. Eastwood of Eastwood
    and P a rtn e rs . The Secretary had also suggested a meeting on F riday,
    16th F eb ru ary , 1979, to discuss the documents.

    The purpose of today’s m eeting was to consider the views which the Working
    P a rty should put to the Club on the 16th February.

    2.____ P lan s

    (a)     W hilst the ’’Notes for the Guidance of Applicants" stated that detailed
    plans a t 1:100 scale should be supplied of all buildings and other accommodation
    for sp e ctato rs, some of the plans supplied were to 1:200 scale. The F ire
    Service felt that the latter size were acceptable provided all of the plans w ere
    to the sam e sc ale, and it was AGREED that the "Notes for the Guidance of
    A pplicants” should be amended to read plans to 1:200 scale.

    (b)      The site plan at 1:500 scale had not been supplied a s req u ired by the
    Notes, but Eastwood and P a rtn e rs had undertaken to p rep are this in tim e for
    F rid a y 's m eeting. The firm had also prom ised that ail site fixtures would be
    indicated on that plan.
      (c)      It was AGREED that the plans supplied had inaccuracies and
      inadequacies. In p articu lar, they lacked indications of c re s s sections,
      p ro files, structural stability, position of handrails and balu strad es, width
      of stairw ays, etc. Where appropriate, these could, a s an altern ativ e, be
      described in a Report.

      (d) • The County Council’s hope was that, in view of lim ited re so u rc e s in
      the A rchitectural & Building Services Division, the plans supplied and finally
      accepted by the Working P arty could form the basis of the C ertificate
      Drawings.

      ^3.____ Report

      (a)    General

      It was recognised that the c rite ria set out in the Home Office "Guide to
      Safety a t Sports Grounds .(Football)" required new work o r reconstruction
      to be to a standard not lower than the standard set out in the Guide, and that
      In existing situations the criterio n was that of a reasonable degree of safety.
      A s the Guide stated, it would be unreasonable, even if it w ere p racticab le,
      to seek the absolute safety, of everyone attending a ground.

      With these factors in mind, both the F ire Service and the Police felt that
»cr
      the flow of spectators was the m ost im portant c rite ria to be adopted.
~¥r
      W hilst not disagreeing with this viewpoint, the Building A uthority suggested
 *
      It would be useful to know the reasoning behind the recom m endation In the
      Guide that gangways should not be le ss than 1.1 m etres wide. The County ■
      Council AGREED to try to find this information out, and the F ire Service
      AGREED they would contact their colleagues in other a re a s who had been
      Involved in the Certification p ro cess to ascertain how nearly the 1 .1 m etre
      gangway recommendation had been observed in existing situations in th eir
      resp ectiv e a re a s.

      A t the request of the F ire Service, the County Council also AGREED to try
      and find out if there was any general recommendation on reduced
      adm ission If a ground w ere used a t a night time instead of during the day
      tim e.

      (b)    F ront Cover

      W hilst it was probably a typing m istake, it was AGREED that the wording
      on the F ront Cover should read •'REPORT TO SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY
      COUNCIL" and not "REPORT OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL".



                                        - 2 -
  (c)     S p io n K o p   (p a g e s 2 , 3 & 4)


  The Working P a rty agreed v/ith the Club's view that, with the existing three
  ex its, there was no way that the recommended discharge time of 8 m inutes
  could be m et. Where they disagreed was that an evacuation tim e of I l f
  m inutes should be regarded as acceptable. If no m ore exits w ere to be
  provided, the Working P arty AGREED that a crowd limitation of 11,040
  on the Spioh Kop should be imposed.

 The existing exit a t the North end passed under a bridge with a headroom
 below agreed by the Club to be le s s than the recommended value of 8ft.
 A s th is w as in fact some 6*6", the Working P arty AGREED that the Club
 be inform ed that in their view it is essential that the floor be lowered to
 rem ove this danger to spectato rs.

 The exit a t the South side would also require widening, and possibly flow
 b a r r ie r s would need installing.

 The a re a a t the back of the Kop would also require close attention.

 If new exits w ere to be provided by the Club, it was AGREED that a t least
 TWO would be required. The m ost economical way of providing one would
 be to use the g ates in the existing b a rrie r, provided these w ere lined up with
 the gangways, with discharge onto the pitch surround, and the o ther would
 req u ire to be a com pletely new exit.

  The Building Authority felt that the m ajority of the crush b a r rie r s would fail
  the te s ts , and consequently any necessary re-sitin g would probably not be
  too much of a problem . C ertainly the suggested additional b a r rie r s would
• req u ire careful consideration.

 F o r the purposes of crowd control, the Police suggested there should be some
 form of latera l separation. The Working P arty AGREED, and it was -suggested
 th at th ree m etal fences sited centrally in the blocks (as opposed to adjacent
 to the gangways) should be provided, with access between each lim ited to a
 padlocked gateway under the control of the Police.

 A s re c e n t adverse w eather conditions had proved, ice and snow on the Kop
 could cause problem s, and it was AGREED that P a ra g ra p h ll $ of the draft
 C ertificate should be amended so as to require the Club to take ste p s to
 c le a r the Kop of ice and snow before a game was played.

 The Building Authority pointed out that information was still req u ired from
 the Club on profile and step dim ensions and.the slope of the Kop.
 (d )    The W est T e rr a ce   (p a g e s 4& 5)


  In view of the lack of depth of this terrace , the Club’s offer to reduce the
  spectator lim it to 7,200, and the discharge time of 6. 6 m inutes, the
t Working P arty AGREED that it would be unreasonable to in sist that
^gangways o r additional exits m ust be provided.

 However, even if the existing crush b a rrie rs w ere to p ass the te sts, the
 Working P arty AGREED that the b a rrie rs would requ ire special attention
 in view of the apparant sharp edges, corrosion, etc.

 (e)    The North West Corner Reinforced Concrete T erra ce (pages 5 & 6)

The Working P arty AGREED there were no re a l problem s h e re , but the
Building Authority pointed out that a s well as the crush b a r r ie r s , the
existing corrugated sheeting would require to p ass the appropriate te s ts .

 (f)    The North Stand (pages 6 & 7)

W hilst the flow ra te s and discharge tim es w ere probably satisfactory (the
construction and width of the ram ps being such that they could quite properly
be regarded a s elevated roadways), the fact rem ained that the gangways In
the North Stand w ere only 640mm wide for much of th eir length, com pared
with the recommended width of 1.1 m etres.

Additionally, observations had shown that tw o-thirds of the sp ectators used
file upper exit, whilst the rem ainder used the lower exit. An ideal would be
to provide additional exits at the top of the stand but, in view of its cantilever
construction, the cost would be prohibitive.

A s an alternative, the Working P arty AGREED that consideration m ight be
given to removing a row of seats from the top of the stand down each gangway
to the upper exits, with a physical b a rrie r a cro ss the stand below the upper
exits to ensure m ore equal use of both upper and lower exits by sp ectato rs.
If this would cause difficulties, a b a rrie r in the gangways only below the upper
exits might be considered.

So far as the Wire Mesh b a r rie r s under the stand w ere concerned, the
Working P arty AGREED that these m ust eith er be rem oved o r made of a
perm anent construction.

(g)     The West Stand

W hilst the exits w ere adequate and well spaced and the discharge tim es
w ere acceptable in view of the type of stand, the F ire Service felt that
the m eans of escape -/ere not adequate as the only means of e g re ss was
by way of two sta irc a se s. The Working P arty AGREED that it was essential
that another staircase be provided, and one on the south-west corn er w as felt
to be the m ost acceptable.

(h)     The South Stand fcages 7 & 8)

So far a s the seating arrangem ents were concerned, the Working Party-
felt that it was the front, open a ir p a rt which caused the concern. Because
of the bad in g re ss /e g re s s, the Working Party AGREED that two additional
ex its would be required. It was suggested that the m ost economical way of
doing this was by m eans of one discharging a t the Spion Kop end and the
other by breaking through the wall by the Tea B ar.
                                                 *
Additionally, the penning arrangem ents of the seating would need to be
looked a t closely.

A s the b alustrades and handrails w ere constructed of tim ber; the Buildlng
A uthority considered they would be likely to fall the appropriate te s ts .
A lso, a s the sta ircase was a 24 Instead of the maximum 12 r i s e r recommended
In the Guide it was probable that this would have to be reconstructed.

C ontrary to th eir initial reaction, the F ire Service felt that, provided that the
n ecessary increased fire resistan c e m easu res were carried out, the stand
would not be the problem from a combustability point of view that they had
anticipated.

The Building Authority expressed concern a s io the corrosion of the steel
w ork of the stand, and considered that this would require Investigation.

The Police expressed concern about the use of the c a r park behind the
Stand.. P e rso n s entitled to use this c ar park frequently arriv ed ju s t before
the s ta rt of a m atch and drove through the spectators attempting to gain
a c c e ss to the ground. As they left immediately afterw ards, the sam e tMng
o ccu rred at the end of a m atch. This practice had to be stopped, either by
banning the use of the c ar p a rk entirely on m atch days or Imposing some so rt
of tim e re stric tio n on its use before and after* a m atch.

 (h)    G eneral Requirem ents

 These w ere not discussed by the Working P arty a t this stage.
        CO      Future Ground Capacity

        If additional exits a re not provided on the Spion Kop, this will have th*
        effect of reducing the ground capacity to 45,140, made up a s follows:-

               Seating approxim ately                 24,000
               Standing on ion Kop                    11,040
               Standing a t Leppings Lane end
               (including N.W. Corner)                10>10Q

                                                      45,140




•   .




                                      - 6-
               SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1575

             N ote o f a M eeting o f the O fficer Working- Party
                              (Sheffield D istrict)

       F ire Service H eadquarters, Sheffield: 30th March, 1979

 PRESENT:           F . Davis (South Yorkshire County F ire Sen'ice)
                    H. B. Duns tan (South Yorkshire County F ire Service)
                    B. A . E llis (South Yorkshire County F ire Service)
                    D. H u rst (South Yorkshire Police)
                   K. Jon es (South Yorkshire County F ire Service)
                   D. Mullarky (South Yorkshire County Council - A rchitect's
                      Division)
                   W. O'Neill (South Yorkshire Police)
                   D. S h erriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan D istrict Council)
                   D. J . Shirtcliffe (South Yorkshire County Council -
                      A dm inistration Department)
                   J . H. Stenton (City of Sheffield Metropolitan D istrict Council)
                   D. I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council - Adm inistration
                      Department)
                   H    VJCSevCCtv
3^______P urpose of Meeting                                     ^

Following the postponement of the meeting with the Club because of adverse
w eather and the difficulty in agreeing a mutually convenient alternative
date, the purpose of the m eeting was to review the position since 12th February,
1979, p rio r to the re -a rra n g e d meeting with the Club which was now to take
p lace on 2nd A pril, 1979. .

2 .______ P lans

T he plans a t 1:500 scale and indicating all site fixtures were, it was still understood,
to be supplied by Eastwood & P a rtn e rs at the meeting with the Club.

3 .______ R eport
(a)       G eneral

The County Council had contacted the Home Office, but had been given little
inform ation additional to that contained in their various C ircu lars. Basically,
they had said that any new work o r reconstruction had to be to a standard not
low er than that s e t out in the Guide. However, the maximum flexibility, had
to be m aintained in the case of existing stru ctu res and differences in such
m a tte rs as age, size and mode of construction had to be taken into account.

The F ire Service had contacted four other Brigades with designated grounds,
and only in one case had the recommendations of the Guide been strictly
adhered to.
  (b )     S p io n K op ( p a g e s 2 , 3 & 4)


 Additional to the points mentioned cn 12th February, 1979, concern was
 expressed by the Building Authority as to the general maintenance of the Kon
 and the loose and broken concrete at the bottom in particu lar. If attention
 was not given to this, it was AGREED that it would be necessary to r e s tr ic t
 adm ission to the Kop, additional to the restrictio n to 11,040 if the ex tra
 ex its are not provided.

 On the question of exits, it was again AGREED that it was essen tial to line
 up the gates in the existing b a rrie r with the gangways.. Of the existing two
 exits, concern was expressed as to the effect of the right-angled tu r n o n
 the embankment a t the exit at the r e a r . A fter discussion, it was AGREED
 th at the best com prom ise was to leave things as they existed, provided
 handrails a re provided on the stairw ays, taking into account the
 desirability of maintaining a smooth flow.

The F ire Service queried the exact form of the lateral separation d iscussed
a t the meeting on 12th February, 1979, as this would naturally have a
bearing on the means of escape recom m endations. A fter discussion, it
was AGEEED that the m etal fences should not be of the clim b-proof type,
th a t it was not intended that they should obstruct the gangways, and that
in consequence the padlocked gateway recommendation should be dropped.
However, it was AGREED that it was still desirable to seek 3 x 2 central
b a r rie r s but, if the Club really re siste d the suggestion, 2 x 2 could
reluctantly be conceded. The Building Authority stre ssed that whatever
b a r rie r s were provided would have to p ass the appropriate stra in te s ts .

The fact that the height of many of the existing crush b a rrie rs was below the
recom m endation in the Guide, in some cases well below, was pointed out by the
Building Authority. The corrosion point mentioned at the la s t meeting was
also re ite ra te d . It was AGREED that these points m ust be drawn to the
C lub's attention, as m ust the condition of the Score Board S tructure.

(c)      The West T errace (pages 4 & 5)

As well as the condition of the crush b a rrie rs mentioned at the la s t meeting,
the Building Authority drew attention to the poor condition in places of the
te rra c in g in sm all areas near to the stand. The cro ss-fall on the steps on
the north-w est corner exit would also require attention as it tended to throw
people forw ard. The height of the crush b a rrie rs mentioned in re g a rd to the -
Spion Kop also applied. It was AGREED that all these points m ust be drawn
to the C lub's attention.

(d)      The N orth W est C orner Reinforced Concrete T errace (pages 5 & 6)

Having now had the opportunity of having a closer look at the existing corrugated
sheeting., the Building Authority confirm ed that it would req u ire alteratio n to
m eet the requirem ents of the Guide.
  (e)      T h e N o r t h S t a n d ( p a g e s 6 & 7)


 T he rem oval of a row of seats from the top of the stand down each gangway
 to the upper exits and the rem oval of four seats at those exits was
 confirm ed as being a reasonable compromise to put to the Club.

 As the asbestos sheets at the top of the stand were protected, the Building
 A uthority fe lt that these could be accepted, and confirmed that the glazing
 a t the ends of the stands was not glass and so would not sh a tte r.

 (f)       The W est Stand (page 7)

C onsideration was given to the Building Authority's suggestion of la te ra l
gangways and the segregation of exits but, after discussion, it was AGREED
th a t the additional sta ircase agreed a t the la st meeting should be confirmed.
So long as it was of 4-unit exit width, it was AGREED it was not necessary *
to in s is t it should be on the south-w est co rn er. Such staircases could be
bought "off the peg" and, if not installed in the close season, it was
AGREED that a £ reduction in capacity would be necessary.

 (g)       The South Stand (pages 7 & 8)

A s mentioned at the la s t meeting, the penning arrangem ents of the seating
and the num bers of se ats in the rows caused problem s. Bearing in mind the
need for reasonableness and to make the situation better, it was AGREED
that, even though not strictly in accordance with the Guide, th at the best
com prom ise was to seek the rem oval of the existing b a rrie rs and th eir
re-alig n m en t, toge th e r with the widening of the gangways at the position
of the wings.

T he F ire Service pointed out and it was AGREED that F ire R esisting Doors
would be required leading to the D ire c to rs’ seating, and 1 h a ir fire
re sis ta n c e would be req u ired for all problem areas under the stand. This
could be reduced to \ hour if autom atic detection equipment were to be
in stalled .

F o r th e ir p a rt, the Building Authority reiterated their concern as to the
co rro sio n of the steelw ork of the stand, and also pointed out the concrete
spalling which was occurring. Again, the likelihood of the balustrading,
b a r r ie r s and g u ard rails needing to be reinforced or replaced was mentioned.
It was AGREED all would need to be given attention by the Club.

(h)       G eneral R equirem ents (pages 8 & 9)

As well as the F ire Service pointing out that the presen t tem porary
stru c tu re s u sed for police and firs t-a id purposes would need rem oval
fro m a m eans of escape point of view if the capacity of the N orth Stand
 r f t t tthe
 with      t l cClub
                l u b the facilities they would
                                            Sttted 4 a t * *Briefly,
                                                require.     were ready   t0 d i s “ s s
                                                                     they envisaged
structure*6^ struoture a!m ost               “s large as the existing tem poraiy
e ^    lacm t-es SXPe           ° mmUIli0ati0DS' ds‘ention' toilet. parade room,


S d ^ n V n T f l M d ” *f c°!,oer,’ed' *>« Sheffield A rea Health Authority
        f ™     ,     willingness t0 Provid£ advice on F irst-A id and
i r.                ’ but the person nominated (Dr. H. Bailey - Specialist
in Community Medicine (Social Services)) was on holiday nnffl
2nd A n Jn ' I? ,7 9-'* He ^   been invited 10 »>e meeting, with the Club on
p r l v S s d o i^ T o 3 r6C0gniSed          P0SSiMe               difficulties might




                                     4.
                SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

      Note of a Visit to the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield,
                        on 8th June, 1981

PRESENT: -Representing the' Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.

           E. England (Secretary)

           Representing the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)

          C. Calvert (South Yorkshire Police)
          F. Davis (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
          R. Grimshaw (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
          R. Herold (South Yorkshire Police)
          A. Roberts (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
          J. P. Ruddy (South Yorkshire Police)                             '•
          D. Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
          D.I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)

1 .____ Purpose of Meeting

The visit was the second in the twice-yearly programme of visits by Officer
Working Parties to all five League Football Clubs in South Yorkshire, as
mentioned at the meeting on 10th February, 1981, and originally referred to
in the Chief Executive's letter to the Club dated 10th January, 1981. The
visit on 7th April had been a special one in view of the Stadium being the
venue on 11th April for a F.A. Cup Semi-Final match.

2 .____ Inspection of Stadium

The representatives made a joint inspection of the Stadium.

(a)    South Stand

The progress of the monitoring of the apparent deflection in the steel
trusses referred to at the meeting on 10th February was queried but, in
the absence of Dr. W. Eastwood, no specific answer could be g^ven.

It was noted that the monitoring device to be sited adjacent to the new
metal case for the batteries supplying the emergency power supply for the
public address system (referred to at the meeting on 7th April) had yet to
be provided. t

(b)    West Stand

The cracked brickwork at the rear of the stand, as well as the apparent
distress on the concrete pillars supporting the steps at the rear of the
stand and the cracks in the concrete at the top of both sets of stairs,
had been made good.

As previously agreed, as soon as a grinder was next present at the Stadium
the Club would round off the steel supports to the new emergency exit
(nearest to the South Stand).

Following experiences at the F.A. Cup Semi-Final match, the Club were
considering revised arrangements on the terracing in front of the Stand.
An assurance was given that the Officer Working Party would be consulted
when these had substance.
(c)    North-West Terrace

The two small areas where water seepage had continued to take place after
treatment had now been satisfactorily treated.

It was also noted’that the tie bars through the upper level concrete
area to the rear had been protectively wrapped.

(d)    North Stand

The expansion cracks in the wall of the North Stand (nearest to the Spion
Kop) had been made good.

(e)    Spion Kop

The infilling of the step adjacent to the handrail on the left of the
original exit at the top of the Kop had not been done to date but would
be attended to shortly.                                                     :

The temporary barrier of scaffolding tubes erected between the end of the
new Kop exit outer barriers and the concrete pillar of the lowest of the
Kop original exit steps (adjacent to the new brick built chip shop) prior
to the F.A. Cup Semi-Final match remained. However, the Club intended to
extend the existing barriers to fill the gap on a permanent basis and to
level off the area between the bottom of the new Kop exit staircase and the
original Kop exit steps prior to the commencement of the forthcoming season.

(f)    General

It was noted:-

(i)    that the steel girders with mesh on top adjoining the wall at the
rear of the Butcher's Shop on Penistone Road required attention because of
corrosion, and (ii) that the top of the brick built wall between the Spion
Kop and the South Stand required pointing.




                               -2-
E A S T W O O D             &         PARTNERS                                                             BOWMAKER HOUSE
               Consulting       Engineers                                                             !L   p KINGFIELD ROAD
                                                                                                           Sheffield si i 9AS
VV. Eastw ood            a .E n e - P h -O - F .E n a , F.].C.E„                                           Tel.: (0742) 583871
                         F .I.S u u c l E , F .G .S - M .C ons.E .

A. A. W ood              8 . E n g , P h .D . C .E n g , F.I.C .E.
                         F .I.S t/u c tE _ M .I.W .E .S , M .C o n tE

A. G. B u rd ett        G .M . B .S c-(E n g ), C .Eng.. M .I.C.E.

R. C. A. Eastw ood      b !s c ,   C.Eng.. M .I.C .E . M X S o u ct.E .

juaoaeUM:
Geoffrey Splr           C.En*.. H.I.C.E., M.I.M«ch.E.

C. S. Greaves           B .E n t, C .E nt.. M.I.C.E„ M .IJtruet.£.

A. J. Clough            B A ., C -E n i, M.C.I.BJ.,.MJ.M«eh.E.                         Our Ref:    WE/JAS/PB/3563
J . A. Strange          C-Enj., H J J t r v a i .                                      Your Ref:
Caruultant;
A. L. Percy             M.T«ch.{Hon.). B.Sc.. C .E ni„ F.l.CE.,
                        F.l.Struct.E - F.I.Mun.E., M.R.T.P.I.




 South Yorkshire County Council,                                                                   2.S e p t e m be r , 1981
 County Hall,
 BARNSLEY, S. Yorks.
 S70 2TN.


For the attention of Mr. D. V a u g h a n .


Dear Mr. Vaughan,

                      Sheffield Wednesday Football Club L t d .
                            Radial Fences -at Leppings Tiane End

              We have been instructed by the Club to organise the
installation of two radial fences ,on the terrace at the
Leppings lane end of the ground.

              It is intended that these fences are so positioned
that they divide this section of the terrace into
 approximately three equal areas, each served by its own
entrance.

        *        B y dividing the terrace more control over supporters
should result.                     A visiting team with only a few followers
will be allocated one section, with the other two sections
r et a i n e d by the home supporters.

              L a rger contingents of visiting spectators could be
 a ccommodated in two or all three areas as their numbers
dictate.

              A 1.15 metre wide gate is proposed at the rear of
each fence to give access for maintenance and also policing
 during a game.                     The gate could be left open, but fastened
 back,         to connect the areas during a game if adjacent ones


                                                       Registered in England - No. 1134531
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




  are accupied.by supporters of the same team.        When establishing
  the height we have considered that the views to the corner
  flags should not be restricted any further than they are at
  present by the perimeter fence.       We therefore propose that the
  top of the fence should be approximately 1680mm above the
  terrace.

          This may not prevent the odd spectator climbing the fence
  but should eliminate a mass invasion from one area to the other.
  Fences this height appear to work successfully at St. James's
  Park,    the home of Newcastle United.

          We would be pleased if this specific point can be discussed
  within the Working Party and your comments forwarded to us.

          Also to be included in the same contract are some gates at-
  various locations around the north stand.        Now the gymnasium is
  open to the general public security to ether parts of the ground
  must be maintained.       It is proposed that gates are provided at
  the top of the ramps at both ends of the stand with additional
  gates at ground floor level at the Penistone Road end of the
  stand.     A separate gate will be placed behind the west ramp to
  prevent people going round the rear of the gymnasium towards
  Leppings Lane.

          S ix copies of our drawing 3563/1 together with two copies
  of our drawings 3563/2 and 3 (for reference only) are enclosed.



                                           Yours sincerely,




  c.c.    Mr. E. England,
          S.W.F.C. Ltd.
                          SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

                   Note of a Meeting of the. Officer Working Party
                   (Sheffield District);held at the Division Street
                   Fire Station, Sheffield, on lltti September 1981
               •                 i                                  •            a
 PRESENT:      D. Chapman (South Yorkshire Police)
               B. A. Ellis (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
               P. Garnex (South Yorkshire Police)
               D. Horner (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
               W. O'Neill (South Yorkshire Police)
               J . Ray (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
                  .Sheriff_(City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
               T. W. Stuart (South Yorkshire, Police)
               D. I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)

1.     Purpose of Meeting

The purpose of the meeting was to consider the letter dated 2nd September
and plans submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of the
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd. relating to the proposed erection
of Radial Barriers on the West Terrace for crowd control purposes and ‘
Security Gates at various locations around the North Stand now that the
gymnasium was open to the general public,,

2.     Radial Barriers on West Terrace

Whilst there were drawbacks to the division of the terrace into
approximately three equal areas, each served by its own entrance the
Working Party felt that increased control on the Terrace should result
from the proposals. For instance there could well be problems with
opposing fans mixing at the rear of the West Stand and/or the final exit
gates , but the police considered that they could cope with any problems
of this nature.

The adequacy and positioning of the gates to be installed at the rear of
the radial barriers was also discussed, as well as the use of the
existing gates in the pitch perimeter security fence at the front of the
Terrace.

It was noted that the plans submitted did not indicate the amount of head­
room which would be available at the rear of the Terrace should the
radial barriers and gates be installed.

IT WAS AGREED that Mr. Vaughan should notify Messrs. Eastwood and Partners
that the Officer Working Party sees no objection to the proposals to instal
two 1680mm high radial barriers, with 1.15 metre wide gates at the rear
on the West Terrace at the Hillsborough Stadium, subject to*—

      (i)-         the further calculations required by the Building
                   Authority being satisfactory;

      (ii)         confirmation that adequate headroom will be DEPART?,'ZfiT C,- f-!.;
                   available at the rear of the Terrace, and         a :;d c:s:s:i
                                                                    p -r.       7D
     ' (iii)       the new gates at the rear of the Terrace al >o beiwg5 SEh i98I
                   under police control.
3.    Security Gates around North Stand

Nov that the gymnasium was open to .the general public, the Club wished to
erect security gates at the top of -the ramps at both ends of the North
Stand, with additional gates at ground floor level at the Penistone Road
end of the Stand. A separate gate would also be placed behind the West:
Ramp to prevent people going round the rear of the gymnasium towards
Lepping? Lane.              .

These gates would .be fastened when the gymnasium only was in use so as to
provide security for the rest of the ground. However, on match days they
would be secured in the fully open position to allow unrestricted access.:

IT WAS AGREED that Mr. Vaughan should notify Messrs. Eastwood and Partners
that the Officer Working Party sees no objection to the erection of security
gates around the North Stand, subject t<^ the gates and/or their supports,-
hinges, etc not impinging on the existingcritical ramp widths, and to the
gates being secured in the fully open position on match days.

4.    Police and First Aid Facilities

It was recalled that the existing unsatisfactory police and first aid
facilities under the North Stand had Been accepted on an interim basis*.
The Club had undertaken to provide purpose built facilities in a similar
position to the existing timbered facilities during the 1980 close
season. Whilst some progress had been made in discussing details of the
facilities, no firm indication had yet Been given as to when they would
actually be provided.

IT WAS AGREED that Mr..D« Vaughan should press the Club and/or its
Consultants   for a firm indication as to when the new police and first
aid facilities are to'-be provided.

5.    Lottery Ticket Boxes

Attention was drawn to the blocked egress which could result if the.
timber lottery ticket boxes presently sited close to the ramps were, to
be tipped over or ignited, either accidentally or deliberately,

IT WAS AGREED that Mr, Vaughan should draw the Club’s attention to the
desirability of re-siting the lottery ticket boxes. .
                        SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

                Note of'a meeting of the Officer Working Party (Sheffield j W tjj
                District) held at the Police Sports & Social Club, Niagara^!
                              Sheffield, on 18th April 1985


PRESENT: N.   Atkinson (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
         C.    Calvert (South Yorkshire Police)
         R.    Grimshaw (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
         G.    Stanley (South Yorkshire Police)
         T.    Stewart (South Yorkshire Police)
         G.    Sykes    (South Yorkshire Police)
         D.   I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)
         A.   Vickers (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)


1.    Purpose of Meeting

The purpose of the meeting was to consider the letter dated-9th April
and plan from Messrs. Eastwood & Partners relatingto the proposals of
the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to construct two new banks of
turnstiles and various runs of fencing and new gates in order to achieve
segregation of visiting supporters at the Leppings Lane end of the
Hillsborough Stadium.

2.    Consideration of Proposals

The Police representatives pointed out that the proposals had been
prompted in the main by comments they had made to the Club. At one
time, both the West Stand and Terrace had been regarded as exclusively
for the use of visiting supporters, but recent patterns of attendances
at the Stadium made it necessary to allow for son® element of use by
home supporters as well.

The proposals now outlined by the Club were generally acceptable to the
Police representatives, subject to:-

(a)   additional gates being provided between the turnstile numbered 16
      and the wall of the inner access road;

(b)   the central area of the Terrace (indicated asthe neutral area or
      visiting supporters’ terrace) being divided in half by a new
      central radial fence running from the tunnel entrance to the
      pitchside security fence with gates erected so as to permit entry
      to be diverted to either half as appropriate (the proposed new
      secondary radial fence adjacent to the existing fence indicated
      on the plan to be abandoned);

(c)   the right hand area of the Terrace (indicated as home supporters*
      terrace) also to be divided in half by a new central radial fence
      running from back to front with .two gates (the existing radial
      fence dividing the present two Terrace areas - neutral area and
      home supporters - to have a second gate installed;

(d)   the existing pitch perimeter fence to have additional exit gates
      installed - one in the neutral area and one in the home supporters
      area

                                          1.
The County Fire Service saw no objection in principle to the proposals,
subject to more detailed investigation of the means of escape aspects,
and the Building Authority similarly saw no objection, subject to
submission of detailed plans and calculations under both the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act and Building Regulations.

3.   Action

IT WAS AGREED

(a) That    R. Grimshav should investigate as a    matter of urgency themeans
of escape   aspects of the proposals and let D. I. Vaughan know the
outcome.

(b) That, subject to satisfactory clearance of these aspects by the
County Fire Service, the outline proposals submitted by Messrs. Eastvood
& Partners be agreed as now amended by the suggestions of the South
Yorkshire Police, also subject, of course, to the submission of the
necessary detailed plans and calculations under both the Safetyof Sports
Grounds Act and Building Regulations.
                              SAFETY 0? SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

Note of, a Meeting of the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)' held at
the Police. Sports and Social Club, Niagara, Sheffield, on 29th July, 1985

PRESENT:         S. Allcock (South Yorkshire County Fire Service).
                 N. Atkinson (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council).
                 Ms. J. Barker (South Yorkshire Police).
                 J. Freeman (South Yorkshire Police).
                 D. Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council).
                 D. I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council).

1.         Purpose of Meeting

.The purpose of the meeting was tb consider the detailed plans submitted by the
 letter dated 25th July from Messrs. Eastwood and Partners of arrangements
 for the segregation of visiting spectators at' the Leppings Lane End of the
 Hillsborough Stadium of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. It was
 recalled that consideration of outline proposals had taken place by the
 Officer Working Party on 18th April, 1985. Whilst formal application had been
made for Building Regulation approval and some of the work had actually
 commenced, Messrs. Eastwood-and Pajrtpejrs had apologised by 'phone that
 submission of the detailed proposals' for. Safety' of Sports Grounds Act
 approval had apparently been overlooked due’to pressure of work and staff
-holidays. The plans also included details .of repairs to .certain crush
barriers on the Spion Kop.                                     .
                                                                         •    ' s —V *                        .
2 .____ Consideration of Proposals ' ‘-y~;                                           Y.‘   V*
       ..    •                                                                             •    ' .J ..   .
                                                                 '7 ;i * • . . . ■
The 14 detailed plans submttedvere'each; considered and discussed individually
        ‘ •       .          :                        •    '
IT WAS AGREED- that, subject to the;-fol-lowing'j>oints and to the submission of ‘
the necessary detailed calculations .to .the Building Authority, the proposals
for segregating visiting supporters at ‘the'Leppings Lane End of the
Hillsborough Stadium were generally/acceptable:-
                                        .       *   - .’ . ».•         .. *
                                                    t            . •

^a)    Plan No. 6705/6 - for both security access and emergency egress purposes
a pitch perimeter fence gate to be provided;

(b)    Plan No.. 6705/8A - the new handrail by.‘turnstile 23 to be either
shortened or re-aligned so as to maintain, the exit width between the outer
(river) wall and Turnstile 23, and the.exit *idth between Turnstile 16 and
the new handrail not to be less than. the,..width of the roller shutter gate
between Turnstiles 16 and 17;                  •

(c)    Plan No. 6705/9A - the single block thickness of the interal walls
(e.g. the cubicles) is not considered to be substantial enough, and a * '
substantial stud partition (tinier or steel — suitably faced) is felt.to
be required;

(d)        Plan No.      6705/10A - same conments as for plan 9A;

(e)    Plan No. 6705/11A - no objection in principle> but details of exact
location required;

(f)    Plan No. 6705/12 - no objection'in principle, but no barrier height
indicated;
      *7     '       .                      *                                    t
(g)'   Plan No. 6705/14A - so long as increased thickness is achieved by steep
slopes as indicated on the plan and not bv."aterroed*’ arrangements to give
faofchoU. t-h< pro?osftls ar-e sarisfactcrr bat the possible need to take
measures ca tof of eh* w<sJl to discourage persons from attempting to cli=b
over will have to be bcrne in'mind;

(h)         P la n - No. 6705/16A - in view of experiences l a s t y e a r, th e fro n t
c o m e r o f the Spion Kop (by the crush b a r rie r s numbered 5, 8 and 22) to
e i t h e r have a P itc h P erim eter Fence Gate or rad ial b a r r i e r ( s ) to overcone
p o s s ib le l a t e r a l crushing hazard when larg e crowds are p re s e n t;

(i)         P lan No. 6705/17 - fo r bo th se c u rity access and emergency egress
p u rp o s e s , a P itc h P erim eter Fence Gate to be provided;

(j)      Stew arding of New Gates - as mentioned in my l e t t e r o f 2nd May, 1985
i t i s e s s e n t i a l th a t a l l the new gates are fu lly supervised by Stewards,*
who must be f i t , able and p ro p e rly tra in e d .
                     P g L E M E N T A T I O N Of T H E S A F E TY OF SPORTS GROUNDS A C T 1Q7K

                                                  Area Officer Working P a r tie s

          In o rd e r to avoid duplication and division of resources, the prim ary authority has bem .
           esignated fo r the carrying out of inspections, reinspections, and making final
          oof nthet 1 *’G J
                        Guide    d
                              to Safety      nT SSZ17
                                        at Sports      U3'mwith
                                                  Grounds" g thesome
                                                                 headingS ^ ' en inWhere
                                                                      additions.    the rontent*
                                                                                          there issum
                                                                                                    an m ary
         oth er ^autti T T 3 °f C0Dtnl ^                 authority responsible m ust consult the
         abbreviations havJ tee“ us™ :-bef0re £lna“ SlIlg     recom™ d Ill° ^ ) . The following

                                                             c.       = Count v
                                                             p.       = Police
                                                          F.B.        = F ire flrifrnrie
                                                          B.A .       = Building Control Authority


        Subject                      P rim a ry                    To be
                                    Authority                      Consulted          M atters for Consultation


  In g ress to the ground
  (i) stru ctu ral                       B.A.                      F .B .tP .
  (ii) m eans of escape                                                               Possible adverse effects
                                         F .B .                    B . A .t p .       on area of responsibility of
                                                                                      P rim ary Authority

 E g re ss from the ground
 (i) stru c tu ra l                      B.A.                      F .B .& P .        Possible adverse effects
 (ii) m eans of escape                   F .B .                    B .A .fcP.         on area of responsibility
                                                                                      of P rim a ry Authority

 T e rra c e s -
 (i) stru c tu ra l                      B.A.                     F .B .& P .        P ossible adverse effects
 (ii) m eans of escape                   F .B .                   B .A .fcP.         on a rea of responsibility
                                                                                     of P rim a ry Authority

S:ands -
(i) stru ctu ral                         B.                       F .B . &P.         P o s s i b l e a d v e r s e e ff e c ts
(ii) m eans of escaoe                    F.B.                     B .A .& P.         on a r e a of r e s p o n s ib ility
                                                                                     of P r i m a r y A u thority


S tairc a ses and ram ps -
  ■ str u c tu r a l                 B.A.                         F.B.LP.            Possible ad v erse effects
*i-) m e a n s of e s c a p e                                     B.A . t P .
                                     j    . a .                                      on area of responsibility
                                                                                     of P rim ary Authority
        Subject                     P rim a ry •    To be                                               «

                                    Authority       Consulted              M atters fo r Consultation


  F ire P recau tio n s                F .B .       B.A .& P.             A uxiliary and em ergency
                                                                          lighting. Em ergency
                                                    P.                    p rocedure and staff train ir

 A ccess fo r em ergency
   vehicles                            P.           F .B .                F ire B rigade appliances.

 Spacing of cru sh b a rrie rs        B .A .       P.                     E ffect on crowd co n tro l.
                                                   F .B .                 Effect on m eans of escap e.

 Strength of c ru sh -b a rrie rs
  and p e rim e te r w alls           B.A .

T e rra c e to touch-line
  distance                            P.

E stim ation of safe
  ground capacity                     C.           P . , F .B .& B .A .   Final F ig u re s.

Communications                        P.           F .B .                 Effect on fire w arning
                                                                          sy stem .

F ir s t Aid and Medical              C.           A rea Health
                                                   Authority to
                                                   be consulted

P olice a t ground                   P.

Legal and A dm inistration           c.

C ertificate drawings                c.
South Yorkshire County Council,
Department of Administration,
County Hall,
BARNSLEY,
South Yorkshire.
S70 2TN                                               Mr* Sherriff
                                                           4173
              DV/MH/583/5              BR/DS/ADM          2-lst March, 1980


Deeur Sirs,

Safety of Sports Ground Act, 1975
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

I would refer to your letter dated 14th March in connection with the above and
enclose a list of comnents on outstanding Batters primarily concemina the
Ikiilding Authority*

There will, of course, be some overlap of responsibilities and the iteas are
presently being discussed with the County Fire Service and Eastwood & Partners.

Yours faithfully,
      I _______________/?
                          Building Authority Comaents


1.   Fire resisting door frames to be sealed against supporting walls.

2. Check to be made that fire retardant paint has been used on the partitions
   within the South Stand.

3. Confirm the requirements for the use of wired glass in the sane area for
   fire and/or safety purposes.

4.   South Stand restaurant and access areas to be checked for rnmpHaiv. y&th
     fire regulations.

5. Hew stair construction at South-West Stand to be checked for clearance.
   Suggest sharp edges to steelwork removed and timber fascia provided.

6.   Perimeter fencing at North-East comer of Spion Kop to be appraised for
     condition and strength.

7. Upper exit area on Spion Kop to be checked for step obstruction*

8. Mesh fencing under North Stand to be assessed for strength and potential
   hazard to crowd surges.

9.   Exit signs not clearly displayed.


Note: Items 1, 2, 3 and 4 involve the County Fire Service to a considerable
      extent.




Department of Planning & Design,
Town Hall,
SHEFFIELD.
SI 2HH

BR/DS/ADM                                                       21st March. 1980
game if adjacent areas were to be occupied by supporters of the

same    team.             Ap p r o v a l    for the installation of the two radial

fences      was        given by S.-Y.C.C.              in their letter of H t h                September

1981    (pages- 76-77).                    The approval was subject to the condition

(p a ra g ra p h       I.e.    at page 76)            that the gates at the rear of the

fences       should be under Police control.



46.        The     installation              work       was    carried       out    by     a        firm   of

Contractors,              Blessvale,             in    October        and    November      1981.           In

places       the       crush barriers passed through the radial fences and

t h e re    was     d i s c ussion between Mr Strange and Hr England                                   about

this,       as     recorded in the memorandum of 4th November 1981                                     (page

 79).        There         was     further            discussion       between      them       about       the

 r e l e v a n t barriers          on 13th November 1981 (page 81).                            The Police

 wanted          those        barriers       which      passed through the               radial       fences

 removed          because        otherwise            spectators       might use them to climb

 over       the        radial      fences.             Neither    the       Club,   nor        Mr    Strange

 wished          the    barriers           to be removed because to do so might have

 a f f e c t e d safety.           If the relevant barriers had been removed, an

 uninterrupted                 "channel"           would      have     been    created          along      the

  radial         fence from the top of the terrace down to the perimeter

  fence.           Also,       spectators          tend to congregate at the top of the

  w es t    terrace           rather than at the bottom by the perimeter fence

  because          t he i r    v i e w will        not be obscured by the small mesh of

  the       perimeter.               It      was      agreed     in    the    discussions             on   13th

  November             1981     that       the   barriers      would remain in position for

   the next match to see what happened.
47.     The      n e x t    discussion between Mr Strange and Mr England tool:

place following the match on 17th November 1981 (page 82).                                                The

Chief       Constable               had     seen     the      barriers       in    position        and    was

content          that          they     should       remain       because         there   had      been       no

problems          at       the       match.        It    was,     therefore,         agreed     that      the

barriers          would          remain       in   position passing through the                     radial

fences as they are today.



48.     I     wrote            to     S.Y.C.C.          on     14th    December       1981      (page         83)

u p d at i n g     them         on    progress          regarding      the    installation          of        the

radial        fences            and     security         gates.        S.Y.C.C.       replied      on     20th

January          1982          (pages      84-85).        That letter recorded doubts still

 b e i n g v o i c e d by the Police concerning the crush barriers which

 passed          through             the    radial           fences.      I       therefore      wrote         to

 S.Y.C.C.          on 26th January 1982                      (pages 86-88) with my views as to

 why    I   felt that the relevant barriers should not be terminated

' sh o rt of the radial fence.                          I pointed out the aspects of safety

 and segregation which were involved and felt that what had been

 done        was           a      -r easonable               compromise       between        the     various

 interests-.'                  These matters were discussed at a meeting of the

 w o r k i n g pa r t y h e l d on 4th February *982 (pages 89-91).                                      It was

  agreed         at        that      meeting       that       it was    preferable          from a safety

  p o i n t of v i e w to retain the crush barriers which passed through

  the radial fences.



  49.       The insta l l a t i on of two further radial fence, in the west

  terrace           were          considered         in       1985.      These       were    part        of     the

   .-ortT-aanisation of                    the   west        terrace which I shall              refer to in
                              DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND PLANNING

                                  BUILDING SURVEYOR'S DIVISION


DIVISIONAL MEMORANDUM NO. 26                                                    October 1986



SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

1.    Powers and R e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s

1.1   Th is Act became a f u l l r e s p o n s i b i l i t y o f the City Council on
      . 1 s t A p r i l , 1986 and i t s implementation r e s t s with the Administration
       and Legal Department ( C h i e f L ic en si n g O f f i c e r ) a s s i s t e d as neces s ary
       by a panel o f o f f i c e r s ("The Working Party") drawn from vari ou s
       Departments, o t h e r s t a t u t o r y a u t h o r i t i e s and exter nal s o u r c e s .

1.2   The Working Party c o m p o s it io n , r e l e v a n t r o l e s and r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s
      were f i r s t drawn up by the then South Yorkshire County Council in
      1975 ( s e e A ppendix). These arrangements have l a r g e l y been contin ued
      in t h e C i t y , but are l i k e l y t o be reviewed s h o r t l y b e c a u s e : -

       (a)     The Act has been widened in scope (By Order; SI 1986: 1044,
               21.7 .8 6 ).

       (b)     A d d i ti o n a l e x p e r t i s e has been sought to add to the Working Party.

       (c)     The Act may be.amended in the next parliamentary s e s s i o n .

1 . 3 . This memorandum regar ding the r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s o f BSD should t h e r e f o r e
        be regarded as a p o s i t i o n statem en t pending such a review. I t should
        be n o te d t h a t th e BSD r o l e i s t h a t o f "Building Authority", as d e f in e d
        in th e Act, on behal-f o f th e C it y Council. Normally BSD w i l l be
        r e p r e s e n t e d a t Working Party meeti ngs by the Head o f the SAU o r SSU as
        seems a p p r o p r ia t e f o r the c a s e in question or by both.

1.4    B a s i c a l l y t h e r e are two c a s e s where the views o f BSDw i l l be            sought or
       w i l l have t o be put forward

       CASE A

       Where a l t e r a t i o n s or new work i s proposed where, in a d d i t i o n , t o the need
       t o s a t i s f y requir em en ts under the Act ("Green Code" re q u ir em en ts),
       approval under B u il d i n g R e g u la tio n s w i l l be n ecessary , i r r e s p e c t i v e o f
       what s t a g e i t w i l l be sough t, or

       CASE B

       Where work i s proposed or i s to be required to s a t i s f y the Green Code,
       bu t which w i l l n o t r e q u ir e approval under Building Regulatio ns or
       p ia n n in g p e r m i s s i o n .
       NB.     I t w i l l u s u a l l y have been the ca se that the Chief Lic en sing O f f i c e r
               w i l l have d is s e m in a t e d any appropriate information i n c l u d i n g plans
                a t or between m ee tin gs o f the Working Party.


2.     Procedure w i t h i n BSD

2 1    Where Case A a p p l i e s GAU w i l l adopt the primary c o - o r d i n a t i n g r o l e in th e
       D i v i s i o n , ' w i l l con duct any n e c e s s a r y l i a i s o n with ex ter nal Departments
       and b o d i e s           and wi.ll ag r e e , in c o n s u l t a t i o n with SSU and SAU a t P r incipal
                  r ,• r , oV Dy-fnrinai l e v e l . matters o f comoliance with the Green Code.
                                                - 2 -



2 2   Such c o n s u l t a t i o n w i l l a l s o tak e p la c e where for example any d e t a i l s
      are s u b m i tte d in re sp on se to a c o n d i t i o n a l approval or where amend­
      ments are su b m itt e d to the scheme, even i f such d e t a i l s appear to be
      o f i n t e r e s t o n l y to one o f the BSD Units concerned.

2 3   Where Case B a p p l i e s SSU w i l l adopt the primary c o - o r d i n a t i n g r o l e
      in th e D i v i s i o n , w i l l conduct any n e c e s s a r y l i a i s o n with e x t e r n a l
      Departments and b o d i e s , and w i l l a g r e e , in c o n s u l t a t io n w it h SAU
      and GAU, a t P r i n c i p a l or A s s i s t a n t P r incipal l e v e l , matters o f
      c o m p li a n c e w it h t h e Green Code.

2 4   G e n e r a l l y a l l o b s e r v a t i o n s r e l a t i n g to Green Code requirements should
      be p u t " in w r i t i n g t o A d m i n i s tr a tio n and Legal Department. A ll meetings
      s h o u l d be p r o p e r l y minuted as a p p rop ria te using ce n tra l f i l e s 73
      ( S h e f f i e l d Wednesday), 72 ( S h e f f i e l d U n i t e d ) , 71 (General SSGA m a t t e r s ) ,
      and 96 (Owlerton Stadiu m), which are kept by                                           m


3.    P l a n n i n g Pe rm is si on

3 1   Large improvements r e q u i r e planning permission and t h i s may have been
      s o u a h t in advance o f approval under th e Green Guide or B u il ding
      Regulations              In o rd er t h a t th e p o s i t i o n under s . 55 SYA 1980 ( a c c e s s
      f o r f i r e b r i g a d e ) i s sa fegu ard ed i t i s e s s e n t i a l th a t the p r o v i s i o n s
      o f t h e s e c t i o n are brought t o the n o t i c e o f the a p p li c a n t when the
      p l a n n i n g p e r m i s s io n i s i s s u e d .




 C irculation:         All BSD s t a f f
                       Environmental Planning O f f i c e r
                       B Edge, P r i n c i p a l A d m i n i s t r a t iv e O f f i c e r
     Sheffield Sports Stadium
        Owlerfcon, Sheffield



    Report of the Works required
    to be carried out to satisfy
The Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975




 By the Building Surveyor's Division
   Department of Land and Planning
       Sheffield City Council

                 September 1989




     OIRECTOPT                    BUICDINCJ SURVEYOR
CONTENTS


1-0    INIRODUCTION AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1.1    Sections
1.2    Extent of Rqport
1.3    General Requirements

2.0    IMMEDIATE SAFETY RETIREMENTS
2.1    Introduction
2.2    Gate A
2.3    Gate B
2.4    Gate C
2.5    Dates D, E and F
2.6    Gate G
2.7    Gate H
2.8    Gate I
2.9    Stock Car Paddock Area
2.10   East Terrace
2.11   South Terrace
2.12   Greyhound Terrace
2.13   Grandstand
2.14   Sportsman Terrace
2.15   Exit Signs
2.16   Sportsman Tavern
2.17   Greyhound Bar
2.18   The Panorama Suite

3.0    WORKS TO BE CARRIED OOT WITHIN 2 YEARS
3.1    Introduction
3.2    Stock Car Paddock Area
3.3    Greyhound Terrace
3.4    Grandstand/Panorama Suite Area
3.5    Sportsman Terrace/Tavern
3.6    South-West C o m e r of Stadium Land
3.7    Additional General Requirements

4.0    WORKS REQUIRED TO INCREASE CRCWD CAPACITY
4.1    Introduction
4.2    Rugby Football
4.3    Other Activities

APPENDIX - Layout plan of Owlerton Sports Stadium
                       StLLFFT£1D SPORTS STADIUM
                          CWLERTON, SHRFVTTTn

                   REPORT OF TEE WORKS REQUIRING
                   TO BE CARRIED OUT TO SATISFY
               THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

                BY THE BUILDING SURVEYOR'S DIVISION
                  DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND PLANNING
                      SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL

                            SEPTEMBER 1989


P7TRQDOCTION AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

SECTIONS

1.0   Introduction and general requirements
2.0   Immediate safety requirements
3.0   Works to be carried out within 2 years
4.0   Works required to increase crcwd capacity

EXTENT OF REPORT

The contents of this report are those from my office only, and do not
include any caiments or requirements made by the Police, Fire
Authority, Department of Health and Consumer Services, the South
Yorkshire Ambulance Service, the Council's Administration and Legal
Department (Licensing Authority) or any other department, body or
organisation.

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

Electrical Safety

All electrical appliances, circuitry and fittings should be inspected
and tested by a competent person, and a certificate of satisfaction
should be issued to the Council (as Licensing Authority). It is very
important that the competent person is appointed without delay and that
the works of achieving electrical safety to all parts of the stadium
are ccranenced as soon as possible and canpleted in the shortest
possible time.

First Aid Facilities

The number of qualified first aiders and the provision of first aid
equipment and facilities within the ground to be agreed between the
Stadium management and the Council's Department of Health and Consumer
Services, in respect of each type of event and crowd capacity levels.

Ambulance and Fire Brigade Access

For the duration of any event, access for ambulance facilities must be
maintained via an unrestricted access, and stewarded gate, directly to
the ground's first-aid facilities.

Access for fire appliances to all buildings on the site must be
provided for the duration of any event, through stewarded gates. The
position, width and unrestricted height of such access points to be
agreed by the Fire Authority, and those access points to be marked on
any safety certificate.
Stewardinq

In addition to the stewarding requirements in 1.3.3. above, sufficient
stewards must be in attendance at each event (the numbers to be agreed
between the management of the stadium and the Licensing Authority).
All stewards must be trained in normal and emergency evacuation
procedures in addition to the recognition of spectator dangers, and
should be deployed at agreed positions.

IMMEDIATE SAFETY RBJJIREMEOTS

INTRODUCTION

The requirements detailed in this section of the report are required to
be carried out iximediately.

The items relate directly to ingress, egress and general safety
requirements to ensure reasonable safety. However, seme of these
measures are short term and will require further works which are
covered in later sections to bring them up to a satisfactory standard.

The report is based on the retention of all the existing seating and
terracing (except the South Terrace). The provisions of the report are
however only applicable if a walkway is maintained for the spectators
use through the South Terrace area.

For clarity gates have been identified by letters A to I inclusive,
starting frcm Lawther Road and working anti-clockwise around the
Stadium.

In the interests of safety and maintenance, a permanent identity board
should be mounted on or adjacent to each gate to assist identification
to unfamiliar persons.

GATE A

Paint yellow box with diamond cross hatching, iirrnedlately outside
gates, projecting 3.0 metres by full width of gates, and provide
adequate stewarding to ensure that obstruction of the gateway is
prevented when spectators are in the stadium.

Fit suitable panic bolt, able to be opened by any person, from inside
the stadium (in an emergency situation) without delay or need for
additional equipment, e.g. keys.

Carport structure adjacent to Gate A to be demolished. This structure
consists of timber posts, timber roof purlins and asbestos cement
sheeting to the roof. The timber roof members are considerably-under­
sized for their span and are showing excessive deflection. Sncw
loading could cause collapse.

Inside turnstile 3A adjoining Gate A, the light switch on the wall is
loose and is considered a danger. The turnstile equipment appears not
to have been used for sane time. It is therefore suggested that the
turnstile be permanently sealed up.

GATE B

Paint yellow box with diamond cross hatching, immediately outside
gates, projecting 3.0 metres by full width of gates, and provide
             adequate stewarding to ensure that obstruction of the gateway is
             prevented when spectators are in the stadium.

    2.3.2    Fit suitable panic bolt, able to be opened by any person, frcra inside
             the stadium (in an emergency situation) without delay or need for
             additional equipment, e.g. keys.

    2.3.3    The wicket door in these gates is not accepted as being suitable for a
             means of egress or emergency egress, when spectators are in the
             stadium.

    2.3.4    Positive stand open catches, positioned so as not to create a trip
             hazard, and of sufficient strength for the size of the gates, need to
             be fitted.

    2.3.5    Loose materials on roof of ladies and gents toilets, immediately inside
             Gate B, to be removed.

    2.4      GATE C

^   2.4.1    "NO PARKINS" sign to be placed on external face of gates.

    2.4.2    Provide adequate stewarding to ensure .the gates are unobstructed at all
             t-imp's that spectators are in the stadium.

    2.4.3    Fit positive stand open catches, positioned so as not to create a trip
             hazard, and of sufficient strength for the size of the gates.

    2.4.4    Barbed wire on top of gate not to be within 2.4 metres of adjacent
            • ground level.

    2.5      GATES D, E AND F

    2.5.1    Paint yellow box with diamond cross hatching, projecting 3.0 metres by
             the full width of all three gates and turnstiles, on the surface of the
             ground outside the stadium. Additionally NO PARKING should be painted
             along the front edge of the box.

^            If after an initial trial period of 3 months, the yellow box system is
             ineffective in prohibiting parking of vehicles in this area, a physical
             barrier of concrete bollards or other suitable means must be provided
             to ensure unrestricted egress from any of the gates is maintained at
             all tines during the use .of the stadium.

    2.5.2    All of these gates to remain unlocked and permanently stewarded whilst
             any spectators are in the stadium.

    2.5.3    Positive stand open catches, positioned so as not to create a trip
             hazard, and of sufficient strength for the size of the gates, need to
             be fitted. ■

    2.5.4    Barrier recently installed outside Gate F, to segregate parking area
             from entrance area, has already been damaged by vehicular impact. The
             barrier needs to be repaired, strengthened and satisfactorily beaded so
             as to achieve the desired stability.

    2.5.5    On the top of the external walling between the stadium and the car
             park, barbed wire has been installed, and is at approximately 1.3
             metres above car park level immediately adjacent to Gate F. All
             barbed wire to be minimum 2.4 metres above adjacent ground level.
2.5.6    Although the gates at D, E and F have been altered so as to be capable
         of opening outwards, it is found on close inspection that one of each
         of the double gates needs first to be opened inwards in order to
         release the second gate in each pair. Having released the second gate
         by its vertically mounted hoop handled bolt, both gates can then be
         opened outwards. This process is unsatisfactory for a major means of
         escape route.

          Further structural alterations are required so as to achieve readily
          available opening outward facilities for both gates in each pair.

2.6      GATE G

2 6     1 Fit suitable panic device, able to be cpened by any person frcm inside
          the Stadium, in an emergency situation, without delay or need for
          additional equipment, e.g. keys. This need only apply when spectators
          are in the Stadium.

2 6     2 Building adjacent to Gate G appears to be in a delapidated condition.
          Loose roof tiles must be removed and broken windows mast be boarded up.

2.7      GATE H

2 7     1 Fit suitable panic bolt, able to be opened by any person from inside
           the Stadium, in an emergency situation, without delay or need for
           additional equipment, e.g. keys.

2 7     2 Area innediately inside Gate H presently used for storage of plant and
           materials. This area should not be open to spectators, and nwst be .
           adequately fenced off and gated. When recovery plant is being used for
           stock car racing, the opening to this area must be adequately stewarded.

2.7.3     Partially buried barbed wire in this area to be removed.

 2.8      GATE I

 2.8.1    I d e n t if ic a t io n   p la t e   "i; to be positioned on inside of g a te .

 2 8 2    Barbed wire over top of gate to be removed or increased in height to
           minimum 2.4 metres.

 2.9      STOCK CAR PADDOCK AREA

 2 9 1     Provide additional floodlighting to paddock area and trade access road.
           The level of illumination must be sufficient in all parts of the
           paddock and the access road, to enable the ground surface and any other
           potential hazards to be seen.

 2.9.2    Make good to paddock ground surfaces to form an even walking surface.

 2 9 3    Provide fire fighting appliances, at a suitable position or positions,
           of such type and number so as to be suitable for extinguishing a
            vehicle fire.

 2 9 4      When vehicles are being refuelled, the stadium managementmust^devise a
            safe system to ensure that a NO SM3KBG rule is enforced for both
            competitors and spectators who may be near to that operation.

 2 9 5  Spectators attending events other than stock car racing should not have
    * access to this part of the ground.
2.9.6       Spectators attending stock car events must not be allowed to-use the
            banking to the rear of the East Terrace as an access to, or egress
            frcm, the stock car paddock area.

2.9.7       Lcose barbed wire to wall between Gates H and I to be removed. Any
            barbed wire must be a minimum of 2.4 metres above adjacent ground
            level.

2.10        EAST TERRACE

2.10.1      Refix or replace loose timbers to advertising hoardings along rear of
            terrace.

2.10.2      Provide adequate fence, capable of withstanding 3.4 KN/M, along the
            rear of the terrace, so as to prohibit spectators frcm entering into
            the vegetation or under the advertisement hoardings.

2.10.3      Prohibit the use of the track along the rear of the terrace by any
            vehicles when spectators are in the stadium.

2.10.4      Remove all litter and debris from the terrace after every event.

2.10.5      Provide 1200 nm high fencing with gate(s) across the ends of the East
            Terrace abutting the track access road. The construction should be
            strong enough for its purpose and have vertical balusters at 100 era
            maximum centres. The gate(s) must be steward controlled during stock
            car events, but may be left open during other events where the trade
            access road is not used. The width of the gate(s) should satisfy means
            of escape requirements frcm the East Terrace for spectators to use Gate
            H in an evacuation.

2.10.6      Fix Warning Notices each side of track access road in clearly
            illuminated and visible positions, stating BEWARE VEHICLES CROSSING.

2.10.7      Provide new gate for opening in perimeter wall midway along terrace,
            and ensure it is in position and locked during every event.

2 .10.8           out drainage channel to terrace front.

2.10.9      R em ove all loose structures and items of plant and other loose material
            from the useable terrace area before it is used by spectators.

2 .1 0 .1 0 Rotted front and rear facias to snack bar to replace.

2.11        SOUTH TERRACE

2.11.1      This terrace requires extensive re-building to make it safe to.pse,
            therefore, it must not be used for spectators until such works have
            been carried out.

2 .1 1 .2   To maintain full access around the stadium, the terrace will require a
            path with a smooth even surface to be constructed so as to connect the
            Greyhound Terrace to the track access road adjacent to Gate H. The
            path must be of a width capable of satisfying means of escape require­
            ments from the Greyhound Terrace and be not less than 1500 itm wide.
            Throughout its length it should be adequately balustraded and
            illuminated.
2.11.3   Provide 1200 mm high fencing with gate(s) across the end of the South
         Terrace abutting the track access road. The construction should be
         strong enough for its purpose and have vertical balusters at 100 inn
         maximum centres. The gate'(s) must be steward controlled during stock
         car events, but may be left open during other events where the track
         access road is not used. The width of the gate(s) should satisfy means
         of escape requirements from the Greyhound Terrace for spectators to use
         Gate H in an evacuation.

2.11.4   Remove shale overspray frcm terraced passage in front of Greyhound Bar.
         Make good to any uneven surface.

2.11.5   Clean out any drainage gulleys which are blocked.

2.11.6   The perimeter wall or other suitable structure must be continued
         between the site of the former totalizator board and the trade access
         road, (if this is adjacent to the site of the pathway through the South
         Terrace) so as to prevent any spectator gaining unauthorised access to
         the greyhound track or any of its operating mechanism.

2.11.7   The access gate frcm the greyhound terrace should be removed.

2.11.8   Barbed wire on the stadium external wall to be removed where less than
         2.4 metres above adjacent ground level.

2.11.9   Remove bench seat from south terrace.

2.11.10 Immediate action must be taken to alter ground levels to achieve public
        safety where approximately 900 mm vertical drop in levels exists to
        East end of former 'Totalizator Board' on line of walkway used by
        spectators.

2.11.11 The extensive areas of thistles and nettles in the vegetation to the
        back of this terracing is considered to be very dangerous.

2.11.12 Exit from this terracing towards Gate G is very uneven and overgrown
        with vegetation. It is very dangerous for this route to be used in the
        hours of darkness.      S’                     •




2.12     GREYHOUND TERRACE

2.12.1   Remove, and prevent the use of, crates on the terrace. Loose
         such as these should not be allowed to be used as seats or for standing
         on.

2.12.2   Replace corroded or damaged corrugated sheeting to rear of terrace, or
         seal to prevent exposed rough edges.

2.12.3   Prevent beer glasses and bottles being taken onto the terracing.   If
         drinks are allowed on terraces, plastic containers must be used.

2.12.4   Clean and maintain yard gulleys to terrace front, in an operative
         condition. Any broken gratings are to be replaced, preferably with
         screw down type covers.

2.12.5   Make good to uneven tarmac to terrace front to provide an even walking
         surface and better drainage.
2.12.6    Fix any loose wiring to prevent it being pulled or further damaged.
          - Any electrical connections or joints must be within approved junction
          boxes.

2.12.7    The concrete terracing to the northern end is cracked, and some parts
          are loose - satisfactory repairs must be carried out.

2.12.8    The top riser of the terracing is greater than other risers on the
          terracing. Particularly outside the Greyhound Bar this could cause
          a trip hazard. The edge of this nosing needs to be highlighted in
          yellow or white paint.

2.12.9    'Pit? area at south end of terrace is constructed on the line of the
          track perimeter wall. ■ The perimeter wall adjacent to this needs to be
          increased from 800 mn to approximately 1000 mn. The opening in the
          perimeter wall requires to be gated.

2.12.10 Loose materials and debris on terracing to be removed before spectators
        are admitted to any event.

2.12.11 Timber barrier rail in terraced area to be removed immediately.

2.12.12 Access between rear of Terrace and toilet block, to be gated to prevent
        unauthorised access.

2.12.13 If Gate G is to be used as an exit gate for spectators (in any circum­
        stances) either the route(s) must be clearly defined and balustraded,
        or loose materials stored at the rear of the Greyhound Terrace must be
        removed or adequately fenced off.

2.13      GRANDSTAND

2.13.1    Repair to a satisfactory standard, all broken or damaged seats and
          seat backs. All protruding bolt heads, etc., must not present sharp
          edges, or cause snagging of clothing.

2.13.2 Refix or replace all broken or worn floorboarding to theseating
       gangways. All loose boarding to be secured.

2.13.3    Prohibit beer glasses and bottles frcm being taken onto the seating.

2.13.4           all accumulations of rubbish and materials fran beneath seating
           tiers, and ensure no build-up of rubbish occurs in.the future.

2.13.5     Prohibit sitting on steps, gangways and balustrading associated with or
           forming part of the seating.

2.13.6     Secure loose balustrading to all sections of seating.

2.13.7     At southern end of South seating unit open risers to 1st and 2nd steps
           to be closed .down to 100 mm maximum.

2.13.8 B a lu s tr a d in g t o e n d s of s e a tin g u n it s t o b e m axim um   900mm h ig h a b o v e
        p it c h lin e of t e r r a c in g .

2.14       SPORTSMAN TERRACE

2.14.1 Barbed wire within 2.4 metres of terrace level should be removed from
       around the low roof of the building of the southern end of the terrace.
         This must however be replaced by other materials which prevent this
         roof from being used as a "vantage point" by spectators.

2.14.2   Remove projecting screws frcm wall in front of the low roof referred to
         in 2.14.1 above.

2.14.3   Re-hang steel gate, between the terrace and the greyhound trade access
         road, to swing outwards frcm the terraoe. The hinges of such a gate
         mast be on the trade side of the gate opening. It should be ensured
         that the gate is capable of being held in the open position and that it
         is unlocked at all times during any event.

2.14.4   Clean out all yard gulleys to terrace front, and replace any damaged
         gratings with screw dewn type gratings.

2.14.5   On the large double doors at the rear of the terrace a suitable NO EXIT
         sign should be affixed.

2.14.6   Wiring loom overhead from Sportsman Terrace to offices is within easy
         reach. These cables must be increased in height to at least 2.4 metres
         over this area.

2.14.7   Wires at eaves level to the back of the terracing is hanging down and
         now within easy reach of spectators - it is suggested that all wiring
         in these areas should be trunked.

2.14.8   Steel purlin in 6th bay of roof (frcm to southern end) is badly
         corroded and considered to be in need of urgent replacement.

2.14.9   Sloping coping to top of wall outside entrance to "Sportsman Tavern" to
         be extended to end of wall.

2.14.10 Guttering to entire length of sportsman terrace to clean out and clear
        of vegetation.

2.14.11 Materials and plant to be   removed from rear access road. This is a
        dedicated means of escape   route and should not be obstructed in any
        way. Any permanent plant    storage adjacent to the roadway should be
        adequately balustraded to   form a separate area.                        ,

2.14.1 2 Openings to underfloor void of betting booths to be sealed - Adequate
         means of natural ventilation to be provided.

         Before sealing, earth needs to be removed so that timber and steel
         floor members are clear of ground. All timber and steel members to be
         checked for deterioration, and steelwork painted before being sealed
          in.

2 14 13 Rerove loose building and maintenance materials frcm area between rear
        of terrace and toilet block.

2.15      EXIT SIGNS

2 15 1    In all spectator areas, exit signs should be provided so as to guide
          spectators to a place of safety and to the designated exits for means
          of escape purposes. The Fire Authority should be consulted as to the
          positions of these signs and the designated emergency evacuation exits
          relevant to a particular area.
2.15.2   The signs are to have white arrows and instructions on a green
         background, and comply with BS 5378 Part 1, 1980. The signs must be
         mechanically fixed, durable, and adequately illuminated.

2.16     SPORTSMAN TAVERN

2.16.1   Low level void (at midpoint of length of building on the track frontage)
         to seal so as to prohibit debris and refuse being deposited there.

2.16.2   Manhole to the North East comer of the building needs rebedding of
         loose masonry.. Balustrading to be built into the construction to
         provide spectator safety to the present 1.5 metre unguarded difference
         in height of ground levels.

2.16.3   The waste pipe entering into the manhole (see 2.16.2 above) is
         unprotected against damage, and the rodding eye cap to the pipe is
         missing - Repairs and replacement are necessary.

2.16.4   Access to underfloor space of these premises to be sealed - Adequate
         means of natural ventilation to be incorporated by the use of
         225 x 225 urn airgrates at maximum 1.0 metre centres. Before sealing
         all rubbish to be extracted and steelwork cleaned and painted.

2.16.5   Vegetation in guttering to rear of premises to be cleaned out.

2.17     GREYEQUND BAR

2.17.1   Part of rear pathway between emergency exit and rear steps to be
         adequately surfaced.

2.17.2   Timber gate immediately adjacent to rear emergency exit is capable of
         opening outwards and blocking energency escape route. Since the
         storage area that it serves does not appear to be used, the gate
         should be permanently fixed shut.

2.18     THE PANORAMA SPITE

2.18.1   The treads of the bottom flight of steps, on the external means of
         escape at the southern end of the building, are to be replaced.

2.18.2   White/green arrowed directional signs to tunnel under Panorama room
         indicate ingress direction. These coloured signs should be for egress
         and.emergency egress purposes. Alternative coloured signs required for
         ingress routes.

3.0      WORKS TO BE CARRIED COT WITHIN 2 YEARS

3.1      INTRODUCTION                                                     ~

3.1.1.   The requirements in this section of the report, should be carried out as
         soon, as possible, and certainly before the expiration of 2 years from
         the date of this report.

3.1.2    ftnre of the items in this section are given the extended period'of time
         on the basis that the works in Section 2.0 of this report are carried
         out as a matter of inmediacy.

3.1.3    If further deterioration is noted, it may be necessary to reclassify
         works as then requiring mmediate action.
3.2        STOCK CAR PADDOCK AREA

3 . 2 .1   Bottom of banking to East Terrace to be fenced off to step
           unauthorised access to the vegetation.

3 . 2 .2   In connection with 3 .2 .1 above, consideration should be given to
           forming a purpose made stairway frcm the mid point at the rear of the
           East Terrace, down the bank to the Stock Car Paddock. This would
           spectator congestion along the access road to the paddock, and would
           achieve an additional means of escape (if necessary} frcm the East
           Terrace.

3 . 2 .3   A separated pathway for pedestrians only should be laid along the
           Stock Car Paddock access road. This pathway should be surfaced and
           balustraded from the vehicular roadway.

3 .3       GREYHOUND TERRACE

3 .3 .1    Fractured and damaged roof sheeting to be replaced. •

3 . 3 .2   The cracked terracing outside the entrance to the Greyhound Bar
            requires to be repaired.

3 . 3 .3   All structural steelwork to be wire brushed, and repainted. Any
            severe corrosion found must be reported to the City Council's Chief
            Licensing Officer without delay.

3 . 3 .4   Timber hut in North West comer of terrace to be removed.

3 .4   .   GRANDSTAND/PANORAMA SUITE AREA

3 . 4 .1   Timber seating units to be removed, and any replacement to be
            constructed of non-combustible materials.

3 . 4 .2   Cracked asbestos cement roof sheeting of main canopy to be replaced.

3 . 4 .3   Repaint all structural steelwork. Any corrosion to be wire brushed
            before re-painting. If corrosion is found to be severe, it must be
            reported to the City Council's Chief Licensing Officer without delay.

3 .5       SPORTSMAN TERRACE/TAVERN

3 .5 .1    All structural steelwork to be wire brushed, and repainted.   Any
            severe corrosion found must be reported to the City Council's Chief
            Licensing Officer without delay.

3 . 5 .2   Broken asbestos wall sheeting to rear of betting booths (approximately
           at central point of terrace) to be replaced.                  ...

3 . 5 .3   Shattered asbestos cement roof sheeting to re?:-: of Sportsman Tavern to
           be replaced.

3.5.4      Access steps frcm centre doors to rear roadway to be formed in
           .accordance with plans submitted to, and approved by the City Council
            as Licensing Authority.

3.6        SOUTH-WEST CORNER OF STADIUM IAND

3 .6 .1    The growth of grass, w e d and other low vegetation to be inhibited by
            either cutting or use of chemicals, so as to reduce the risk of fire in
            sunmer months, and to maintain designated escape routes, through the area. >
3.6.2    The presently derelict building adjacent to Gate G mast be either
         restored and be used, or demolished.

3.7      ADDITIONAL GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

3.7.1    All external perimeter walls to Stadium to be inspected and all
          necessary works carried out to achieve safety and security.

3.7.2     Exposed reinforcement in track perimeter walling, to be covered by
          suitable means to be agreed with the City Council's Building Surveyor.

3.7.3    Clean out all manholes on the site, and rod all lengths of drainage to
          achieve a clear flowing drainage system. - Any consequential repairs
          to be carried out at the time. The works of cleansing and repairs to
          be carried out to the satisfaction of the City Council, and to be
          monitored throughout by the Council's Building Surveyor.

3.7.4     All trees, bushes and shrubs overhanging or encroaching into the
          spectator areas to be kept well trimmed back.

4.0      WORKS REQUIRED TO INCREASE C R O P CAPAdlY

4.1      TNTRODUCnON

4.1.1    Before any consideration is given to increasing the crowd capacity
          above the present figure of 4000, all the works in Sections 1.3,
          2.0 and 3.0 must be carried out.

4.1.2     Any increase in crcwd capacity must be considered in the light of
          legislation and knowledge current at the time of the request.
                                                                      •

4 1.3     Due to the diversity of activities at the Stadium, it may be necessary
          to design re q u ire m e n ts to cater for a specific spectator group, and not
          to increase capacity for all events.

4.2      RUGBY FOOTBALL

4 2.1     Any increase in crowd capacity for this purpose mist be considered cxily
          when total segregation of opposing supporters has been achieved.   .

4 2.2     In order to achieve segregation of opposing supporters, it will be
          necessary to have structural alterations within the ground to -separate
          the two parts of the ground, the provision of refreshment facilities in
          each part, and separate turnstiles of adequate numbers to' cater for
           estimated demand.

 4 2 3    An increase in crowd capacity for this purpose would also necessarily
           involve the installation of properly designed and positioned crash
           barriers in any used terrace areas.

 4 2 4    proposals for this purpose would need to be the subject of very
           detailed discussions between all members of the SSGA advisory group.

 4.3      OTHER ACTIVITIES    ■

 4 3 1    Requests for increase of crcwd capacity for other than Rugby Football
  * *     must be considered according to 4.1.2 above, and in addition the
           knowledge of trends of behaviour of fans at the tine.


 M14ABW
            INC U S f U R R A C J                            .NQWLERTON SPORTS
       ( H O I ; 0 9C VS CD A t N t t S U M I
                                                              \5 J A O IU M



•S'




      TOTAL CAPACITY IN THIS APPLICATION
      FOR A SAFETY CERTIFICATE 6 7 8 1 .                w !~ i   V




                                                HEW
                                                FEHCf




                                                                 E A S TW O O D & PARTNERS
                    MAIN StA
                                                                 C o nsu ltin g E n jjin » « n
                                  •I ISOI                        St. A n d r a w * H o u s e
                                                                 2 3 Kingfiald R oad
                                                                 S h e l f laid S11 9AS          T*L I07«»)

                                                                                                      SCALE
                                                        DRAWN

                                                        CHECKED
                                                                                                  DRAWING No.
                                                         APPROVED
                        DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND PLANNING

                          BUILDING SURVEYOR'S DIVISION


DIVISIONAL MEMORANDUM NO 26 (Revised)                           October 1988




SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

1.    Powers and Responsibilities

1.1   Following the demise of the County Council, the implementation of
       of this Act became the full responsibility of the City Council on
      the 1st April 1986. Its implementation rests with the Administration
      and Legal Department (Chief Licensing Officer) assisted as necessary
      by the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, which is a pano] Qf
      officers drawn from various Departments, other statutory
      authorities, and external sources as required.

1.2   The 1975 Act has been amended by the Fire Safety and Safety of
      Places of Sport Act 1987, and currently covers sports grounds at
      which either Association Football, Rugby League Football or Rugby
      Union Football is played, and having a ground capacity, in the
      opinion of the Secretary of State, in excess of 10,000. Future
      comnencement orders may bring operational Part III of the 1987 Act,
      which will introduce a system of safety certification for stands
      with covered acconmodation for 500 or more spectators (Regulated
      stands).

1.3   In connection with the above powers, the following have been agrgy}
      as being the general areas of responsibility for the participating
      authorities.

             Authority                         Area of Responsibility

      The Building Surveyor             All natters relating to the structure
                                        of stadia, including crush barriers,
                                        walls, etc.

      South Yorkshire County            Fire Precautions, fire alarms, neans
      Fire Service                      of escape, emergency lighting,
                                        stadium capacity.

      South Yorkshire Police            Stadium policing, evacuation
                                        procedures, access of emergency
                                        vehicles and emergency planning.

      Department of Health and          An advisory input on aspects of
      Consumer Services                 general safety, general safety
                                        management of stadia and first aid.

1.4   The role   of the BSD is that of "Building Authority", as defined in
      the Act,   and will normally be represented at the advisory group
      meetings   by the Principal District Surveyor or the Principal
      Engineer   as seems appropriate for the case in question, or by both.
Basically there are two cases where the views of BSD will be sought
or will have to be put forward

CASE A

Where alterations or new work is proposed where in addition to the
need to satisfy requirements under the Act ("Green Code" requirements),
approval under Building Regulations will be necessary, irrespective
of what stage it will be sought, or

CASE B

Where work is proposed or is to be required to satisfy the Green _
Code, but which will not require approval under Building Regulations
or planning permission.

NB.    It will usually have been the case that the Chief Licensing
       Officer will have disseminated any appropriate information,
       including plans, at or between meetings of the Advisory Group.

Procedure within BSD

Where CASE A applies GAO will adopt the primary co-ordinating role
in the Division, will conduct any necessary liaison with external
Deoartmants and bodies, and will agree, in consultation with SSU
and SAU at Principal or Assistant Principal level, matters of
compliance with the Green Code.

Such consultation will also take place where for example any
details are submitted in response to a conditional approval or where
amendments are submitted to the scheme, even if such details appear
to be of interest only to one of the BSD Units concerned.

Where CASE B applies SSU will adopt the primary co-ordinating role
in the Division, will conduct any necessary liaison with external
Departments and bodies, and will agree, in consultation with SAD and
GAU, at principal or Assistant Principal level, matters of
compliance with the Green Code.

Generally all observations relating to the Green Code requirements
and any other matters relating to the Safety of Sports Grounds Act
should be in writing, and sent to or via the Chief Licensing Officer
of Administration and Legal Department. All meetings should be
properly minuted as appropriate,-using central files as follows
which are kept by the Building Surveyor's secretary:-

         Sheffield Wednesday                 File   73
         Sheffield United                    File   72
         General SSGA matters                File   71
         Owlertcn Stadium                    File   96

 Other files will be created as necessary for additional sports
 grounds or designated stands.

 P la n n in g P e rm is s io n

 Large improvements require planning permission and this may have ^
 been sought In advance of approval under the Green Guide or Building
Regulations. In order that the position under s.55 SYA 1980 (access
for fire brigade) is safeguarded it is essential that the provisions
of the-section are brought to the notice of the applicant when the
planning permission is issued.




                            / y


• • • • • • • « • • •   •

BSD/A.Bli/Kl9AAD




This supercedes the document dated October 1986



Circulation:- All BSD staff
              Environmental Planning Officer
              Principal Administrative Officer
              Chief Licensing Officer
                      (Administration and Legal Department)
The Building Surveyor                        Acting Head of Admin. & Legal Dent.

                                              For the attention of Ms. F Woodhead
29 September 1989
KW33/AW/KH6ADCJ
4169 - Mr K Blount




Safety at Sports Grounds
Advisory Group Meetings


I refer to your memorandum of 25 September concerning the p » n W a r vaiig
of Sheffield United Football Club and the question of the membership of
the Advisory Group.

Mr Butler is currently indisposed and therefore a full reply concerning
the walls will be sent after his return. However, may I draw your
attention to ny report to you dated 24 May, 1989 (for the attention of
Mr D Bownes) wherein the condition of these walls was infact noted (at
item 6.5) and that further investigation would be needed in order to
determine appropriate action.

As to the membership of the Advisory Group, I note your intention to
invite Mr B J G Levers to future meetings. As a matter of principle I do
not think it is necessary for an authority or department to be represented
by more than one person. To do otherwise is to invite the Advisory Group
to become again an unwieldy body consumed by indecision.

Clearly, however, there will, be occasions when such a representative might
wish to be accompanied by other officers of the same department to give
advice to hire/her as may be necessary on particular issues. I see no
problem in that.

Except where I attend an Advisory Group in person, I am c o n te n t that
Mr Butler represents the Division. Where it is necessary, however, he m y
be substituted by another appropriate officer or be accompanied by another
officer, for example, Mr Levers or Mr Sheriff. I trust that I make myself
clear on this point
      ________ t




         V

cc.    Mr 6 Levers
       Mr D S h e r i f f
       Mr A But le r
       D ir e c to r
       F i l e s 71B & 72B
                                                                        STATION

                DAVID MALCOLM
                BOWNES

ADDRESS:        ADMIN AND LEGAL DEPT
                TOWN HALL, SHEFFIELD

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 34

OCCUPATION:     CHIEF LICENSING OFFICER (GENERAL)


Who states:- This statement consisting of 015 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 200690                                              D M BCWNES (SIGNED)



        I am employed by Sheffield City Council in the Administration and

       Legal Department as Chief Licensing Officer.      I have been employed by

       the City Council since September 1971 (000971) and have held my current

       post since 11 July 1977 (110777).      I have a HNC in Public

       Administration.

       My job entailed the management of the licensing section which deals

       with 33 licensing systems including taxis, private hire vehicles,

       operators and drivers, cinemas, theatres and places of public

       entertainment as well as the safety of sports grounds licensing system.

       In the course of these duties I prepare written reports for Council

       Canmittees. The job also involves liaison with other departments and

       outside agencies such as the Fire Service and the Police.

       On 1 April 1986 (010486) South Yorkshire Metropolitan County Council

       ceased to exist by virtue of the Local Government Act 1985 (000085).

       The County Council had responsibility for the discharge of functions

       under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (000075), and these were to

       be taken over by Sheffield City Council in respect of sports grounds

       within Sheffield, including Hillsborough.     This entailed the City
BOWNES                 DAVID MALCOLM                                       2


Council making arrangements to take over this function.

I recall that in February/March 1986 (000286) (000386) I spoke to Mr

VAUGHAN of the County Council who was then dealing with the Safety of

Sports Grounds, at his offices in Barnsley.    I also spoke to the Police

and the Fire Service and Building Surveyors about Safety of Sports

Grounds. I did not receive any information to the effect that any

serious safety issues were outstanding.

In order to establish a framework within which Sheffield City Council

could exercise its functions which would be acquired on 1 April 1986

(010486) I prepared a report which was submitted through the Head of

Department, to the General Purposes Panel which was a sub committee of

the Municipal Enterprise and General Services Programme Committee

(referred hereafter as MEGS) which is in turn a Committee of the City

Council. The report was submitted to the Panel on 3 March 1986

(030386).    I produce that report, (Ref DMB1) (Ex      ).

The report "recommended that the following delegations be approved:-

(a)         All the powers and duties of the Council under the Safety of

            Sports Ground Act 1975 (000075) be delegated to the General

            Purposes Panel;

(b)         The emergency procedure powers under Section 10 of the 1975

            (000075) Act be delegated to the Head of Administration and

            Legal Department in consultation with Chairman or Deputy

            Chairman of this Panel or of the Municipal Enterprise and

            General Services Programme Ccmnittee as appropriate.

(c)         The power to authorise Officers under Section 11 of the Act

            be delegated to the Head of Administration and Legal

            Department. "

At its meeting on 3 March 1986 (030386) the Panel resolved in

accordance with the report.    The minutes of the Panel were subsequently
BOWNES                  DAVID MALCOLM                                         3


approved by MEGS at its meeting on 17 March 1986 (170386).        In turn the

minutes of MEGS were approved by the City Council at its meeting on 9

April 1986 (090486).        I produce an extract from the Council Summons

dated 9 April 1986 (090486) which contains these minutes (Ref DMB2)

(Ex      ).

As frcm the 9 April 1986 (090486) the delegations approved by the Panel

cane into full legal effect.

All the County Council files (which consist of seme thousands of

documents and plans) in relation to Sports Grounds in Sheffield were

handed over to me on the demise of the County Council.       Consequently I

was able to examine their administrative system more thoroughly before

making a further report to the Panel.

The Council now having acquired the functions, it was necessary to

establish an administrative system within which it could fulfil its

functions under the legislation.       To achieve this I prepared a further

and more detailed report which was submitted via the Head of

Department to the Panel on 6 May 1986 (060586).       I produce the report

(Ref DMB3) (Ex         ).

The Panel considered the report at its meeting on 6 May 1986 (060586)

and resolved (amongst other things), "that

a)        the broad outlines of the administrative system organised by

          the former South Yorkshire County Council under the Safety of

          Sports Grounds Act 1975 (000075) be noted and authority be

          given for the continuation of such system for the time

          being."

The resolution also deeds with other non material matters.

As the Panel had full delegated power to deal with this issue the

resolution took effect immediately.

As a matter of routine the minutes of the Panel meeting were seen by
BONNES               DAVID MALCOLM                                         4


MEGS and the City Council. I produce an extract from the Council

Summons dated 4 June 1986 (040686) which contains these minutes (Ref

DMB4) (Ex      ).

The administrative system adopted was based on the former County

Council system and comprised two main components.     These were meetings

of an Officer Working Party at which bi-annual inspections of sports

grounds were carried out and meetings of the Working Party on other

occasions to discuss various matters.

Dealing with the bi-annual inspections these were carried out by

representatives of the Police, the Fire Service and the Building

Surveyors Division of the City Council.

Also in attendance would be myself and representatives of the Club.

Inspection involved a thorough check of the stadia and the

identification of any defects.    Any defects found were brought to the

attention of the Safety Certificate holder and/or his technical

representative if present.     Depending upon the nature of any defect

steps were then agreed for rectification.

The Officer Working Party meetings comprised representatives of the

same organisations but representatives of the Club or their technical

advisors were not members of it.     Dr EASTWOOD and/or a representative

of his firm and/or of the Club could of course be present during

inspections and during General Purpose Panel meetings when relevant

issues were being discussed.     I do not recall inviting Dr EASTWOOD, etc

to attend Working Party or Advisory Group meetings.

Examination of Officer Working Party minutes pre 1 April 1986 (010486)

show that on occasions either Dr EASTWOOD and/or his representative

and/or a representative of the Club attended meetings.     I am unable to

comment upon the extent of the involvement of Dr EASTWOOD, his company

or Club representatives in the Working Party system prior to 1 April
BOWNES                  DAVID MALCOLM                                       5


1986 (01 048 6 ) .

The Officer Working Party, post April 1986 (000486), considered all

aspects of safety of spectators at sports grounds, acting as a

co-ordinating body which attempted to ensure that a balanced and

consistent approach was maintained to current issues.     For example the

provision of disabled facilities in the North Stand at Sheffield

Wednesday Football Club, which involved the construction of ramps etc.

In adopting the administrative system from the County Council the role

of the constituent agencies was divided and defined in accordance with

a schedule drawn up by the County Council.     This gave responsibility

for "the carrying out of inspections, re inspections and making final

technical recommendations..." to 'primary authorities'.     For example

the 'Primary Authority' for the spacing and strength of barriers and

strength of perimeter walls and terraces (structural) was the building

surveyor and for terraces (means of escape) the Fire Service.

The Council was the prime authority for estimation of safe ground

capacity.     I produce the schedule which was in force until 1987

(000087) (Ref DMB5) (Ex         ).

As part of the administrative arrangements the Officer Working Party in

addition to making "agreements" (for example in respect of work to be

carried out) could make recommendations to the Panel.     Recommendations

could cover any issue in relation to safety of sports grounds, examples

of issues in which the working party did make recommendations to the

Panel involved the South Stand roof and the Spion Kop (both of which

are at the Hillsborough Stadium).

If the Working Party were unable to reach agreement on any matter then

it would be referred to the Panel.    If the Club refused to implement

something agreed by the Working Party then this would be referred to

the Panel.
BCWNES                DAVID MALCOLM                                       6


Minutes of the Officer Working Party were taken by me due to ray

position with the Council.   So far as ray involvement with the Working

Party is concerned I acted as Clerk/Secretary and took the lead as the

occasion demanded although in practice this did not arise very often,

owing to the smooth operation of the Working Party.

Regarding the reduction of Barrier 144, this arose at the bi-annual

inspection attended by the various agencies at Hillsborough on 7 August

1986 (070886).   Representation was made by the Policefor two sections

of the barrier in the South Central Pen to be removed         so     thatpersons

entering the terrace from the tunnel would not be obstructed by it.

According to the Police some difficulties had arisen in this area.

Following discussion it was agreed by the Officer Working Party that

the barrier be reduced.   In attendance at the time that the discussions

were taking place were representatives of EASTWOODS on behalf of the

Club, although I am unable to name the individual(s).

During the course of the discussion in regard to the reduction of the

barrier I am unable to recall whether any mention was made on the

question of crowd capacity of this part of the ground.   My personal

notes taken at the time are not available.

So far as I am concerned the working party arrived at an "agreement"

which was wholly consistent with past practice and the administrative

procedures briefly described in the report of 6 May 1986 (060586).

Such 'agreements' were expressly authorised by resolution 4(a) of the

General Purposes Panel meeting held on 6 May 1986 (060586).

In the period after May 1986 (000586) a review was carried out by my

department of the administrative system relating to safety of sports

grounds.   As part of this review consultation took place with the

Police, the Fire, the Building Surveyors Department and the Health and

Consumer Services Department (of the Council).   This led to a draft
BOWNES                  DAVID MALCOLM                                       7


report being prepared and circulated for their comments to these

authorities on 3 August 1987 (030887).     I produce a copy of the letter

circulating the draft to the Fire Brigade (Ref DMB6) (Ex         ).

Letters and memoranda to the other agencies followed the same format.

Following receipt of replies from the agencies a report was submitted

to the Panel via the Head of Admin and Legal Department on 7 September

1987 (070987) which reflected the consultation process.     I produce the

report (Ref DMB7) (Ex         ).

A resolution was passed by the Panel on that date and took full legal

effect immediately.   The minutes of the meeting were passed to MEGS and

the Council for information only.     I produce an extract from the

Council Summons of 7 October 1987 (071087) which includes these minutes

(Ref DMB8) (Ex        ).   The purpose of the review was to update the

administrative system and to try to clarify and simplify the system.

The Panel resolved that:

"a)      the details contained in the report now submitted regarding

          the operation of the Councils Certification function for the

          safety of sports grounds be noted.

b)       the revised administration system set out in the report,

          including the establishment of the proposed Safety of

         Sports Grounds Advisory Group comprising representatives of

         the Building Surveyor, the South Yorkshire County Fire

         Service, the South Yorkshire Police and the director of

         Environmental Health and Consumer Services to advise the

         Council on matters relating to the Safety of Sports Grounds

         be approved and

c)       authority be delegated to the Head of Administration and

         Legal Department to deal with all routine matters in

         connection with the administrative system."
BCWNES                  DAVID MALCOLM                                     8


It will be noted that there are minor differences between the

resolution and the recommendations in the report.

The significant changes arising frcm the review were that the Health

and Consumer Services Department now had a role, the inspection system

was made annual (instead of bi-annual) and included inspections during

specified activities.    The practical effect of the change to the

inspection system was that written reports were submitted by each

authority to Head of Admin and Legal Department following an

inspection.    The Officer Working Party ceased to exist and it was

replaced by the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group.   As the report

says:    This:-

"would function as a forum for discussion between officers; its most

regular use would probably be the discussion of items of advice to the

Council before they are finally formulated by the appropriate

Authority.    Meetings of the Group would be held at the request of one

or more Authorities and on receipt of a request the Head of

Administration and Legal Department would arrange a meeting and

despatch a list of items to be discussed.   At the conclusion of the

meeting a further list of items would be prepared and the details of

action agreed to be taken by each Authority would be noted.    It is then

anticipated that detailed written advice would be provided by each

discipline and be acted upon as appropriate.

In addition the Head of Administration and Legal Department will keep

copies of all relevant correspondence which will be available to all

participants in the Group."

The roles of the various agencies were also simplified from those

previously laid down in the schedule referred to (Ref DMB5). Thus the

Building Surveyors Department had responsibility relating to the

structure of stadia, including crush barriers, walls etc and South
BOWNES                  DAVID MALCOLM                                       9


Yorkshire County Fire Service wsre responsible for amongst other

things, means of escape and stadia capacity.      The Health and Consumer

Services Department had an input on Health and Safety matters including

First Aid.     Built into the system was a general provision for

flexibility.     There was no role in the Advisory Group for Clubs or

Eastwoods.

Dealing with the delegation given by the Panel to the Head of

Administration and Legal Department in relation to "routine" matters.

Interpretation of the phrase "routine matters" is a matter for

individual judgement to be exercised in the circumstances of a

particular case.     Generally the operation of this delegated power is

very similar to that in other licensing systems operated by the

Council.     It is in no way exceptional.   Taking account of my

responsibilities as Chief Licensing Officer, I operated the day to day

running of the system on behalf of the head of Administration and Legal

Department.    Mr PENSAM, now retired, was the Head of the Department

during 1986/89 (000086) (000089) and his assistant Head of Department

was Mr WEBSTER.

This administrative system was in force at the time of the Hillsborough

Disaster on 15 April 1989 (150489).

As far as I am concerned the members of the Officer Working Party and

subsequently the Advisory Group were regarded as the Council's source

of professional advice in relation to Safety of Sports Grounds matters.

The methods of communication between the authorities comprising the

Advisory Group were general ones, telephone, meetings, memos and

letters and this would include liaison with the Building Surveyors

Department.

Communication with Sheffield Wednesday Football Club was on the same

basis as with the other authorities.
BOWNES                 DAVID   MALCOLM                                   10


Dealing with the relationship between the Football Club, the Advisory

group and the Council, I would describe this as reasonably

satisfactory.   The impression I have is that the Club were reasonably

safety conscious and generally complied with requests made of them.     I

am aware that a number of issues involved more discussion than otters

but eventually agreement was reached.

Post April 1986 (000486) when the City Council took possession of the

files from the County Council in regard to the Safety of Sports Grounds

I read through them including the file on Hillsborough Stadium.     I also

read about this time the Green Guide on Safety at Sports Grounds 1976

(000076). There was a very large amount of paperwork and I cannot

specifically recall any particular issues raised in the files and this

includes the erection of radial fences in the West Terraces in 1981

(000081) and 1985 (000085) or the crushing in the terraces in 1981

(000081).

On 1 April 1986 (010486) bearing in mind that the Safety of Sports

Ground system had been operated for a considerable length of time by a

responsible body (South Yorkshire County Council), I was entitled to

assume (in the absence of any contrary evidence), that the sports

grounds in Sheffield, including Hillsborough Stadium, were reasonably

safe.

I have been asked to comment on my knowledge of the following issues in

relation to the Leppings Lane terraces of the Hillsborough sports

ground:-

(a)         The elevation of the tunnel beneath the West Stand;

(b)         The configuration of crush barrier on the terraces;

(c)         The width of gates in the perimeter fence;

(d)         The reduction of barrier 144;

(e)         The capacity on the West terraces;
BOWNES                DAVID MALCOLM                                        11


(f)       The capacity on the Safety Certificate;

(g)       All these issues with regard to the Green Guide;

(h)       All these issues pre and post 1 April 1986 (010486).

My comments have been sought on the basis that same or all of issues

(a) to (e) involved variation fron the Guide to Safety of Sports

Grounds - the Green Guide.

It is necessary for me to re-state the following three facts:-

(i)       I am not technically qualified;

(ii)      I was not   involved in safety of sports grounds prior to 1

          April 1986 (010486);

(iii)     I am an Administrator.    It follows frcm these facts that I

          cannot authoritatively corrment on any technical issues or on

          any issues pre dating 1 April 1986 (010486).

Bearing in mind my comments, issues (a) to (g) are technical issues

upon which I cannot comment.     Issue (d) I have conmented on elsewhere

in this statement and in my submission to the Inquiry - and I have

nothing to add.   With regard to issues (e) and (f) I am aware that

allegations have been made that the certificate should (for example)

have specified capacities for the pens on the terraces.    At no time

prior to April 1989 (000489) has anyone suggested to me that capacities

should be imposed in respect of the pens.    Had such a suggestion have

been made I would have taken appropriate action (as I did for example

in relation to the Spion Kop). Those changes that had been made, in

particular I an thinking of the erection of radial fences in the West

Terrace, in 1981 (000081) and 1985 (000085), which cduld have an effect

on capacity, were not brought to my attention either.

I have also been asked to carment on the questions, "Did the Council

undertake a full survey of each sports ground in Sheffield after 1

April 1986 (010486) to discover the extent of ccnpliance/non compliance
BOWNES                  DAVID MALCOLM                                      12


with the Green Guide?    If not why not?"

Up to 1 January 1988 (010188) the duties of the Council were set out in

the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (000075) (as amended). These

duties were summarised in Annex 'A' to Hone Office Circular 7 of 1986

(000086) (Ref DMB12) (Ex        ) which I produce.    No mention is made of

inspections.   The 1976 (000076) edition of the Green Guide suggests

that annual inspections are appropriate.      (Paragraph 4).

From 1 January 1988 (000188) two more duties were added to the list by

the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 (000087).      These

are a duty to enforce the legislation and to carry out inspections.

The Home Office issued statutory guidance on annual inspections, see

Home Office Circular 72/1987 (000087) (Ref DMB13) (Ex          ) which I

produce.   The Guidance clearly refers to a limited inspection.

Bearing in mind these facts there is clearly no obligation on the

council to carry out the type of survey envisaged in the question.

Bearing in mind that the same authorities personnel vrere involved pre

and post 1 April 1988 (000486) it would also have been unreasonable to

carry out a survey.   Also no authority has indicated that such a survey

would be appropriate.

The method by which I arranged for reasonable safety to be monitored at

Sports Grounds in Sheffield contained three main elements.     The first

element is inspections of Sports Grounds by professional officers,

these are well documented in the files.      The second element was the

written communications to working party members in early 1987 (000087)

asking for their views on sports ground safety in Sheffield, all

caranunications are available if required.    The third element was the

review of the Safety of Sports Grounds system covered in the report to

the General Purposes Panel in September 1987 (000987) (Ref DMB 7)
BOWNES                DAVID MALCOIM                                       13


Had any of the experts identified any issues relating to reasonable

safety then the system I have outlined should have encouraged thorn to

raise than and have them resolved.    There are examples of such issues

on the Advisory Group notes.     It is also relevant to note that it is

the duty of professional officers involved in any Licensing System to

bring safety issues to the attention of the Licensing Authority.     I am

aware that the Green Guide does have a relevance to reasonable safety

issues as does other guidance.

Regarding amendments to Safety Certificates my view is that it is not

necessary to physically alter or amend the original certificate

document.   Where amendments are made by the council in accordance with

legislation it is sufficient that notice procedures as specified (in

the Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations) are followed.    This involves

notifying by letter various parties involved and notices in the Press.

With regard to the increase in capacity for the Spion Kop this

procedure was followed with the exception of the notice in the press.

As part of the third element referred to previously the Safety

Certificate conditions were reviewed on two separate occasions, the

second and most detailed draft being circulated to the authorities for

comment on 30 March 1989 (300389).    I produce the letter, to the Chief

Fire Officer, together with the draft conditions (Ref DMB 9) (Ex          ).

A similar letter/memorandum and draft were sent to the other

authorities.

At the time the second draft which considered crowd capacity was

circulated no amendment to the crpwd capacity in the West Terrace was

proposed.   Obviously officers comments on the draft, which may have

included reference to capacities, were not made prior to the disaster

occurring on the 15 April 1989 (150489).

The Council as the licensing authority have a duty to enforce within
          BCWNES                  DAVID MALCOLM                                     14


          their area the provisions of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act arid

          regulations made under it and for that purpose, toarrange for the

          periodical inspection of designated SportsGrounds.      In carryingout

          the functions I have described I consider that they (The Council) have

          fulfilled their duty.

          A written submission was prepared by me and submitted to Lord Justice

          TAYLOR'S enquiry on behalf of Sheffield City Council.     This submission

          deals in detail with many of the issues dealt with in this statement

          and should be read in conjunction with it.     I produce a copy of the

          submission (Ref DMB 10) (Ex         ).

          Subsequent to the submission, I gave evidence to the TAYLOR enquiry on

          27 and 28 June 1989 (270689) (280689).     I produce a copy of the

          transcript of my evidence (Ref DMB 11) (Ex       ).

          I have no reason to doubt the accuracy of the transcript.     I am

          conscious however that seme points referred to in the transcript

          require clarification.     Seme of these issues are referred to in this

          statement and clarified; I reserve the right to clarify other points.



                                                                D M BOWNES SIGNED

S A E M E O T TAKEN
              PLACE:

            TIME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE       SIMDN J DAVIES (LEGAL REP)

OFFICERS SIGNATURE
