                                  Sheffield Archives Ref: ft* -/-4* j* l&ctc
                                                                           &             MIR.15
                                                                                                  & = $% €>

                                                Date and time raised                                       Number
OTHES? DOCUMENT FORM


Title
        ^X ^O Z        aj         1a / O v Q
(Include source and any document number if relevant)

Receiver's instructions - urgent action 4 Y es/^lo
                                                     CPoc^i/ ~h                ^     O<0)7~            i~ f     Cv*'
                                                                          ' ------------------------- — ------ *—         Receiver

 ^       T 1S T
                                                                                                                       3735Indexer
Document registered /indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised         A h- hIT                                                                               Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions               —

                                                                                                                           Indexer
Indexed as indicated      p o   ^fir

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                       O/M        SIO
Examined - further action to be taken




Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                  Anfield,
                                                  Liverpool
                      *
                                                   17th April 1989

  Dear Sir,
  I feel that I have to write to you as one of the lucky ones who
  escaped un-injured from Saturday's tragedy. I am not trying to
  apportion blame because that is not for me to do, but I feel that I
  must report the facts as I know them to try and prevent anything like
  this ever happening again.
  The coach on which I travelled to the game left Liverpool just after
  II o'clock and after getting caught in a traffic jam on the M62 near
  Manchester, arrived in Sheffield shortly after 2 o'clock. As we
  approached the ground I noticed half a dozen coaches parked in the same
  position as the previous year, and fully expected the coach to do a
  'U-turn' at the break in the central reservation. This however did not
  occur and we got closer to the ground. Before the ground we reached a
^roundabout and the coach went right around this and started heading
I oack out of the city up the hill. Part way up, just after the station,
  the driver pulled over to the side and we started to alight. About ten
  people (including myself and one of the two lads I was with) actually
  got off the coach before a policeman came along and told everyone still
  on board to sit down and then ordered the driver to drive up the hill to
  where the other coaches were congregating. My mate and I waited for our
  other companion at the place where we had alighted, and quarter of an
  hour later he appeared.
  On his arrival we headed straight for the ground, past numerous police
  officers who were standing in groups doing apparently nothing. When
  we turned into Leppings Lane we first encountered the swelling of the
  crowd and the lack of organisation. I noticed the crash barriers at
  the end of each side street and each of these was patrolled by a
  couple of officers, and mounted police were telling everyone to stay
  on the pavements which was almost impossible.
  The previous year when we arrived at this point the police presence
  was very much in evidence and the flow through the turnstiles was very
  easy and well organised, but this year the situation was different
  to the previous year's calm and order. At the approach to the terrace
  turnstiles the scene was one of utter chaos, with thousands of people
  trying to get to the EIGHT turnstiles. At this^point l could see two
-'■mounted policemen fairly uiutu 1 6 T h e turnstiles, and two by the gates
  approaching the area. As I was forced forward, I was seperated from my
  two colleagues and looked on in disbelief as the mounted officer beside
  to me told everyone to stop pushing. It was as much as I could do to
  keep my feet and the officers request was met with a reaction of anger
  and disbelief. Young children were being crushed and just behind me a
  lad of about 12 years of age was lifted to safety over peoples heads
  after he had fainted.
  As I reached ttSe"~turnstile I saw a poli£e»an on foot looking pale and
  obviously frightened as he got squashed aqairyst: thts^wall. I can only
  assume that he was there to search people as they entered the ground
  at this stage his presence was superfluous and he would have been
  better served trying to prevent people from pushing from the rear.
  After passing through the turnstile I waited for my two mates to enter
  and as more and more people came through the mood was getting angrier.
  People were pleading (often abusively) with the police to go outside
  and help the kids, and to try and stop the people at the back from
  pushing. These requests were met with point blank refusals, often in a
  vulgar tone and in a tirade of obscenity totally unbecoming officers
  of the Law.
  I actually watched one officer turn his back on a distressed woman to
  take a flag off a young lad, of no more than 5 years of age, who was
 Sitting on his fathers shoulders. The attitude inside the gates was
 one    "It's not my fault" and a complete disregard for the people
 outside.
 When my two colleagues eventually got into the ground the time was
 rapidly approaching kick-off, and we headed towards the only visible
 entrance to the terrace. As we got to the pitch end of the tunnel it
 was obvious that the area was over-crowded and we decided, fortunately
 for us, to look for access to the wings of the terrace. After a short
 search we found another entrance and consequently an area of terrace
 that was un-occupied.
 We actually reached our vantage point as the Liverpool team arrived
 on the pitch and we could see that the terracing in which we had first
 tried to get to was full to over-flowing, and even at this early stage
 people were climbing up into the seated area behind the terracing.

 Sadly, the rest is history.

  From my position on the terracing I was unable to access the pitch
   and help in any way and all I could do was watch in horror and
   disbelief. The lack of communication in the ground as to the gravity
   of the situation to the Nottingham Forest fans was extremely poor and
® i ea r l y caused the already desperate situation to degenerate even
   further because of their barracking which I accept was in all
   innocence.
   A further ugly situation was de-fused by a number of officers when a
   press cameraman was escorted from the ground after inciting the highly
   emotional people who escaped,      by climbing the fence at the side of the
   pitch to get a better view of      the carnage unfolding in front of our
   eyes. He was eventually escorted from the scene after being subjected
   to verbal abuse, pushing and a deluge of spittle.
   I know he has a job to do andthe reason for him being       there was not
    the one he ended up doing but surely he should be censured for his
   actions as should the Daily Mirror for it’s uncaring centre page
   photograph, which may well be how a family will remember a loved one
    forever.

  Whilst trying to be objective, I feel that the following questions
  must be answered to prevent any future similar tragedy.

  1. Why did Liverpool receive fewer tickets than Forest when the demand
     was far greater on Merseyside?
  2. Why was Leppings Lane not closed to traffic?
  3. Why didn't the tunnel to the central part of the terracing get
     blocked off with the crash barriers that were used by the program
     sellers when it was patently obvious that the area was packed?
  4. Why are the side entrances to the terrace not indicated clearly?
  5. Where were all the police that came onto the pitch to form the
     human barrier before the game?
  6. Why was the gate opened at all, transfering the problem from one
     place to a smaller more confined space?

  I   have tried to be as dis-passionate and objective aspossible, but
  I   hope you appreciate that this has been difficult. Iactually knew
  one of the people who died and I can only describe my feelings as numb
  I   know this is only a personal account and will probably have little
  or no bearing on your report, but as I have stated earlier I feel that
  I had to let these facts be known and if this letter will help in any
  way to avoid any further tragedy of the kind that occured on Saturday
  at Hillsborough, I will feel that my efforts have been worthwhile,
  although they should never have been necessary.

                           Yours Faithfully,
