                 1



                 '1:; ov::,'.':'



V ';   ’V   :   Vv '




I-
                          Andrew David Jarman



                          Detective Constable 1*4$

                          Woodseats Police Station

                          699 Chesterfield Road

                          Sheffield



 At 8.00am on Saturday 15th April 1989 I commenced duty in full Police uniform at

 Woodseats Police Station.   I was then transported to the force driving school at Brightside

 Lane,Sheffield where I was briefed,issued with a flourescent jacket and traffic light key

 and allocated a traffic point on Halifax Road,Sheffield at its junction with Claywheels

^ane.

 I commenced duty on Halifax Road at approximately 9»30am.    Traffic grew steadliy throughout

 the day and at approximately 2»00pm it was necessary to turn off the traffic lights and

 direct the traffic manually.   I would not describe the traffic as heavy most persons

 appeared to park away from this area and make their way to the football ground on foot.

 Shortty after 3«00pm I was collected from this point by transit van and after collecting

 other officers also on traffic points we travelled back to the driving school.     We did

 not have any radio contact in this vehicle and no officers had possession of personal

 radios.   On arrival at the driving school we were instructed to return to Hillsborough

 immediately.   We did so and at approxiamtely 3«20pm we arrived at the gru n d .   Ibgether

^ t h other offcers from this serial I went staftight into the ground via the Penistone Road

 entrance near to the Police room and gymnasium area.    On going onto the pitch I saw that

Police officers were forming a corden across the centre.     I could see that numerous persons

were milling about on the playing area and were obviously distressed and angry.      I

proceeded to calm and re—assure peaple and comfort persons who were suffering from shock.

I did not go further than the centre line towards the Leppings Lane area of the ground(

periodic fights broke out amosgat     supporters but nothing of a serious nature.

I remained on the pitch area and later returned to the same traffic point until all

traffic and persons were clear of the ground and surrounding areas.      After a de—briefing

in the Hillsborough ground I returned to Woodseats Police Station and ended duty at 8.00pm
