-   QoSZ
                                                                  DUNCAN BATTT
                                                                  DETECTIVE CONSTABLE kJJ
»
                                                                  Bom
                                                                  South Yorkshire Police
                                                                  Woodseats Police Station
                                                                  Sheffield*

                                                                   7th June 1989
                                                                                         jS x .
            At 8.00a.m. on Saturday 15th April 1989,1 commenced duty at ^oodseats Police
Station,in uniform.
           Together with other Officers from that station I was transported to Force         riving
    School ,Brightside Lane .Sheffield.At that location a briefing took place in relation to
    the F.A.Cup Semi-Final at Hillsborough Stadium, and specifically to the Traffic Management of
    traffic approaching the ground.
            I was allocated duties as a reserve and as such was to remain at Brightside Lane to
    be deployed as and when any congested road junction was identified.
            At 10,30a.m. I was conveyed to Burngreave Road,Sheffield where I directed supporters         1

upwards the Hillsborough area of the City.
        At 10*40a.m. another Officer who had been previously allocated this duty returned and
    I in turn returned to stanby at Brightside Lane.
            At 11.45a.m. I wqs deployed to Park Square Roundabout in Sheffie ld City Centre,X
    controlled traffic at this junction until   2   .4 0 p.m.Throughout that time traffic was very heavy
    and concisted mainly of Nottingham fans travelling in private cars and mini buses,although I
    did notice several vans and mini b&ses that contained Liverpool supporters.
            At 2.40p.m. I was collected and returned to Brightside Lane where at around 5.00p.m.
    I was eating my meal. At that time I saw Inspector Walker on the telephone nearby.He announce!
    that *Operation Support* was being implemented and myself together with many other Officers,
    left the canteen and boarded vane waiting outside*
            We travelled with a Police Escort and arrived at the ground within five minutes.
            On arrival at Hillsborough we disembarked and ran to the rear of the North Stand.As w
    flkched the stand I saw a senior Officer, I do not know who it was, he said'Straight round
    lads, inforat of the North Stand. *
             I thought it was a Public order situation taking place inside the ground,and with
    other Officers who were not personally known to me I ran between the Kop and the Borth Stand
    and onto the pitch*
            As I did so I could see there were about 100 supporters on thepitch        attheLeppings
    Lane   end of the ground.lt appeared tobe a pitch invasion.
            I took up a position on the pitch facing the North Stand*I saw and heard people shout
    and gesticulating they were saying'Get over there Get over there*and pionting towards the
    Leppings Lane end of the ground*
            I only stayed in that position for around 1 minute and then someone told us to move t
    the centre circle*
            I moved with the other Officers to the centre circle.There were many morepeople           on t
    the pitch by this time and I saw that they were struggling fro /ip*eat^.
       I decided I must help the people who were obviously in graet distress so I moved
forward.As I went I was checking people were okay      and that they were              not   in need of
instant medical attention.lt was obvious now thatthis was not a public order situation but
that people on the pitch were injured.
       I made my way further fowrard until I reached a          position near           to    the goalpos
the Leppings lone end of the ground,As I did many      fans were starting              to    arrive with
advertising hoardings for stretchers.It became apparent that these hoardings were
creating congestion so I started telling the fans to lay them on the floor so that they were
not in the way.I could see a Police Officer trying to resusciatate someone and I remember
shouting ftit him harder in the chest,
       I saw a number of what I thought were bodies near the goalposts,about 4 or 5*1
checked for sings of life but could find none*
       fhe fans were screaming and shouting at everyone to help.
       A group of supporters arrived with a hoarding and I told them to help me with the
Judy of a maw aged between 20/30 years,we loaded him onto the hoarding and ran across the
pitch with him,The man was dead but the supporters did not realise#
      We used the access point between the Kop and the North Stand and on arriving at the
rear of the stand I saw that the area wsa heavily   c o n g e s ted.Ambulances   and what appeared to b<
medical staff were in at tendance •
      We carried the man to the rear of the North flyand a short distance from the gymnasium wl
where we put the board down.Htere were numerous Police Officers in that area so I XJCXX told
ZS one,who I did not know, to take care of the body, I ran back to the playing field with
the supporters*
      On returning I again set about calming people down,there was less activity at the
Leppings Lane end but I could see great numbers of Officers in that area.
      At      « time the Forest supporters on the ^op were still singing and this appeared to
be causing great anger amongst certain Liverpool fans on the pitch,^ recall grabbing at least
£ r e e supporters who appeared to be setting off towards that end of thground. They appeared t
calm down*
      I rember looking behingd me and seeing a line of Police Officers, the full width of the
pitch and advancing to the halfway line from the Forest Kop end,
      X was telling people anxious about relatives that an announcemnet would be made on thr
P.A,system explaining what they would have to do.
      I later heard the announcement tia t the game would be cancelled and heard Mr .Dalglish
                                                                                   •
on the P#A,                                                     \
                                                                                              )   •
                              3
                              ■ -




     While I was on the pitch someone shouted at me *Why did you open the gates*#Many
Liverpool fans seeaed heell bent on attacking any Police Officer.At least six people approache
me shouting and yelling abuse#I managed with the help of other fans to divert them away*
      1 noticed that many people on the pitch smelled strongly of intoxicants and many of
that number appeared to be drunk* %ere were other supporters who were in total control
of themselves and there conduct was helpful in dealing with the others*
      After the game was cancelled the stadium emptied ami I accompanied a man, serehing for hi
his younger brother to the rear of the North Stand where he was provided with the emergency
telephone details by another Officer who had set up a table under that stand*
      I subsequently attended a de hriefing in the North Stand and left the ground on foot*
I walked with other Officers to Claywheels Lane where 1 boarded a bus and returned to
V odseats Police Station*
