DOCUMENT     Nos
 192   -   207
               I

               I Sheffield Archives Ref:   /n   I
               /*,                              I




    West Midlands Police




D O C U M EN T SECTION
     (192 —          207 )




HliLSBO
 West Midlands Police




D O C U M E N T LIST




       Part V
SJA52A                      DOCUMENT LIST


NUMBER   DOCUMENT                                   PAGE(S )

192      South Yorkshire Police standing             998 - 1044
         instruction for the policing of
         football matches.

192A     Appendix L to South Yorkshire              1044A-M
         Police Standing Instruction for
         the policing of football matches.

192B     Report dated 20 March 1986                 1044N-Q
         from Assistant Chief Constable
         (Operations), Mr W JACKSON,
         headed Safety of Sports Grounds.
         South Yorkshire Police Standing
         Instructions for the policing
         of football matches.
         ’Evacuation and Stewarding.’

193      South Yorkshire Police                     1045 - 1127
         Operational Order for 1988
         Semi-Final Liverpool v Nottingham
         Forest.

194      South Yorkshire Police *F*                 1128 - 1210
         Division Operational Order
         1989 Semi-Final Liverpool v
         Nottingham Forest.

194A     South Yorkshire Police                     1210A-S
         ’D ’ Division Operational
         Order 1989 Semi-Final
         Liverpool v Nottingham Forest.

194B     South Yorkshire Police                     1210T-AI
         Road Traffic Division
         Operational Order 1989 Semi-
         Final Liverpool v Nottingham
         Forest.

195      Appendices to statement                    1211 - 1235
         supplied by W JACKSON, Assistant
         Chief Constable of South
         Yorkshire Police.
         (Part II Statement Pages 860-869).

196      Appendix to *F* Division                   1236 - 1256
         Operational Order 1989 Semi-
         Final .

197      Briefing notes of Chief   Superintendent   1257 - 1262
         DUCKENFIELD re Football   Association
         Cup Semi-Final 15 April   1989 used
         to brief officers on 14   April 1989.
                                      2.


    NUMBER   DOCUMENT                                 PAGE(S)

    198      Briefing notes of Chief Superintendent   1263 - 1266
             DtfCKENFIELD re Football Association
              Cup Semi-Final 15 April 1989 used to
             brief officers on the day.

    199      Briefing notes of Superintendent         1267 - 1276
             MURRAY re Football Association
             Cup Semi-Final 15 April 1989.

    200      Briefing notes of Superintendent         1277 - 1279
             GREENWOOD re Football Association
             Cup Semi-Final 15 April 1989.

    201      Briefing notes of Superintendent         1280 - 1289
#            MARSHALL re Football Association
             Cup Semi-Final 15 April 1989.

    202      Document outlining communications        1290 - 1303
             arrangements re Football
             Association Cup Semi-Final
             15 April 1989, prepared by
             South Yorkshire Police.

    203      A plan and chart indicating the          1304 - 1305
             postings and refreshment times of
             those officers posted to the perimeter
             track.

    204      Record of arrests made in and            1306 - 1314
              around Hillsborough Football Stadium
              on 15 April 1989.

    205      South Yorkshire Police                   1315 - 1351
              contingency plans for dealing
              with disorder. Code names
              "Operation Support" and
              Operation Maine.

    206      South Yorkshire Police Major             1352 - 1444
              Incident Manual.

    207      Superintendent MURRAY’S hand­            1445 - 1447
              written log of events 15 April
              1989.
                         DPP DOC i92




SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE




STANDING INSTRUCTIONS


       FOR THE


     POLICING OF


   FOOTBALL MATCHES




                                   998
                                                       I Document Np.<^ ^      CONT’D


                                 INDEX


                                     Pages       Paragraphs           Appendices

OBJECT                               1           1.1       - 1.4


COMMAND STRUCTURE                    1           2.1       -   2.2


OPERATIONAL ORDER                    2           3.1                  'A'


BRIEFING ARRANGEMENTS                2           4.1      - 4.3       'B' & ' C


MANPOWER REQUIREMENTS                2 &     3   5.1      - 5.6       'D'   & 'E'


METHODS OF DEPLOYING PERSONNEL
     I
     i
Uniforned Officers                   3 &     4   6.1       - 6.3
Detective and Plain Clothes
   Officers                          4           6.4       - 6.6


ADDITIONAL RESOURCES

Transport and Mobile Reserves        4 &     5   7.1       - 7.5
Police Horses                        5           7.6
Police Dogs                          5 &     6   7.7       - 7.9
Specialist Equipment                 6           7.10      - 7.13
Special Constables                   6           7.14      - 7.15
Force Press Officer - Media          6           7.16
Refreshments                         7           7.17


'THE MOVEMENT OF SPECTATORS          7           8.1                  'F'


TRAFFIC FLOW                         7 &     8   9.1       - 9.7


MATCH AND DIVISIONAL CONTROLS
   FORCE OPERATIONS ROOM             8           10.1      -   10.6


 STANDARDISATION OF METHODS OF
    PROCESSING PRISONERS             8            11.1                 'G' & 'H'


 CRIME PREVENTION                '   9           1 2. 1    -   12.6


 FOOTBALL GROUND FACILITIES          10          13.1      - r',-?




                                                                                    999
                                                     Document No. ^       CONT’D



                                      Pages        Paragraphs       Appendices

EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURES       10           14.1 - 14.2


FOOTBALL MATCH SUMMARY/               10 & 11      15.1 - 15.4      ■K'
   INTELLIGENCE

INSPECTION OF FOOTBALL STADIUMS       11           16.1


LIAISON BETWEEN CLUB MANAGEMENT
   AND THE POLICE                     11           17.1




                                  APPENDICES



                     Pages

APPENDIX 'A'         13 - 15           Standard Operational Order

APPENDIX 'B'         16 - 18           General Briefing

APPENDIX 'C'          19 - 21          Individual Briefing

APPENDIX 'D'         22                Grading Criteria

APPENDIX 'E'         23                Criteria for Levelling Charges for
                                       Police Services

APPENDIX 'F'         24 - 26           Control of Spectators

APPENDIX 'G'         27 - 28           Processing of Prisoners

APPENDIX 'H'         29 - 31           Standard Forms for Processing
                                       Prisoners

APPENDIX 'I'          32               De-Briefing Sheet

APPENDIX 'J'          33               Schedule Showing Overall Police
                                       Ccrrmitment

APPENDIX 'K'          34               Football Match Surrmary /Intelligence




                                                                          1000
                                                (1)          Document No.   |   92   CONT’D


                  STANDING INSTRUCTIONS FDR THE POLICING OF FOOTBALL MATCHES


    OBJECT

    1.1           It is necessary, as far as is possible, to standardise our rrethod
                  of policing at all football league grounds in South Yorkshire so
                  that all officers of the force are aware that wherever they are
                  detailed for duty, slight variations being accepted for each
                  ground, they will know what is expected of them. Additionally,
                  by standardising our procedures which have been evolved through
                  experience we should be more able to ensure the safety of
                  spectators, look to the protection of residents and business
                  concerns lately to be affected by the influx of football
                  supporters into their area, provide good value for money to the
                  clubs who pay for the hire of our services and display a high
                  standard of smartness and professionalism before large gatherings
                  of the public.
              1


    1.2           It is accepted that there will be slight variations in policing
                   at the five football league grounds to cater for the different
          j       conditions appertaining at each of them but the standard methods
                   set out in this - report will be followed throughout the police
                   district.

    1.3           It will be the responsibility of Superintendent (Operations) to
                   circulate amendments to these instructions but it will be the
                   duty of divisional commanders to bring to the notice of the Chief
                   Superintendent (Operations and     Traffic) recommendations for
                   anending this order, resulting from their experience in policing
                   football matches.

    1.4           With a view to these standing instructions being frequently
                  evaluated, they will be      discussed at a Chief Constable's
                  Conference mid-way through the football season and also following
                  the end of the season.   These discussions will coincide with the
                   inspection of football grounds by the South Yorkshire County
                  Council Working Party involved with the Safety of Sports Grounds
                  Act 1975.

)
    COMMAND STRUCTURE

    2.1           The officer in charge of policing football league matches will be
                   of not less than superintendent rank, with the exception of
                   matches being played at Bell Vue, Doncaster, where the rank of
                   the officer should not be less than chief inspector, unless the
                   match is one where, because of abnormal circumstances, an officer
                   of not less than superintendent should be deployed.

    2.2           General policing outside the ground should te the responsibility
                   of an officer not less than chief inspector rank, but in the case
                   of Doncaster the rank may be that of an inspector. The duties of
                   the officer outside the ground will encorrpass the prevention of
                   public disorder, the supervision of car and coach parks, anti­
                   vandalism patrols, the supervision of H cm -'.'S'H'. r’" m ;es in the
                   vicinity of the ground and the escorting of grxupi ot supporters
                   to and from the ground.




                                                                                       1001
                                         (2 )          Document No. 1 9 2     CONT’D


OPERATIONAL ORDER

3.1        It is necessary to use a standard format for operational orders
           for football matches within the fores area with additions to
           cater for local conditions.   The format shewn at Appendix 'A'
           will be adopted.


BRIEFING ARRANGEMENTS

4.1        The Officer in Command will, as far as is practicable, undertake
           his briefing within the      close confines of the ground in
           sufficient time to allow officers to take up their duties within
           the ground before the gates are open to the public, and outside
           the ground before the main body of spectators arrive in the
           vicinity of the stadium..

4.2       “ All officers will be briefed with uniformed officers being
            paraded in three ranks ready for inspection.      It will be the
            responsibility of the briefing officer to see that each officer
            is fully instructed in his duties and is smartly turned out
      !     including having his hair cut to an acceptable length and his
            beard or moustache trimmed - one man of scruffy appearance
            standing before a crowd of spectators discredits the force as a
            whole. Officers not coming up to the acceptable standard will be
            advised and returned inrnediately • to their sub-division or
            station.   The officer in command will subsequently report the
            natter to that officer's divisional corrmander. “

4.3        Points to consider during inspections and briefing, whilst not in
           themselves exhaustive, are set out in Appendices 'B' and 'C'.


MANPOWER REQUIREMENTS

5.1        In estimating rronpower requirements, the       following factors must
           be considered:

             i)   the importance to each club of the result, ie               league
                  position, local reputation in 'derby' games, etc;

            ii)   the history of previous encounters between       clubs and the
                  supporters of the clubs;

           iii)   the absence of other fixtures in the area;

            iv)   the likely    number   of     visiting   spectators   and    their
                  reputation;

             v)   -relationships of public transport systems to the stadium,
                   ie rail stations, bus routes, etc - personnel will be
                  required to protect premises 'en route' to and from the
                  stadium;

            vi)   the geographical features of each ground and location in
                  relation to town or city centres - the arrival of early
                  transport encourages supporters to        -.ic^pmg areas
                  which require extra protection.




                                                                                1002
                                                           Document No. ^ 9 2 CONT’D
                                                              ___________________


    5.2                                                  I
             To assist in identifying 'manpower requirements' a Football
             Liaison Officer has been appointed within Operations and Traffic
             Division.   It is his responsibility to collate and disseminate
             intelligence relative to fixtures within South Yorkshire.      He
             will liaise with his counterparts in other force areas and supply
             information in respect of South Yorkshire Clubs and supporters
             travelling to 'away1 fixtures.    This officer will work closely
             with divisional officers     responsible for football policing
             arrangements.

    5.3      It is vital not to underestimate the police corrcTUtinent, but it is
              inpractical to lay down a basic overall police detail. This can
              only be determined locally, through experience of the conditions
              applying to the area and of the stadium concerned and also of the
              reputation of the heme and visiting supporters.       Additional to
              officers employed on public order duties, officers will be
              required for the police control room, detective and plain clothes
              duties, prisoner reception, transport crews, traffic points,
              motor cycle and traffic      patrols, mounted and dog duties,
              supported by an adequate mobile reserve for emergencies.

    5.4      Whenever possible ccmnunity constables should be used to poli.ee
              the same areas of ”the ground at every match to try and establish
              a rapport with supporters and to identify and eliminate any
              disorderly section of supporters.

             Inspectors, sergeants and constables should also, if at all
             possible, police the sane areas of the ground so that they become
             fully aware of the problems in their sector.

    5.5      Football matches will be graded by divisional commanders using
              their experience of previous     encounters between the clubs
              concerned and intelligence from the Football Liaison Officer and
              local football clubs. The criteria for grading is outlined at
              Appendix 'D'. The Chief Superintendent (Operations and Traffic)
              will be involved in the planning of all category 'A' and 'B'
              matches, and it will be his responsibility to keep the Assistant
              Chief Constable (Operations) informed of police plans for such
              commitments.

^   5.6      The criteria for calculating the charge to clubs     for the hiring
             of police officers is given at Appendix 'E'.


    METHODS OF DEPLOYING PERSONNEL

    Uniformed Officers

    6.1       After a general briefing by the Officer in Cofrmand, all uniformed
              officers will as far as possible be designated to a serial. It
              will be the responsibility of the Officer in Command to deploy
              his serials according to the special needs of the particular
              stadium.   Whenever possible, officers within and outside the
              ground will be enployed in serials of one sergeant and ten iner.,
              with an inspector to every three serials.




                                                                              1003
                                                   Document No. 1 9 2   CONT’D
                                        (4)


6.2      Serials will be deployed both inside and outside the ground
         during the pre-match period, then mainly inside the ground during
         the duration of the game. The operational order should allow for
         the withdrawal of certain serials from within the ground as the
         match nears its end to facilitate dispersal of the spectators and
         prevent public disorder.

6.3      Operational orders will emphasise the need for police serials to
         march to their tasks or appointed positions and for units less
         than serials to march or walk in single file especially around
         the perimeter track. The order will specify individual duties
         for each serial so that supervisory officers are aware of their
         exact roles prior to, during ani after the match.    Each serial
         sergeant will be responsible for conpleting a debriefing form at
         the*end of each match (as shown at Appendix 'I').

Detective and Plain Clothes Personnel

6.4      The main function of detective and plain clothes officers at
          football matches is the prevention and detection of crime outside
         the ground, particularly in relation to the theft of and f..om
         unattended notor vehicles.    They’will be used at the discretion
          of the Divisional Commander.      Officers so employed will be
         equipped with radios to enable them, if necessary, to be called
          into the ground to supplement those officers given specific
         duties within the stadium.

6.5      Detective and plain clothes officers may also be used outside the
          ground to gather intelligence in relation to the mood of
          supporters using licensed premises and for spotting the carriage
          of offensive weapons by supporters making their way to and from
          the stadium.

6.6      A mxnber of detective or plain clothes officers will be detailed
          for duty within the ground to investigate reports of crime and on
          special occasions to concentrate on particular facets of crime,
         •for instance pick pockets      are known to travel with some
          supporters and certain clubs attract ticket forgers for       all
          ticket' matches.   Uniformed officers and not detective or plain
          clothes officers will be involved in the supervision of licensed
          bars within the football stadium.                    •


ADDITIONAL RESOURCES

Transport and Mobile Reserves

7 .1     The use of resources additional to those kept on division, ie the
          command vehicle or force coach, will be considered by the Officer
          in Command and particularly so for category 'A' and 'B' matches.

7.2      At least one divisional personnel carrier with a driver and
          police attendant will be available at each football fixture for
          the carriage of prisoners.      When the detention vehicle is
          available,    ^ should be used.
                                                      Documemt No. 1 9 2   CONT’D
                           (5)


7.3       There will be a mobile contingency held in reserve at every
          football league fixture.   The use of such a reserve will be for
          two main purposes, ie as a unit in radio contact with the Officer
           in Command and available for deployment to any situation and,
          secondly, to afford assistance in the escorting of supporters
          between public service termini and the stadium.

7.4       The use of a personnel carrier containing one sergeant and ten
          constables in the immediate vicinity of the football ground has a
          moderating influence on the behaviour of supporters.          The
          divisional crime and anti-vandal patrols will be considered for
          such a reserve strength.     However, it should be borne in nu.nd
          that crime and vandal squads may be withdrawn at any time to
          perform duties at rretjor incidents. They should not, therefore,
          be considered when planning manpower requirements, or be inducted
           in Operational Orders.

7.5       The motor cycle wings      will    be used for facilitating the
           unhindered movement of traffic    to and from the football grounds
           and for escorting visiting team   coaches into and out of the force
           area when requested to do so by   Divisional Commanders.

Police Horses

7.6       Police horses are invaluable in the policing of football matches.
           Tftey should be used to escort visiting supporters to and from the
           ground in the segregation of opposing fans, regulating queues at
           turnstiles and clearing the playing area in the event of serious
           crowd invasion. A mounted officer has a greater field of vision
           than his contemporary on foot and is of such value that police
           horses will be vised at every first team football fixture in South
           Yorkshire. When necessary, a request will be made to the Chief
           Superintendent (Operations and Traffic) for the hiring of horses
           from other police forces.    During the game mounted horses, where
           possible, will be on view to the spectators. Their presence has
      '   a moderating influence upon potential hooligans.

.Police Dogs

7.7        on 9 November 1976, the Hone Office Standing Advisory Corrmittee
           on Police Dogs agreed that while dogs can be used to deal
           effectively with small groups of hooligans, they should not
           normally be used when large crawls are present.     The Committee
           pointed out that the presence of dogs may well appear provocative
           and if surrounded by unruly crowds would be likely to become
           excited and bite indiscriminately.

 7.8       Whilst the Comnittee advocated the retention of dogs in a reserve
           opacity, it could see no objection to their use as a deterent at
           railway stations, car or coach parks or along routes to footuall
           grounds.   It advised that dogs should not be used within the
           playing area at football. matches or other sporting events unless
           there were exceptional reasons.     This advice does not preclude
           the officer in charge from allowing them to be paraded around the
           perimster track before the kicl -off and during half-tirro so at to
           interest the spectators in their presence.




                                                                            1005
                                                      Document No. 1 9 2   CONT’D
                                       (6)


7.9        The Officer    in Command will take the      above advice into
           consideration but he has the overriding discretion to use police
           dogs if he considers their use absolutely necessary to avoid a
           dangerous public disorder situation.

Specialist Equipment

7.10       In due course it is hoped to arrange with football clubs for the
           acquisition and use of closed circuit television and video
           recording equipment as at Sheffield Wednesday's ground. At this
           stage the only visual aid which will be used at football fixtures
           will be binoculars which have been supplied to each station
           concerned with the five football stadiums. Divisional Ccsrmandnrs
           should also consider using the facilities of Audio Visual Aids

7.11       The use of 'spotters' with binoculars in radio contact both w:.th
           the police control room and arresting officers, is a technic(ue
           which has been successfully errployed nationally.     .They can
           concentrate on particular sections of the terraces renowned for
       I   disorder, where pick-pockets are operating, from where missives
       I   are being thrown into the playinc area, etc.

7.12       Once; offenders   have been located by the 'spotters', other
           officers can be   guided into the crowds and directed by radio to
           persons to bs     arrested.     'Spotters' will submit evidence
           accordingly.

7.13       Consideration should be given to using a helicopter for traffic
           control, and identifying public disorder situations in connection
           with category 'A' matches and possibly category 'B' games.
           Requests for a helicopter      will be directed to the Chief
           Superintendent (Operations and Traffic) for decision by Assistant
           Chief Constable (Operations).

Special Constables

7.14       Hie presence of special constables at football grounds is
           acknowledged as a valuable supplement to the regular force. This
            is especially relevant in crowd situations where an enhanced
            uniform presence contributes to the observance of public order.

7.15       Special Constables can be used as a deterrent factor but whenever
           possible they should not be enployed in volatile situations.

Force Press Officer - Media

7.16       The Force Press Officer will be consulted for press publicity in
            relation to other than the normal fixture.    It has been found
            from experience that there are advantages in publicising police
           plans for matches likely to attract large crowds.
                                                     Document No. j 9 2   CONT’D
                                      (7)


Refreshments

7.17      The provision of refreshments is necessary for all matches.
          Usually this can take the form of pre-packed tea, coffee or soup
          beverages, but for major functions the Force Catering Officer
          will be consulted about providing a substantial msal for officers
          on longer tours of duty. Such meals could be provided within the
          ground, or nearby, and if necessary by outside caterers.


THE MOVEMENT OF SPECTATORS

8.1      The movement of spectators to and from a football ground can
         present a threat to public safety through conflict between home
         and visiting supporters.     The basic strategy for dealing w:.th
         football hooliganism, as with all public order events, is to
         ensure segregation of the opposing factions.     This segregation
         should be planned in three stages - before, during and'after the
         match, as is set exit at Appendix 'F'.


TRAFFIC FLOW

9.1       The five main football stadia in South Yorkshire were purposely
          constructed in residential areas to cater for mass spectator
          attendance. That situation was no doubt satisfactory at the time
          but the advent of m o d e m transport in current times has resulted
          in serious congestion and        conflict between pedestrian and
          vehicular movement.

9.2      Controlled parking can     be   a   contributory factor to easing
          congestion but cannot,    in   a   residential area, be a total
          solution.

9.3*     There must be an acceptance by persons attending a football
          match, whether on foot or otherwise, that delay and congestion
          will arise and must be endured when in close proximity to a
          ground.    It is our duty, however, to make every effort to
          minimise delay and congestion by whatever neans possible.

9.4      During the pre-match period there is usually less of a traffic
          problem because spectators stagger their arrival at the ground
          during the hour preceding kick-off tine.     Notices showing the
          whereabouts of coach and car parks should be displayed.

9.5       At this tine previous intelligence enquiries will have been of
          assistance to determine the     number of visiting supporters
          expected and their mode of travel. Once known and identified,
          arrangements should be made for their routing and arrival at the
          designated parking areas at a time shortly preceding 'kick-off'.
          This strategy of delayed arrival of visitors reduces the time for
          pre-match disorder problems.
                                                        Document No. « n n    CONT’D
                                       (8 )                          192


9.6        It will be necessary for more widespread and advanced traffic
            arrangements to be made when the fixture in question is of major
            importance, in particular a semi-final match involving teams from
            different areas of the country.       On such occasions it is
            important to establish a       close liaison with the motoring
            organisations and local authorities for pre-determined routes to
            be taken by vehicular traffic.

9.7        Traffic Division through the Chief Superintendent (Operations and
           Traffic) or the Traffic Group Superintendent, will be involved in
           giving advice upon traffic arrangements for all football match.es
           and traffic officers will be used to supplement territorial
           divisional personnel.


'MATCH' AND DIVISIONAL CONTROLS - FOR OPERATIONS ROOM

10.1       It is essential in the interest of efficiency that every first
            team football fixture in South Yorkshire should be controlled by
       ;   radio from a Police Control Roorr situated within the stadium, ie
       I   'MJatch Control'.  Hie officer ir charge of Match Control should
            not be of less rank than sergeant and be aided by at least one
            police constable.

10.2       Ifiene is no requirement for Force Operations Room to be involved
           in the control of a normal football fixture but it is necessary
           for the Operations Room Inspector to be fully aware of all police
           operations in conections with football league matches, and this
           will be achieved by the supply of the relevant operational order.

10.3       Exceptions to this general principle will apply in relation to
           category 'A* and 'B* matches, when there will be an overall force
            involvement necessitating the use of the force corrmunications
           vehicle with direct contact to the Operations Room.

10.4       Throughout every match contact will be maintained between the
           stadium and the Divisional Control. By this means the Divisional
           Controller will be alerted quickly in the event of additional
           resources being required, and the requirenrent for resources
           beyond the capacity of the division will be referred immediately
           to Force Operations Room, from where the Duty Officer will be
           responsible for obtaining the necessary additinal manpower and
           equipment.

10.5       The officer in charge of the Comnunications Department will visit
           stadiums to ensure efficient radio coriraunications.

10.6       All supervisory officers will      be   supplied   with   radios   to
           facilitate control and deployment.


STANDARDISATION OF METHODS OF PROCESSING PRISONERS

11.1       There will be a standard procedure for th - processing of
           offenders detained at football matches. "V        o r ’sed at
           Appendix *G' and the standard forms to be u-^u axe shown at
           Appendix 'H '.
                                                       Document No. 1 9 2   CONT’D
                                       (9)


CRIME PREVENTION

12.1       Each of the five football league grounds within South Yorkshire
           Police area has been visited and a survey completed by a
           divisional crime prevention orficer.

12.2       The surveys had a two-fold function:

            i)     To ensure the general security of the premises, ie
                   the adminitrative offices, the Development Fund
                   Offices where much of the clubs' revenues are
                   collected and the Supporters' Club where varying
                   amounts of cash accrue fronn the sale of liquor.

           ii)     Evaluate the systems currently in   use in relation
                   to the care and control of cash.

12.3       The police can prevent crime by protecting persons dealing w;.th
           or conveying money within the ground and officers in command w;J.l
       t
       i   make adequate supervision available to cater for this objective.
       I
12.4       To ensure that standards of security are maintained, divisional
           crime prevention officers will re-visit the clubs at three-
           monthly intervals and report to divisional commanders. The visit
           will, on each occasion, include attending a football league match
           to check upon security systems. A copy of the report showing any
           action taken will be sent to the Detective Chief Inspector (Crime
           Prevention) for him to check upon uniformity of advice throughout
           the force area.

12.5       The consumption of alcohol before arrival at the football stadium
           often exacerbates police problems.   With a view to reducing this
           problem and thus preventing crime, advice will be given through
           the media, trade organisations, supporters clubs and the police
           of the area of visiting supporters, about the advisability of
           prohibiting the sale of alcohol in containers to obvious football
           supporters on match days, the carriage of alcohol for consumption
           in coaches, and the stepping of coaches at licensed premises.
           Hie Chief Superintendent federations and Traffic) in conjunction
           with the local divisional commanders and the Force Press Officer
           will be responsible for giving this advice to the appropriate
           persons.

12.6       If the visiting supporters have a reputation for violence,
           endeavours will be made to bring forward the kick-off time to
           outside licensing hours.    Discussions for an early kick-off
           should be undertaken as soon as possible after the fixtures are
           published.
                                                      Document No. “1 9 2   CONT’D
                                       ( 10 )


FOOTBALL GROUND FACILITIES

13.1      Every police complex at a sports stadium must have good vehicular
           access and its location well signposted. It should have separate
           accesses for    public enquiry (lost/found     property, missing
          persons, conplaints of crime etc) and prisoner reception.      The
          public enquiry section should include a reception desk and
           interview roan.     There   should be facilities for prisoner
          reception and     processing linked with     separate and secure
          detention accommodation for adults and juveniles. As an ideal
          there    should be    further accorrmodation   for briefing    and
          refreshment purposes.    Toilet facilities for both prisoners and
          police officers should be provided..

13.2      The availability of desirable pol ice accommodation is clearly a
          matter for the football club coi'cemed.      There should be full
          consultation between the club officials and the divisional
          officer concerned.     The Superintendent (Operations) ' will be
          available for advice regarding thf; standard facilities required.


EMERGENCY EVACJATION PROCEDURES

14.1     Divisional Commanders should ensure that emergency procedures at
          each ground are adequate and are in accordance with the 'Green
          Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds' (paragraph 10.7) viz;

          {a)    It is essential that plans should be made for
                 dealing   with   emergency  situations.      Joint
                 consultation between the mangement of the ground,
                 police,   fire, ambulance   and other    emergency
                 services should be held in order to produce agreed
                 plans of action.

          (b)    While the public are in the ground an adequate
                 number of staff should be maintained to cover
                 entrances, exits and other strategic points.

          (c)    All such staff should be trained in the use of the
                 fire fighting equipment provided and in the action
                 to be taken in the event of a fire.

14.2     Divisions should include details of evacuation plans, emergency
         warning systems etc, in their operational orders.


FOOTBALL MATCH SUMMARY /INTELLIGENCE

15.1      A Football Match Summary has been designed by the ACPO C-r.3.rc.l
          Purposes Sub-Conrmittee on Hooliganism at Sporting Events as pait
          of a conprehensive and systematic approach to intelligence
          gathering for the coming football season. (Appendix 'K' copy and
          specimen.)




                                                                            1010
                                                    Document No. } <^2   CONT’D
                                     ( 11 )

 15.2    It is intended that the Summary (ADM/124) will be completed
          by the Police Liaison Officer for the home club and forwarded
          without delay to the Headquarters Football Liaison Officer so
          that intelligence about fans behaviour at both hone and away
          fixtures will be collated and made available for future matches
          involving that club.

15.3     The Summary also includes an Appendix showing details of those
          arrested, charged or ejected and the offences or misbehaviour
          conplained of. It should not be restricted to areas of hooligan­
          ism inside football grounds but is intended to cover all such
          behaviour associated with a particular match, whether taking
         place inside football grounds, adjoining streets, public houses,
         railway/'coach stations or other venues where football supporters
          gather.   It should also give details of incidents involving
         supporters travelling through the county to other        matches.
         This will allow for regular offerders to be identified and sub­
         sequently targeted so that a systematic build-up of intelligence
         will result.

15.4     Misbehaviour by football supporters whilst travelling on traiiis
         or ferries or on British Rail property is already collated by
         British Transport .Police as part of a conprehensive intelligence
         system operated by that Force.     This information is available
         to Force Liaison Officers through their British Rail couterparts
         and is recommended as part of the nationwide intelligence gather­
         ing system.

INSPECTION OF FOOTBALL STADIUMS

16.1     A Working Party has been formed under the control of the South
         Yorkshire County Council to carry out its responsibilities under
         the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.        This Working Party
         conprises representatives of the Chief Executive of the South
         Yorkshire County Council, representatives of the Building Author­
         ity of the council concerned, the Chief Fire Officer and the
         Chief Constable of South Yorkshire.      Arrangements have been
         made for the Working Party to visit the football stadiums twice
         a year, at the beginning and mid-way through the season, and
         on any other occasion as the need demands, to ensure the safety
         of spectators.    The Chief Constable has delegated his duties
         to the Superintendent (Operations Division), to whqjn problems
         in relation to safety should immediately be notified, so that
         the secretary of the Working Party can be informed, with a view
         to the problem being examined without delay and before the next
         football league match.

LIAISON BETWEEN CLUB MANAGEMENT AND THE POLICE

17.1      There are considerable benefits to be gained from a close person­
          al liaison with the directors and management of football clubs.
          The establishing of such a working relationship by divisional
          conmanders is essential to the success of police operations.




                         I'l.u.C.

Chief Constable

                                                                         101 1
                                              Document ffo.9 2       CONT’D

                               ( 12 )


DISTRIBUTION

For action:    Chief Officers
               Divisional Departmental Conrnanders
               Sub-Divisional Commanders
               Superintendents - Operation, Cctmiunity Liaison and
                                 Communications & Computers
               Detective Chief Inspector, Crime Prevention
               Inspector, Mounted and Dog Section




                                                           August 1985
                                         (13)             Document No.   ] 9 £   CONT’ D


                                                                     APPENDIX 'A1

STANDARD OPERATIONAL ORDER



                             SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

                                  '   ' DIVISION

             ..................................       POLICE STATION


OPERATIONAL ORDER NO:                                      MATCH CATEGORY: '        '

                            HOME TEAM   V     AWAY TEAM

DATE.............................           KICK OFF....................... AM/PM


1.     ,    INFORMATION
      I
      I
1.1        On ............                 1985, .............................
           will p l a y .................... at .............................
           Football Ground (mention any significant points relative to that
           fixture, eg previous encounters between the two clubs resulting
           in serious outbreaks of public disorder, etc).


2.         INTENTION

2.1        It is the intention ofthe police to      allow this matchto take
           place and to ensure public order and safety both inside and
           outside the ground, to segregate andcontrol opposing fans and
           prevent unnecessary obstructionof the highway       and damage to
           property.   This will be attained and displayed with a high
           standard of smartness and professionalism.


3.         METHOD

3.1        Identify   officer inoverall conrrand   and those with          specific
           responsibilities both inside and outside the ground.

3.2        OPERATIONAL PHASES

           The operation will be in three phases,- viz:

3.2.1      Phase 1 -     before kick-off - which willinclude arrangements for
                        public order patrols, the escorting and segregation of
                        supporters and the ccntrol of traffic.

3.2.2      Phase 2 -    during the matchfrom kick-off to ten minutes before
                        the end of the game. (The specific duties being shown
                        by Appendices.)




                                                                                 1013
                                        (14)             Document No. ^ 9 2   ^ONT’ D


3.2.3    Phase 3 -    from ten minutes before      the endof thegame until
                       walking   spectators   andtraffic have dispersed.
                       (Duties to be performed as directed inthe Appendices)

3.3      PARADING ON DUTY

3.3.1    Time and Place.

3.4      BRIEFING

3.4.1    This should be described in      theStanding Instructions and
          particular reference made to the need for police officers to
          march to their tasks or appointed positions and for units less
          than serials to march or walk in single file especially around
          the perimeter track.

3.5      CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION DEPARTMENT

3.5.1    DutitJS of CID officers.

3.6      PLAIII CLOTHES DEPARTMENT

3.6.1    Duties of Plain Clothes officers.

3.7      SPECIAL CONSTABULARY

3.7.1    Duties <of Special Constables.

3.8      POLICE ROOM

3.8.1    Identify officer in charge.

3.9      PRISONERS

3.9.1    The full procedure for dealing        with detained persons   should be
          fully outlined.

3.10     MATCH CONTROL

3.10.1   Identify location and officers involved.

3.11     TRAFFIC CONTROL

3.11.1   Traffic     Points -   specified in   theAppendices, will be    worked
                                before and after the match.

3.11.2   Traffic Division's involvement

3.11.3   Parking arrangements and restrictions

3.12     PUBLIC TRANSPORT

3.12.1   Give details of public transport, routes, termini,etc.

3.13     OBSTRUCTION OP THE HIGHWAY

3.13.1   Procedures r<_.,_ixaxng oJfences and offenders.




                                                                              1014
                                       (15)            Document Ho. -j ^ £   CONT’D


4.          ADMINISTRATION

4.1         Dress for all officers as indicated at Appendix 'B'

4.2         TRANSPORT

4.2.1       Parking and use of official police vehicles.

4.3         REFRESHMENTS

4.3.1       Explain arrangements.

4.4         MAPS

4.4.1       To te available when necessary.

4.5         REPORTING OFF DUTY

4.5.1 '     Detail de-briefing system andhowofficers    willreport off dut>.


5.      i   COMMUNICATIONS

5.1         Identify frequency and channel to be utilisedduring the event -
            level of allocation ofpersonalradios   - public address systems
            to be checked before theevent by apolice officer.


6.          EMERGENCY PROCEDURES

6.1         Identify procedure for dealing with any emergency intheground.


THE OPERATIONAL ORDER WILL CARRY APPROPRIATE APPENDICES INDICATING            THE
SPECIFIC SERIAL DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES AND A SCHEDULE SHOWING            THE
OVERALL POLICE COMMITMENT BY RANKS AND BY DUTIES - SEE APPENDIX 'J' .




                                                                              1015
                                        ( 16 )         I Document No. 1 9 2    CONT'D


                                                                  APPENDIX 'B‘

GENERAL BRIEFING

1.       The officer in conmiand will wherever possible conduct his
          briefing within the confines of the stadium in sufficient tine to
          allow officers to take up their duties before the gates are
          opened to the public, and before the main body of spectators
          arrive in the vicinity of the stadium.

2.       The briefing should set the tone of the operation and should also
          communicate the standard of policing expected of all officers. A
          plan of the ground will be displayed to assist in the briefing.

3.       Lack of a thorough briefing will result in a loss of efficiency.
          It is imperative that this force is seen to discharge its dutits
          effectively. A deliberate and precise briefing at the outset of
          an operation is seen as essential towards this end.

4.       Officers will be paraded in three ranks and           inspected      for
     I    smartness and dress which will be as follows:
     I
           i)      Male uniformed patrol sergeants and constables will wear
                   helmets - the chin straps of which will be in the 'down*
                   position; mounted officers will wear protected helmets.
                   Officers will be in possession of anoraks - not capes.

          ii)      Female officers will parade with male officers and wear
                   normal uniform and headgear.       They also will be in
                   pssession of Gannex raincoats or anoraks. Female officers
                   should be encouraged to wear trousers when performing duty
                   at football fixtures.

         iii)      Traffic patrol officers will parade in full uniform and
                   flat caps and be in possession of anorak, and traffic
                   motor cyclists will parage in standard motor cycling kit.
                   Traffic officers will be briefed with other officers
                   involved in the operation unless specifically excused by
                   the officer    in corrnend due to    their duties being
                   undertaken some distance away from the stadium.       Any
                   officer not attending the briefing will be briefed by
                   other means.

          iv)      Mounted officer will wear full uniform and protective
                   helmets and in the event of inclement weather they will
                   wear Gannex raincoats. They will parade for briefing with
                   all other officers engaged in the police detail.

           v)      Dog handlers will wear standard police uniform with helrret
                   and will be in possession of an anorak. They will not
                   wear the 'V' necked military-style sweater with epaulettes
                   which is supplied purely for training purposes, nor will
                   they wear the short 'wet suit* jacket normally used for
                   training and patrol duties.

          vi)      CID officers will wear convention-’ ■ ’        1 h-3       an<3
                   report for briefing with their uniform colxeu^ues.
                                                            Document No. 1 9 2    CONT’D
                                       (17)


            vii)   Special Constabulary officers     will wear full        police
                   uniform and be in possession of a Gannex raincoat.

5.          A description of the 'event' about to take place will be given
            along with the system of policing to be adopted (escorting and
            segregation of rival fans etc); the basic reasons for the
            officers' presence and what is expected of them, ie to facilitate
            the attendance of spectators, to       exercisecrowd control, to
            maintain public order, to prevent vandalism, to give attention to
            licensed premises/bars, and other locations where problems of
            public order nay be anticipated.

6.          Give details of 'intelligence' reports received as to number of
            spectators anticipated, their gereral reputation, etc.

7.          Mention that,    despite the general    reputation of foothill
            suporters, it must not be overlooked that the hooligan element
            represents only a small proportion of those attending.      Most
            spectators will respond to friendly words of advice-.     Remold
            officers about public 'conplaints'. Draw attention to the n<ied
            to stop the use of obscenities by spectators, including those in
            team 'dug outs". _

8   .       Inform that a firm but fair attitude will be portrayed.      Officers
            must be on their guard to avoid being provoked.

9.          Give the location of any static/rrobile police room/vehicles to be
            used for the iimitial reception of persons arrested.

10      .   Instruct that no persons will be ejected from the ground without
            first being taken to the Police Room and their particulars noted.

11      .   Remind officers as to appropriate legislation, ie:

                   Public Order Act, 1936, Section 5
                   City Bye-Laws, 1960 (if applicable)
                   Breach of the Peace - Justices of the     PeaceAct, 1361
                   Breach of the Peace - Corrmon Law, etc
                   and
                   The rules of the particular ground.

12.         Outline the system of   processing prisoners      andthewriting of
            process files.

13.         Give details of the communications system to be used and give
            instructions for the tannoy system to be tested before each match
            by a police officer.

14.         Explain the refreshment arrangements.

15.         Detail the de-briefing system and how officers will        report off
            duty (see de-briefing form [Appendix 'I']).

16.         Explain emergency evacuation procedures.




                                                                                 1017
                                              Document No. 1 9 2   CONT’ D
                                 (18)


17.   The operational order will be distributed to all supervisory
      ranks who will be responsible for a more detailed briefing of the
      officers under their charge.    This briefing will errphasise the
      way officers will undertake their duties, working as a team.
      Advice will be given that officers will not go alone into crowl
      disorder, situations.




                                                                    1018
                                                          Document No.   | ^ 2 CQNT’D
                                           (19)


                                                                   APPENDIX 'C1

     INDIVIDUAL BRIEFING

     (a )     Officers o;, the playing area track

                 i)   Prevent spectators sitting or standing on the boundary
                      walls or fencing; or climbing any structure; no one must
                      be allowed to have their legs on the playing area side of
                      the track perimeter wall.

               ii)    Officers will be spaced evenly on the perimeter trac’   <.
                      Where applicable, such officers will be in close proximity
                      to any gates/openings separating the playing area aid
                      track from the spectators' enclosures.

              iii)    No unauthorised person must be permitted to encroach up:>n
                      the pitch/perimeter track before, during or after tie
                      match. Any person so doing will be detained and’taken zo
                      the Police Rocxn.  Officers, will not pursue such offenders
                      but will    wait until     they return to     re-enter the
                      spectators' enclosures. In the event of anyone persisting
                      in remaining on the playing area, the nearest senior
                      officer will authorise the action to be taken.

               iv)    Spectators will not be allowed to remain in passageways
                      adjacent to entrances and exits, or to be in terrace or
                      stand gangways.   Persons seen to be so remaining will be
                      directed to move.

                v)    Officers will stand and face the crowd:

                           Until kick-off                   This will be
                           Whenever a goal is scored        indicated by the
                           Whenever there is a serious      senior officer at
                              stoppage of play              the entrance to the
                           Two minutes before half-tine     players' tunnel,
                              and two minutes before        stepping onto the
                                                            track.
9)                            the final whistle.

                      In the event of localised disorder in the crowd      - only
                      officers at the section concerned will stand.

     (b)      Officers other than on the playing area track

              Turnstile Duties:

                i)    Maintain order, ensure that orderly queues form and that
                      pavements are obstructed to a minimum extent and the queue
                      does not enter a roadway. Watch for persons in possesrior.
                      of offensive weapons, etc. Do not allow persons to regain
                      at entrances and give attention to the safety of irone> at
                      turnstiles.




                                                                              1019
                                              Document No. 1 9 2   CONT’D
                             (20)


 ii)    Under no circumstances must any person be allowed to take
        bottles, cans, toilet rolls or other potential missiles
         into the ground. Banners, flags or other devices fastened
        to sticks will also be prohibited.

iii)    An officer who confiscates any article because of this
        prohibition will do so on the understanding that it may be
        reclaimed after the match and he must therefore endeavour
        to:

        (a)   Obtain the owner's narre/address and note other
              relevant details.

        (b)   Ensure the owner is   aware of the    location of
              the Police Roan.

        (c)   Hand the item in to the Police Room (and
              nowhere else) where it will be labelled with
              the name/address of its owner and the details
              of the officer.

        (d)   Any property not collected by     its owner after
              the match will be dealt with      subsequently as
              found property.

 iv)    Prevent unauthorised entry into the ground by persons
         climbing walls and fences or by cliirbing over turnstiles.

  v)    Prevent anyone climbing from   one section of the ground to
        another.

 vi)    Persons renoved from the ground through illness or injury
        may be treated on the track by ambulancemen. After first
        aid treatment, they will either be returned into the
        crowd, accorrpany the first aid man, or leave the ground.
        If the person is not returned into the crowd, the nearest
        officer will acconpany such      person and obtain full
        particulars in order that, if necessary, his next of kin
        may be informed.

vii)    Officers engaged on duties in the stands and terraced
         areas will take up positions at the rear of the crowds
         using any raised or otherwise advantageous positions which
         might be provided or available.      Passageways in these
         areas will be kept clear and the necessary advice and
         support given to stewards.

viii)   The Officer in Command will ensure there is at all tames a
        uniform presence at the rear of and at the entrance to the
        directors' box to prevent entry to the box by irate or
        celebrating supporters, and also at the entrance to the
        Club Officers/Executive Suite and players' dressing rooms.




                                                                   1020
                                          Document No. | ^ 2   CONT’D
                           (21)


Official Car Park (if applicable)

Officers will ensure the safety of such vehicles and their
contents. When the match is over, vehicles on the official car
park will be advised not to leave until such tirre as the
spectators have departed.

Officers engaged on public order duties

Maintain order amongst the crowds, prevent vandalism to property,
prevent the congregating of supporters arriving at, or leaving
the ground.    Give attention of licensed premises and other
potential sources of trouble and in particular check that cans
and bottles of liquid are not be::
                                 .ng sold at licensed bars instsad
of the agreed sale in plastic containers.

Prevent obstruction of roads ;ind footpaths by indiscriminate
parking of vehicles and by vendors of foodstuffs such as hot log
stalls, etc.

All officers to remain in position until the crowds have cleared
and traffic returns to normal.    They will then return to the
ground/reception point as and when directed by their supervisory
officer.

Officers should    rreke themselves familiar      with   the   Ground
Regulations for the ground they are policing.
                                                  I Document No.   ]   9 2   CONT’D

                                     (22)


                                                               APPENDIX 'D'

GRADING CRITERIA


Category 'A'

Typical of a match which warrants a Category 'A' grading will be a Football
Association Cup Final, International or local 'derby' fixture.

Category 'B*

A match whic'i merits such a grading wil l be one where serious public
disorder can be anticipated from the considerations mentioned at paragraph
5 of the Standing Instructions. The number of police officers to be used
for such a match should be increased by at least two serials above the
number allocated for duty at a Category ’C r match.

Category 'C'

Such a match is one thought unlikely to result in serious disorder after
giving consideration to the matters at paragraphs 5.1 to 5.4 of :he
Standing Instructions.




                                                                             10 2 2
                                                    Document No. ^ ^ 2   CONT’D

                                      (23)


                                                               APPENDIX 'E'

CRITERIA FDR LEVYING CHARGES FOR POLICE SERVICES

The amount levied for police personnel doing duty in the stadium will be
related to crowd attendance and the incorporation of a constant basic
number.   At all times this basic number will be one sergeant and five
constables. The number of constables will be increased by three for each
2,000 spectators.   The number of sergeants will be increased in the ratio
of one to every nine constables. A charge will be levied for the services
of an inspector for a gate of over 9,0C0 and will be increased by an
additional inspector for every four sergeants. In addition, there will be
a charge for a chief inspector whenever the spectator attendance reaches or
exceeds 35,000 and for a superintendent whenever the gate exceeds 49,000.
The chart below illustrates this criteria.

CROWD ATTENDANCE         SUPTS      CH INSES        INSPS      SGTS       PCS

 1000 or belov/ (only charge actual hours wcrked)                1          5
 1001    3000                                                    1          8
 3001 -  5000                                                    2         .11
 5001    7000                                                    2         14
 7001 —  9000                                                    2         17
 9001   11000                                         1          3         20
11001 - 13000                                         1          3         23
13001 - 15000                                         1          3         26
15001 - 17000                                         1          4         29
17001 - 19000                                         1          4         32
19001 - 21000                                         1          4         35
21001 - 23000                                         2          5         38
23001 -
        25000                                         2          5         41
25001 - 27000                                         2          5         44
27001 - 29000                                         2          6         47
29001 - 31000                                         2          6         50
31001 - 33000                                         2          6         53
33001 - 35000                                         2          7         56
35001 - 37000                                         2          7         59
37001 - 39000                            1            2          7         62
39001 - 41000                            1            2          8         65
41001 - 43000                            1            2          8         68
43001 - 45000                            1            2          8         71
45001 - 47000                                         3          9         74
47001 - 49000                                         3          9         77
49001 - 51000               1             1           3          9         80

These charges will be at the Special Services Rate applicable at the time.

Should a match be cancelled at short notice whereby police expenditure is
necessarily incurred, a basic charge will not be levied but a report will
be submitted to the Assistant Chief Constable (Management Services) for
negotiations with the Secretary of the club for reasonable reimbursement..




                                                                          1023
                                                    Document No. ^ g 2   CONT’ D


                                     (24)


                                                              APPENDIX *F'

COrTTROL OF SPECTATORS

PRE-MATCH

The main risk of a pre-match clash between supporters is in the immediate
vicinity of the ground and on public transport. H a m teams’ supporters
often congregate at some distance from the ground so as to arrive in a
group, either on foot or using public transport.       They should not be
allowed to loiter at the approaches to the ground and officers should be
instructed at briefing to ensure that persons are not allowed to congregate
until acutally in the designated spectator areas within the confines of the
stadium.

An increased police presence will have the desired effect of discouraging
rowdyism and vandalism. This applies to post-match also.

Special police arrangements always need to be made at railway stations c.nd
on routes which visiting coaches will use.

The use of mobile patrols in the form of the mobile reserve, motor cyclists
and mounted officers in the immediate vicinity of the ground have a good
moderating influence on the behaviour of the supporters. Thought should be
given to the need for selective searches, both inside and outside the
ground and particularly at transport termini.

Posting police officers to the vicinity of public houses to encourage
separate use by either 'home' or 'away' adult supporters and not both, has
been found to reduce pre-match incidents.

Consideration should also be given to police visits being made at selected
licensed premises.   Other known trouble spots, especially those on coach
routes, if applicable, should be identified and policed.

The use of signs to ensure that supporters go to the appropriate section of
the staidum and do not accidentally mix with the opposition supporters is
essential.

A most useful instrument available to the police in their responsibility
for crowd control within the stadium is the tannoy or public address
system. This facility should at all times be available to the police and
it is essential this equipment should be proved effective throughout the
ground and thoroughly tested before each fixture.

IN THE STADIUM

The crucial period for disorder is in the half-hour irrmediately preceding
the gams and maximum po]ice strength should be available at that tine. The
use of 'entertainment1 during this period is valuable in turning the
attention of supporters away from disorder and clubs should be encouraged
to nake the necessary provision.
                                                     Document No. -j ^ £    CONT’D


                                     (25)


Segregation of supporters within the stadium is essential. As a matter of
policy clubs must be influenced to provide barriers, sectorised fencing and
other services (toilets and snack bars etc) which will facilitate effective
separation of opposing supporters. It should not be necessary for police
to undertake a task which could better be performed by manufactured
barriers.

Attempts to    'capture' the opposing       supporters'   end   is   a   problem,
particularly at 'local derby' rretches.

The most common way this is attempted is by hate supporters gaining access
to one end of a terrace before visiting supporters arrive. Police should
be in position early to prevent this but scmetimes the supporters take care
to be unident:Lfiable until in sufficient numbers to cause trouble.

It is considered that the appropriate police strategy, if this occurs, is
to cordon them off and contain than, not to attempt to move than elsewhere,
unless numbers are so small as to make it a sirrple police operation. (The
fact| this occurs is a strong argument in favour of sectionalised end
terraces.)

It occasionally occurs that an attempt is irade to capture 'ends' after they
are fully occupied by opposing supporters.       The most effective way of
preventing this is the erection of a fence around the whole of the
perimeter track and adequate partitioning of the various sections of the
ground to prevent unauthorised movement of the spectators, as mentioned
above. If in the absence of such fences and partitions the attempt occurs,
the only available strategy is interposing police officers between the two
factions and sending reserves in from the rear or both sides.       Officers
should never go into the crowd alone to deal with trouble.

Where serious disorder occurs in a section of the crowd, it is not good
strategy to attempt to clear the whole terrace, whether onto the pitch or
otherwise.   It is better to drive a double line of police officers,
preferably from the rear or side of the terrace, towards the centre of the
trouble.   Reserves can then be fed in between the police lines to make
arrests.    Where disorder of this kind is anticipated the strategic
positioning of anple reserves is important.

Clubs should be encouraged to provide perimeter fencing and partitioning as
previously described but where such fencing is not provided, there may be
occasions when a pitch invasion occurs.        Such invasions could have
differing motivations.   In the event of a surge onto the playing area to
avoid scenes on the terraces, clearly police attention must be directed to
stabilising that position and spectators can 'then be returned.      In the
event of an invasion designed to disrupt play, all uncommitted officers and
as a last resort police dogs on short leads, should go onto the playing
area and clear it under the direction of the Officer in Command.       That
officer should consider the mood and object of the offending spectators and
deploy his resource accordingly with a view to protecting players and
officials and effecting the return of the supporters to the terraces, if
necessary by a 'sweep' of the playing area.
                                                                         ----
                                                    Document No.         CONT'D j
                                     (26)                          192


Where there is a capacity crowd, supporters are often locked out and can
become frustrated and hostile and have to be supervised by the police. In
order to alleviate this problem clubs on appropriate occasions should be
advised to have 'all ticket1 games.     Correct allocation of such tickets
will further assist the desired segregation of opposing teams.


POST MATCH

Most of the strategy suggested for 'pre-match' apply equally to after the
match, particularly in relation to preventing the congregation of fans, as
this often heralds an attack on opposing supporters.

On accasions there can be advantages of holding back visiting supporters
until the rain body of heme supporters has left or vice versa.      If this
manoeuvre is selected, sufficient manpower must be available to achieve the
objective without keeping the gates closed.

Police horses are very useful in this context.    Experience has shown that
keeping the gates closed after match is likely to result in police officers
and spectators being crushed against the solid partitions.       The tannoy
system should be used to announce any such manoeuvre before the match ends,
and the announcement should be repeated and the spectators exorted to be
patient.   Spectators should be held in such a position for a mininum
period. Details of these procedures have been included in the literature
to be sent to visiting clubs by Football Liaison Section prior to fixtures
in this Force area.

In any case, provision must be made for escorting visiting supporters to
their coaches or the relevant railway stations in a conpact unit.    This
will entail close supervision by as nrany mounted, dog and foot patrol
officers as possible. Additionally, there should be a liberal presence of
police officers along the prescribed route to prevent attacks by hone
supporters.   Officers should join the escort through 'roll-up' tactics,
thus strengthening police presence.
   «

There should be a follow up vehicle to      accommodateprisoners    should the
occasion arise for arrests to be made.

Coach operators should, wherever possible, be warned in advance not to
arrive at the designated coach parks until a specified time.     This is in
order to afford police protection of the vehicles throughout the duration
of their stay and to prevent visiting       supporters arrivingtoo early.
Liaison with British Rail should be established to co-ordinate arrival and
departure times of special trains.

Having escorted visiting supporters to their transport it is stressed that
coaches must not be released until such time as the surrounding area is
clear of home supporters. When released they must be escorted in convoy as
far as is deemed necessary to ensure their safety.        Police divisional
boundaries should be ignored for this purpose. Where Force boundaries are
concerned, neighbouring Forces should be notified and asked to take over
the escort responsbility when the convoy enters their area.
                                                     j Document No. 1 9 2 CONT’D
                                      (27)           I------------- _ -------- _


                                                                   APPENDIX 'G'

PROCESSING PRISONERS

The following procedures will be implemented throughout this         force area
when offenders are detained at football matches:

(a)      Every detained person must    be taken   imTediately to    the Police
          Room within the ground.

(b)      The circumstances   of the detention mast then be the subject of
          full enquiry by a supervisory officer of at least sergeant rank.
         At this stage, a decision will be made as to whether the person
         will be charged, processed by sum irons or ejected.  If the facts
         reveal only an infringement of the Ground Regulations, that
         person should be ejected forthwith, via the Police Room, where
         only his name and address should be recorded.

(c)      Prisoners should   be photographed with the arresting officer by
         use cf a Polaroid camera. This photograph should show the faciei
         features of both the prisoner and the arresting officer.

(d)     The prisoner should be searched and his personal property placed
         in a property bag.   Any property subject of a possible charge
         should be placed in a separate bag suitably labelled and cross
         referenced.

(e)     The prisoner's details should then be documsnted to expedite his
         speedy flow through the reception area, thereby allowing the
         arresting officer to return to his match duties with the minimum
         of delay.   Standard forms will be introduced for this purpose
         (Appendix 'H').    The conpleted form and photograph will be
         affixed to the property bag of the relevant prisoner.         The
         arresting officer should retain a carbonised copy of this form.

(f) '   All prisoners with their property will be conveyed to a nominated
        police station.    In the case of those arrested at either of the
        Sheffield football grounds, the Central Charge Office, Bridge
        Street, will be the designated police station.    At this station
        there will be present a prisoner reception squad, capable of
        obtaining the prisoner's photograph, finger inpressions        and
        antecedent details.      In addition, form Gen/29,     (Record of
        Detention and Charge) will be conpleted.

(g)     The prisoner     should then be charged and formally cautioned,
        normally by a      member of the prisoner reception squad and not
        necessarily the arresting officer and a pre-prepared statement
        form coirpleted by the Charging Officer.

(h)     On conpletion of his match duties, the arresting officer should
        attend the nominated police station and couplete a 'short'
        prosection file.

(i)     Juvenile prisoners should be processed by this same mer.hod but
        care must be taken to separate them from adult prisoners and to
        ensure that existing procedures in relation to              ;>_c
        adhered to.
                                                  ■—     8—
                                                   Document No.
                                                                  m   --------------
                                                                         CONT’D
                                     (28)                                 —


Pursuance of the above procedure in relation to adult prisoners will
eliminate the necessity for the preparation of a full file unless a plea of
'not guilty' is entered.


THE PRODUCTION OF PRISONERS BEFORE COURT

There is considerable merit in the production of prisoners before court at
the earliest possible occasion following the corrmission of the alleged
offence. This will encourage the speedy disposal of justice with a mininwm
of administration.

When disorder is anticipated, Divisional Corrmanders should liaise with c.he
Chief Inspector, Headquarters Prosecutions , or the Prosecutions Inspector
at 'A', 'B' and 'C' Divisions, to identify a suitable date to which alleged
offenders should be bailed.

On occasions when it is considered that it would be an advantage to hold a
special court to sit on a Saturday evening then arrangements should also be
made via the appropriate senior officer of the Divisional Prosecutions
Department.

The question of bail should be considered on the merits of each case wit.iin
the existing verms of the Bail Act 1976.




                                                                            1028
                                                                                                        APPENDIX ‘H’
                                                              (29)

                                       SOUTH         YORKSHIRE               POLICE

                                                   ARREST/SUMMONS REPORT                     Document NoA 9 2           CONT’D

 OFFENCE BOOK NO.

                                  STATION:                                                DATE SUBMITTED
 DIVISION:
 REPORTING OFFICER:                                                         COURT:

                                                              OCCUPATION                             ADDRESS
 DEFENDANTS) NAME                       AGE &
                                                                                             (Ifcompany show Reg. Office)
                                        D of B




 N.B. Ifthe defendant isa juvenile,Include parent particularsand the name ant location of school attended.

                                                                                                  For Prosecution use on;y
 OFFENCE(S) AND LEGAL AUTHORITY




 TIME, DAY, DATE OF OFFENCE(S):
 PLACE OF OFFENCE(S):


-''DETAILS AND EVIDENCE CHECKED                                       DECISION




                                                                                                             . Superintendent
                                                     .Sergeant


 IN THE CASE OF ARREST COMPLETE THIS SECTION

 OFFICER ACCEPTING CHARGE............................. DATE ARRESTED.

 ARE Wii'K £SSES ATTENDING COURT FOR FIRST APPEARANCE?                                YE3/NO

 BAILED TO COURT O N ................................ .... ............
  IS REMAND REQUIRED?                        YES/NO-                 PREVIOUS CONVICTIONS:
                                                                                                                   YES, NO

  IS THERE OBJECTION TO BAIL?                YES/NO (IfYe» Form CTS/33 to to             '

  REMANI) IN CUSTODY/ON BAIL UNTIL:............................ ........

  ATTACH CTS/11 COURT WITNESS FORM •AVAILABILITY
                                                                                                                      1029
                                                                                                             Document No.    19 2   CONT’D
                                                                      (30)


                                             SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


Divisional Charge No (if applicable).............................................................................

Arresting Officer.............................................................                                   Sub Div

Corroborating Officer...................................................................................... Sub Div


Time Arrested........................................................ Date

Time arrived at Police R oom ............................................

Time despatched to Police Station...................................


Adult/Juvenile

Name..............

Address...........



Date of B irth..........................                                                          Age

Occupation/School                             ............................................................

Parent/Guardian............................

OFFENCE.......................... ..........

Place of Offence (Exact location)

Charge authorised b y ....................


TO BE COMPLETED AFTER CHARGING

Officer charging....................................................                                              Sub Div.

Antecedents b y ..........................................................................................        Sub Div.

Finger printed b y .............................................................................................. Sub Div

Photographed b y ............................................................................................... Sub Div


PARTICULARS VERIFIED




                                                                                                                                     1030
                                                                                                                           Document No. 1 9 2          CONT’D

 INSTANCES OF OFFENCE(S)

 At               .... am/pm o n ......................                        th e .................................                1 9 .........

 I was on d u ty ..............................................................................................................................

 When I saw (prisoner)                    ........................................... ................................. ............................


 Describe Circumstances of Offence;




I cautioned and arrested him/her for




He/She replied



I escorted him/her to the Police Room within th e .........................

Football Ground, where I related the facts to Inspector/Sergeant.

Weekly Leave Group of reporting officer                                    ..............................

Weekly Leave Group of other police witnesses...............................



Annual Leave (6 months in advance) of ALL witnesses
                                                                                                                                                        Document No. J                              92              CONT’ D
                                                                                 (31)


                                                     STATEMENT OF WITNESS

              (C.J. Act, 1967, s.9; M.C.A., 1980, s. 102; M.C. Rules, 1981, r.70)

    STATEMENT OF
    AGE OF WITNESS (if over 21 enter “over 21”)
    OCCUPATION OF WITNESS
    ADDRESS AND TELEPHONE NUMBER

    This statem ent, consisting o f                           pages each signed by me, is true to th e best o f my knowledge and belief and I make

    it know ing th at, if it is tendered in evidence. 1 shall be liable to prosecution if 1 have wilfully stated in i t anything which

    I know to be false o r do n o t believe to be tru e.


    D ated th e                         day of                                  , 19


                                                               Signed...................................................................                                                                            —


'                                             Signature w itnessed by.....................................................................................................................................


    ....................................................................................................................................................... being unable to read the statem ent below ,


    I.                                                                                of                                                                                                                       • “ ,d

it to him before he signed it.


    B £ted th e                         day o f                                  ,1 9                     .          ............................................................................................


A t..............                           am/pm, o n ................................................................................................

19 .....                         I was on duty a t .................................... .............................................................

when I formaDy cautioned and charged (prisoner)..................................................................

                              ..........................................with the particulars of the offence. He/she replied




He/she was then served with a copy of the charge.

He/she was then placed in the cells/bailed to the ..

Magistrates Court a t ............................................ on

............................................................ 1 9 ............... ...

Weekly leave group.................................................

Annua) leave (6 months in advance)......................




                                                                                                                                                                                                         1032
                                                              Document No. j ^   ^   CONT’ D

                                       (32)


                                                                      APPENDIX 'I'

      DIVISION


FOOTBALL DUTY                                         DATE


                        V


Serial No

The following officers made up the above serial:

Sgt                                           nr/or
 1-   PC                                      DT/OT
 2    PC                                      DT/OT
 3    PC                                      DT/OT
 4    PC                                      DT/OT
 5    PC                                      DT/OT
 6    PC                                      DI/OT
 7    PC                                      DI/OT
 8    PC                                      DT/OT
 9    PC                                      DT/OT
10    PC                                      DT/OT

Time on duty                                  ....

Time leaving ground                           .....

Incidents including   movements or   duties other     than shown    in Operational
Order:




Signature of Sergeant
in charge of serial   ....................................................


This form must be completed and handed in at-the             police room   prior to
leaving the ground. All parts must be completed.




                                                                                 1033
                                     (33)               Document No. J    92   CONT’D


                                                                 APPENDIX 'J'

SCHEDULE SHOWING NUMBERS OF OFFICERS INVOLVED

                            CHIEF               CHIEF
                            SUPT     SUPT       INSP      INSP      SGT        PC

Inside Ground

Town Patrol

Mobile Reserve

Control & Police Rocsn

Traffic Points

CID

Mounted

Dog Section

Prisoner Reception



                                                Total Officers




                                                                               1034
                                                 (34)                 Document No. 1 9 2     CONT’D


                                                                                    APPENDIX 'K*
                           \


                                         FOOTBALL MATCH SUMMARY


 1.   DATE:                                 FIXTURE:                      - V -

      VENUE:                                                      KICK OFF TIME:

      MATCH: (League/Cup/Other) (Specify):


 2.   CRCMD ATTENDANCE:                  TOTAL          HOME SUPPORTERS           AWAY SUPPORTERS

      Estimate if not known




 3.   MODE OF TRAVEL:                     RAIL                            BUS/COACH '
                                  (No on special trains)          (No and Transport Corrpanies)
              I
                                  (No on service trains)


      CITHER: (Sp>ecify)

      Transit Vans:

      Special Parties (political or youth gangs):




      NUMBER OF                       INSIDE               OUTSIDE                  EJECTIONS
      ARRESTS:                 HOME       VISITORS      HOME    VISITORS          HOME    VISITORS

      Public Order
      offences

      Damage

      Others

 See also
 Schedule 'A*


      LEVEL OF POLICE COVER

      (a)         High priority

      (b)         Normal

      (c)         Low




AEM/124 (Revised July 1985)
                                                                                              1035
                                                         Document No. f 9 2    CONT’D



6*   INTELLIGENCE r e c e i v e d a n d f r o m   whom
     (Information and comments)

     Bus conpanies, Football Clubs, Police, etc.

     (Show nature of intelligence)




7.   POLICING PROBLEMS AND CROWD BEHAVIOUR

     (a)    In Transit:




     (b)    Inside Ground:




     (c)    Inrrediate Vicinity of Ground:




     (d)    Other Locations:




                                                                              1036
                                                               Document No. ij   y
                                                                                 ^    CONT’D




8.   COMMENTS ON POLICING TACTICS

     ie, Escorts, Turnstile Searches, Control of Licensing Lav/s, etc:




     FROM: Chief Superintendent                           TO: Chief Superintendent
           1 1 Division                                       Oper^1
                                                                   -ic-is u Traffic




     Chief Superintendent
                                                  Document No. ^ 9 2   CONT’D



                                                          SCHEDULE 'A'


NAME, ADDRESS AND D O B
(PERSONS ARRESTED/CHARGED/EJECTED)   OFFENCE/BEHAVIOUR




                                                                   1038
                                                                   Document No.          CONT’ D




                                                                             SCHEDULE 1B 1

                                   'SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


FROM:   CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT ...........        DIVISION

TO:     ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE (OPERATIONS)

FOOTBALL MATCH SUMMARY

Nuntoer of officers employed inside the ground (maximum)


   C/SUPT     SUPT        C/INSP      INSP        SGTs       PCs     TOTAL



These officers should be included in the table below.

Police officers on (A) normal voluntary overtime;
                   (B) duty time or
                   (C) rest day working.


      SUPT       C/INSP             INSP         SGTs        PCs       TOTAL


  A


  B


  C


  MOUNTED OFFICERS


  DOG HANDLERS                                                                 •



  NO OF SPECIAL CONSTABLES ON DUTY:          Supervising .




                                                                                       1039
                                                                              | Document No. ^ ^          CONT’D



                                                                                               SPECIMEN

                                          FOOTBALL MATCH SUNMARY


  1.     DATE:    Saturday 6.7.85             FIXTURE:   Sheff Wednesday      - V -    Tottenham

         VENUE:   Hillsborough, Sheffield                            KICK OFF TIME;         15.00 hours

         MATCH: (L e a g u e ( S p e c i f y ) :


  2.     CR jWD ATTENDANCE:               TOTAL           HOME SUPPORTERS              AWAY SUPPORTERS

         Estimate if not known            47,000                41,000                       6,000




  3.     MODE OF TRAVEL;                RAIL                                 BUS/COACH
                                (No on special trains)               (No and Transport Corrpanies)
                                      2,800 (one special)                43 coaches total
                                (No on service trains)                   (27) National  )
                                                                                          previously knoi/n
                                      1,200                              (14) Finglands )
                                                                         (1) Smiths of Watford
         OTHER: (Specify)                                                (1) Browns of Gloucester
                                                                         The latter two not previously
      24 Transit Vans:   240                                             known.

         Special parties (political or youth gangs);
         A gang of 20 (twenty) youths from Leeds visited the match in retaliation
         over problems at the Tottenham - v ~ Leeds game, March, 1985.




 4.      NUMBER OF                    INSIDE                OUTSIDE                     EJECTIONS
         ARRESTS:              HOME       VISITORS       HOME    VISITORS             HOME    VISITORS

        Public Order
        offences                                            5                          26            44

        Damage                                             3

        Others

 See also
 Schedule 'A1


 5.     LEVEL OF POLICE COVER

        (a)   High priority *

        (b)   Normal

        (c)   Low




ADM/124 (Revised July 1985)                                                                          1040
                                                                Document No. *• 9   2 CONT’D


 6.    INTELLIGENCE RECEIVED AND FROM WHOM
       (Information and comrents)

       Bus companies, Football Clubs, Police, etc.

       (Show nature of intelligence)

       1.   London Bus Company - On last away fixture to Liverpool FC trouble
                                 caused at Motorway Services at Keele.

       2.   Metropolitan Police - 2 vans hired from Avis Van Hire,          and
                                            believed to contain offensive weapons.




7-    POLICING PROBLEMS AND CROWD BEHAVIOUR

      (a)   In Transit:

            Coaches caused trouble at Woodall Service Station, attempt to loot
            shop.  2 transit vans,          \
                                            a nd        [ involved in disturbances
            at two public houses in Mansfield.



      (b)   Inside Ground:
            Flares set off prior to half time from Tottenham contingent - 2 smoke
            bombs, coins thrown.  One minor attempt by Tottenham fans to get amongst
            Sheffield Wednesday fans VIA THE MAIN STAND and use of PASSAGEWAY
            UNDER STAND.


      (c)   Immediate Vicinity of Ground:
            Several running fights near to the ground at Leppings Lane.  Large
            groups of Sheffield Wednesday supporters waited for Tottenham fans
            to leave the ground.  Result - dispersed by mounted officers (stones
            thrown at officers).


      (d)   Other Locations:

            Problems in city centre from 11.00 am onwards, ie pub fights and shop­
            lifting.  Before match:- two hundred (200) Tottenham fans qot off train
            in Chesterfield area some 14 miles from the ground and rar ~   •'  ~<urh
            shopping area.  Damage and theft.  Offensive banners displayed on




                                                                                1 04 1
                                                                   Document No.   ]      CONT’D



8.    COMMENTS ON POLICING TACTICS

      ie, Escorts, Turnstile Searches, Control of Licensing Laws, etc:

      1.      Slight problems escorting fans from railway station.  Attempts to
              enter large stores.  Licensed premises in vicinity of ground closed.

      2   .   Turnstile searches in operation (4 arrests).

      3.      Railway travellers require close supervision.




     FROM: Chief Superintendent                              TO: Chief Superintendent
           ' ' Division                                          Operations & Tr.-ffic




     Chief Superintendent




                                                                                      1042
                                                   Document No. 1 9 2    CONT’D



                                                           SCHEDULE 'A'


NAME, ADDRESS AND D O B
(PERSONS ARFFSTED/CHARGED/EJECTED)   OFFENCE/BEHAVIOUR


(The full name, address and date     (Offence, ie Section 5, P.O 1936,
of birth of persons arrested,        ejected - bad behaviour)
charged and ejected to be shown
here as per paragraph 4)




                                                                    1043
                                                                            Document No.      19 ?    CONT’D



                                                                                       SCHEDULE 'B'

                                           SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


    FROM:   CHIEF SUPERIOTENDENT                           DIVISION

    TO:     ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE (OPERATIONS)

    FOOTBALL MATCH SUMMARY

    Nurober of officers employed inside the ground (rraxirnum)


       C/SUPT       SUPT          C/INSP        INSP        SGTs      PCs   TOTAL
                     1                           4           12       122   139

    These officers shou.'-d be included in the table below.

    Police officers on (A) normal voluntary overtims;

•                      (B) duty time or
                       (C) rest day working.


          SUPT           C/INSP            INSP             SGTs      PCs    TOTAL


      A                    2                 5               31       205    243


      B     2                               5                10        95    11 2


      C
                1

      MOUNTED OFFICERS                      1                 2        16         16


      DOG HANDLERS                          1                 2        12         12


      NO OF SPECIAL CONSTABLES ON DUTY:                Supervising




                                                                                                 1044
                                                                                                                DPP DOC
lliiH 3 ( c l }       H e     5
                                    J - f L U . ' . l £ .J * ± ^ ' A r X . l !i L r:L h -.. M L £ l L   ~ T ra in in g   Imp H e r a io n r .

 Mr^Sar,)son c i r c u l r ;l->d s copy of th;.; U c s t V o r k s h i r e Police working group report
 out.1 1 :led     '.Safety of Spores 0 round : Evacuation and .St<n:ardin?' .                                                                   x
                                                                                                                                      /s/d
 Tne C o - i t u t           noted l he report and a p,reed that a copy should be forwarded"to
 •;r C .J Auf’
             ,ert™             ;'!1 bis capacit y as Chairr.an of the ACFO General Purposes Sub
         tee on                        sir: at SporMiijj i.,vents.                        - ,

                  /                                 7     ..


 Dec         (o)

                            y$Ct,

                                                                                                                                            y
                                                                                                  C      OH»t
                                                                                                                         (yc^cLr>^ *g,£.2fe




                                                                                                                                 ;
                                                                                                                                 "
                                                                                                                                 -
                                                                                                                                 .'
                                                                                                                                  v';
                                                                                                                                  ■
                                                                                                                                  > •::•■
                            Document Noj   92A   CONT’D




          Safety of Sports Grounds


        Evacuation and Stewarding



4




        A POLICE WORKING GROUP REPORT
    •                                                     *

                                             1044B
                                                                                            Document No.] 9 2 A CANT’D
                                                    FOREWORD


^    The Interim             Report        of       the C o m m i t t e e of      I n qu iry into Cr ow d
     S a f e t y a n d C o n t r o l at S p o r t s G r o u n d s ,         under the C h a i r m a n s h i p
     o f M r , J u s t i c e P o p p l e w e l l w a s p u b l i s h e d in J u l y            1985 and has
     b e e n s u p p I e m e n t e d by H o m e O f f i c e C i r c u l a r       54/85 which urges,
     amongst other things, chief                           officers         of    pol ice to        respond
     q u i c k l y a n d c o n s t r u c t i v e l y to         the   s p i r it of the          recommend­
     ations.           The       report        c o n t a i n e d 24 r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s including
     t h e foI Iowi n g :

            Recommendation             1

            ' E v a c u a t i o n p r o c e d u r e s s h o u l d be a m a t t e r      of police
            training            and fo rm part of               the b r i e f i n g     by p o l i c e
            officers before a football match'.

            Recommendation             10

             ' S t e w a r d s in a l l g r o u n d s s h o u l d n o t o n l y b e t r a i n e d
|           in       fire      p r e c a u t i o n s and fire f i g h t i n g but         should
            a l s o b e t r a i n e d in           h o w b e s t to h e l p t h e p o l i c e  in
            e v a c u a t io n ' .

  In O c t o b e r    1985, f o l l o w i n g initial                discussions,            officers from
\ West Y o r k s h i r e and the M e t r o p o l i t a n             Police  met             asja  working
    group t o - r e v i e w      e v a c u a t i o n p l a n s and t h e t r a i n i n g o f        s t e w a r d s v-vCH^ Uec
    E x i s t i n g pi ans_      and schemes             were s c r u t i n i s e d   and                    many
    were   satisfactory   significant                             differences             in. format           and               J


    content were apparent.

    T h e w o r k i n g g r o u p r e c g g n i s e d o b v i o u s a d v a n t a g e s in a d o p t i n g " a
    standard             a p p r o a c h to      evacuation            p l a n n i n g in   tire knowledge
    that,         particularly                at f o o t b a l l     matches, many           officers     are
    drawn from districts some                          d i s t a n c e a w a y and m a y be u n f a m i l i a r
    w-i-th       the       p a r t ic u I a r    ground.             A     common         framework    makes
    reference              to            p l a n 5 far s i m p l e r and             allows officers with
    limited           knowledge             of     the          stadium             to    contribute     more
    e f f e c t i v e l y a n d w i t h g r e a t e r s p e e d in a n e v a c u a t i o n s i t u a t i o n .

    In     d r a w i n g up the  s u g g e s t e d f o r m a t it X^sr a c k n o w l e d g e d               that
    considerable flexibility                  is n e c e s s a r y t o t a k e a c c o u n t o f              the
    m a n y local f a c t o r s that m a k e e a c h g r o u n d u n i q u e .

    W h i l s t r e s p o n s i b i l i t y for the t r a i n i n g of s t e w a r d s lies f i r m l y
    w i t h the club the p o l i c e ha ve a v e s t e d                     i n t e r e s t in m a x i m i s i n g
    the c r o w d m a n a g e m e n t       potential          of      non police            resources          at
    sports        grounds.            T o t h i s e n d t h ^ ^ g ^ u p fe€** t h e p o l i c e s h o u l d
    p r o v i d e a s i g n i f i c a n t i n p u t i ntc^_t£ie,j t r a i n i n g          of s t e w a r d s and
    that the            s u B e ivt ’o n s t e w a r d i ngj p r o v i d e s a s a t i s f a c t o r y      basis
    for e n s u r i n g a d e q u a t e s t a n d a r d s are a c hi eve d and m a in tai ne d. ^
                                                          35                                (APPENDIX 'L')


                                 EVACUATION OF SPORTS                  STADIA          Document No. 1 9 2 A C 0 N T ’D
                         Contingency Plans                 for E v a c u a t i o n


It is s t r e s s e d t h a t a l l e v a c u a t i o n p l a n s       must         be    drawn      up    in
c o n j u n c t i o n w i t h the f o l l o w i n g a g e n c i e s : -

a)       Fire     B r ig a d e

b)       Ambulance         Service

c)       An   appropriate           official         of    the    club    concerned

d)       Statutory         Local     Authority            (Safety      Committee)

T o b e e f f e c t i v e a n y e v a c u a t i o n p l a n m u s t b e r e c o g n i s e d b y all
those ag encies and liaison m e e t i n g s invoIving r e p r e se nt ati ve s
f r o m the a g e n c i e s listed above,               will        be the        most efficient
m e t h o d of       achieving a workable,                a g r e e d c o n t i n g e n c y plan for
e v a c u a t io n .

An essential         p r e - r e q u i s i t e to s u c c e s s f u l         evacuation         is     that
all e x i t g a t e s a r e m a n n e d a n d u n l o c k e d .

It s h o u l d b e n o t e d t h a t e s c a p e r o u t e s f r o m i n d i v i d u a l         grounds
ma y a l r e a d y be c o n t a i n e d w i t h i n S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e s .

It       is  a p p r e c i a t e d that         dealing     with    emergencies requires
considerable flexibility                       and m u c h will d e p e n d on the s p e c i f i c
n a t u r e of the incident.

In p r e p a r i n g   contingency plans                  for     evacuation         the    following
headings are           recommended.

1   .   Plan     of    the G r o u n d

        A     plan        containing     detailed                 information   relevant to
        e v a c u a t i o n is  essential     and                 consideration   should be
        g i v e n to the i n c l u s i o n of the                following points, location
        o f ;-

        a)      Emergency          telephones.

        b)      Fire     fighting         equipment.

        c)      Control          rooms    and     pol ice      rooms.

        d)       Fire     Tender         (if    appropriate).

        e)       First      Aid/Ambulance            posts.

        f)      Evacuation          routes.

        g)      Exit g a t e s (to s h o w b o t h              onto    the    pitch       and    out      of
                t h e g r o u n d ).




(Revised March 86)                                                                                               10 4 4   D
                                                     36
  A e r i a l p h o t o g r a p h s m a y b e a d v a n t a g e o u s in g i v i n g c l e a r e r
  d e f i n i t i o n of the p h y s i c a l c h a r a c t e r i s t i c s of the g r o u n d
  and s u r r o u n d i n g area.
                                                                                  Document No. 1 9 2 A C 0 N T ’D
 Plan       o f the        S u r r o u n d ing A r e a

 This should         include agreed access routes and rendezvous
 p o i n t s a s at (12) a n d   (13) t o g e t h e r  with other   infor­
 mation,        useful   to    officers performing         duty,  su c h as
 locations        for   potential    disorder         ie.  public houses,
 railway stations, coach parks.

 B r i e f i n q P o I ic e

 This should include                          how   and   where      officers            are briefed
 and by whom.

 In a d d i t i o n to the norm al       pre-match briefing     officers
 must     be informed     of e v a c u a t i o n procedures w h i c h will
 include coded messages.

Officers           performing duty            in   different       areas of the
g r o u n d m u s t be m a d e a w a r e of the         exit routes, emergency
t e l e p h o n e s a n d f i r e p o i n t s in t h a t a r e a .

C o n s i d e r a t i o n s h o u l d b e g i v e n to p r o v i d i n g o f f i c e r s w i t h
returnable,               individual,           briefing         cards,        containing
essential             facts        in   relation      to p o l i c i n g     the       ground
g e n e r a l l y and spec ifi c roles.

All o f f i c e r s    s h o u l d be issued w i t h a m a p of the      ground
and surrounding              a r e a , to e n a b l e them to be f u l l y c o n ­
v e r s a n t w i t h the layout of the ground.

B r i e f i ng o f S t e w a r d s

Stewards            sh ou ld be b r i e f e d         by    a senior Police Officer
p r i o r to        e v e r y m a t c h to      e n s u r e that they   ar e a w a r e of
their         duties         and       responsibilities          in   the    event      of
evacuation              or o t h e r e m e r g e n c y .     Previously     identified
d e f i c i e n c i e s in s t e w a r d i n g s h o u l d b e   brought     to n o t i c e
at s u c h b r i e f i n g s .

P e d _ j _ c a l e d _ Q f f ic e r s   at    Dedicated Posts

Consideration            s h o u l d be     given        to   deploying dedicated
officers          at k e y p o i n t s    on a re gu l a r        basis.              The key
points,         together with           t h e o f f i c e r s r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s in
an e m e r g e n c y , s h o u l d be included u n d e r this heading.

D e t a i l s of       D e p loym e n t , Du ties         a n d I n s t r u c t i o ns    to
Stewards                                                                          ~

These         d e t a i l s s h o u l d b e d r a w n u p b y t h e c l u b in c o n s u l ­
ta ti on w i t h the P o l i c e and Fi r e B r i g a d e , w i t h p a r t i c u l a r
r e f e r e n c e to       stewards'        responsibilities             in  assisting
p o l i c e in e v a c u a t i o n s i t u a t i o n s .
                                                37
                                                                                Document No. 1 9 2 A C 0 N T ’D

 L o c a t i o ns    and F u n c tions of C o ntrol            Points         and Po li ce
 Rooms                                  ~                                                    ~

 This should            include       details        of     club    and       police     control
 p o in t s .

 I t is s t r o n g l y     a d v i s e d that one     c o n t r o l p o i n t w h i c h is
 not n e c e s s a r i l y the m a i n p o l i c e   control room, be m a n n e d
 j o i n t l y by police, a cl ub of ficial and                     the Fi r e B r i g a d e
 ( i f a v a i l a b l e ) in     order     that m a x i m u m c o m m u n i c a t i o n and
 I i a i s o n is m a i n t a i n e d .

 Each  of            the a b o v e p e rs onn el       should      have         access       to hi s
 own means          of c o m m u n i c a t i o n .

 In the e v e n t of the p r i n c i p l e           control              room    being ren­
 dered inoperative, consideration should                                  be   g i v e n to the
 s u i t a b i l i t y of an a l t e r n a t i v e l o c a t i o n .

 C o m m u n i c a t i o n s A v a i l a b le w i t h i n   the G r o u n d

 This should          include:-

 a)     Police        communications

b)      C l u b c o m m u n i c a t i o n s -e g .   radios         and/or telephones
         w i t h i n f o r m a t i o n on the        systems       employed

c)      Methods         of       communication           with       thep u b l i c          - to
         i n c l u d e w h e t h e r p o l i c e h a v e a c c e s s to them,          e g :-

          i)        Tannoy
          ii)       Electronic Display                 Boards
          i i i)    L o u d h a iIers
          iv )      Banners

d)       Methods        of    contacting         emergency         services

Coded      M e s sages

C o d e d m e s s a g e s a r e t h e m e a n s b y w h i c h a t t e n t i o n is d r a w n
to s t a f f a n d P o l i c e of th e n e e d to t a k e i m m e d i a t e a c t i o n
as a result of an                 emergency situation             that has arisen,
w i t h o u t c a u s i n g i m m e d i a t e a l a r m to the s p e c t a t o r s .

I t is e s s e n t i a l t h a t e v e r y o n e c o n c e r n e d   in t h e    manage­
me nt of c r o w d      s a f e t y w i t h i n t h e g r o u n d is    a w a r e of the
coded      message and             t h i s is    an e s s e nti al in gr edi en t     of
both      steward and police briefings.                          Under this heading
the actual          text      of       the co de d     m e s s a g e and the w a y    in
w h i c h it is t r a n s m i t t e d s h o u l d b e i n c l u d e d .

I n i tial    R esponse        to E m e r g e n cy

To    include       the      following:-

a)      Methods        by  wh i c h police and                 steward          notify    emer­
        gencies        to the p o l i c e c o n t r o l        room.




                                                                                                       1044 F
                                                     38                                Document No. 1 9 2 A C 0 N T ’D

         b)    M e t h o d of a n n o u n c i n g coded  messages   in o r d e r to
                 give        personnel        early  warning  of  an     emergency
                 s i t u a t io n ,

        c)     The       r e q u i r e d r e s p o n s e of   police and            stewards to
                such         m e s s a g e s , eg. s e n i o r o f f i c e r w i l l g o  to the
                c o n t r o l room, g a t e s will be m a n n e d and o p e n e d etc.

        d)     Method     of c o m m u n i c a t i n g     with     the    referee        in    order
                to s t o p the game.

        e)     M e t h o d of c o m m u n i c a t i n g   the     initial       address        to     the
                spectators.

 11■    E v a c u a t ion P r o c ed ur e

        (To        be im plemented    in the   e v e n t of   fire, structural
        hazard,           serious crowd  disorder,        explosion    or   other
        serious incident          which may  r e q u i r e a full   or    partial
        e v a c u a t i o n ).

        a)     This        sub-heading    should          identify, the        intended
                r o u t e s to   be  used    and exits         available       for     the
                evacuation        of   the t e r r a c e s and s t a n d s w i t h i n the
               ground.

       b>      It   is a p p r e c i a t e d certain    routes may however                            by
                inaccessible          depending      on   the  nature  of                            the
                incident.

       c)      A n e s s e n t i a l p r e - r e q u i s i t e to s u c c e s s f u l e v a c u a t i o n
                is t h a t a l l g a t e s a r e m a n n e d a n d u n l o c k e d .

       d)      Access         routes        must    be    preserved        as    far      as     prac-
               t ic a b I e .
                                                                                                     '
                                                                                                     i
       e)      It      is      suggested       that g r o u n d s be       divided      on      an
                individual basis into readily i d e n t if ia ble s e c t i o n s
               d e p e n d i n g o n t h e l a y o u t o f t h e g r o u n d in q u e s t i o n .

               Exit       routes        from these sections                 should       be s p e c i ­
               fied,      (safety       certificates should                 be r e f e r r e d to).

               The s y s t e m of a l p h a b e t i c a l l y       identifying    segments
               is  w o r t h y of   consideration,                   especially    in  con­
               junction       with    the o p e r a t i o n          of C C T V effectively
               locating problem areas within                        the ground.

       f)      This        sub-heading           should       also include details  of
               s p e c i f i c t a s k s s u b s e q u e n t to   the initial response
               that m a y r e q u i r e a l l o c a t i o n .

12.    A c c e ss R o u t es

       These     must    be    agreed       with    the    emergency         services.

       In a d d i t i o n to t h e i r l o c a t i o n ,     the m e t h o d of        opening      and
       preserving these routes should                        be included.




                                                                                                            1044G
                                                            39                             Document No. 1 9 2 A C 0 N T ’D
            R ® Q d e z v o y s _ P o i n j.s

            L o c a t i o n of r e n d e z v o u s p o i n t s , a g r e e d w i t h the e m e r g e n c y
            services should                be      included       in     this      heading.             Any
            facilities             that     exist       at r e n d e z v o u s p o i n t s , eg. l a r g e
            car parks, accommodation                      capable        of h o l d i n g c a s u a l t i e s
            a n d / o r p e r s o n n e l , s h o u l d a l s o be i n c l ude d.

    14 .    UP£glign_gf_F_i_re_Fj_ghllng_Egulpment                            and   Fire   H y d rants

            Details      of the          lo ca tio n of fire f i g h t i n g e q u i p m e n t           and
            hydrants       should         be c o n t a i n e d w i t h i n this heading                  and
            c o u l d be u s e f u l l y l i n k e d to a m a p of the s t a d i u m .

    15 .    Arrangements            for Visiting           S u p p o r ters

           Th i s h e a d i n g s h o u l d include a r r a n g e m e n t s that            exist for
           the s e g r e g a t i o n     of rival s u p p o r t e r s and mu st             take into
           account methods               of d e a l i n g w i t h v i s i t i n g s u p p o r t e r s in
           t h e e v e n t o f p a r t i a l o r t o t a l e v a c u a t i o n to m i n i m i s e t h e
           o p p o r t u n i t y f o r r i v a l f a n s t o e n g a g e in d i s o r d e r .

           C r o w d _ M o n i t o r in g
•   16-
           This should detail what methods exist                             w i t h i n the g r o u n d
           to      o b s e r v e a n d a s s i s t in c r o w d    m o ve men t for e v a c u a t i o n
           purposes            and should include              the     CCTV      facilities,          if
           a v a i l a b l e , the l o c a t i o n of c o n t r o l p o i n t s , s p o t t e r s etc.

    17.    C a s u a l t ie s

           Methods        of    dealing         with     casualties         should    include:-

           a)     Location            of        casualty           clearing     station          if p r a c ­
                   ticable.

           b)     Designated hospitals                    for       rival    supporters       or   police
                   and supporters.

           I t is a p p r e c i a t e d t h a t local m a j o r i n c i d e n t             pl an s will
           p r ob abl y cater for these ev entualities.

•«.        A d ditional         I n f o r m a t io n

           The    following          points        are   put       forward    for    consideration:-

           a>     Local       c o n d i t i o n s , eg.         whether emergency                vehicles
                   c a n g a i n a c c e s s to the             stadium.

           b)     I n f o r m a t i o n as to the h o o l i g a n e l e m e n t - w h e r e they
                   c a n be         located,   t a c t i c s e m p l o y e d by them, v u l n e r ­
                   ab l e a r e a s of the gr ou nd.

           c)     Special           arrangements               -     eg.    deployment      of      plain
                   cIothes         poI ice.

           d)     L o c a t i o n of special  e q u i p m e n t (if   a n y ) eg.                  white
                   tape,         loudhailers,  first         aid,   seek      and                  search
                   lamps, fluores ce nt jackets, banners.

                                                                                                                             M;




                                                                                                                1044H
                                                40                            Document No. 1 9 2 A C 0 N T ’D

               SAFETY OF        SPORTS GROUNDS              -     STEWARDS


      The       prime     responsibility               for     the    arrangement      of
      a f f a i r s at s p o r t s g r o u n d s l i e s w i t h t h e c l u b ,  To that
      end       they    s h o u l d e n s u r e that     stewards        are     suitably
      q u a l if ie d .

      QUALIFICATIONS;

      Stewards       should:-

      a)      Be trained             and           instructed      to     deal w i t h      any
               emergencies           r e l a t i n g to f i r e o r e v a c u a t i o n .

      b)       B e g i v e n w r i t t e n i n s t r u c t i o n a b o u t t h e a c t i o n to
               be      taken          in  cases        of      emergency,        including
               a r r a n g e m e n t s for c a l l i n g the e m e r g e n c y se r v i c e s .

      c)      Receive             practical       instruction                 and   training
               a p p r o p r i a t e to t h e i r r e s p o n s i b i l i t y .

      d)      Should   not  be  e m p l o y e d as                  a steward unless         so
               instructed and trained, and

     e)       Be adequate              in n u m b e r , p h y s i c a l l y   and mentally
               c a p a b l e of p e r f o r m i n g their du ti es,            effectively
               deployed,           efficiently          supervised            and  readily
               id e n t i f ia b I e .

               N B . S t e w a r d s s h o u l d not be less than 18 y e a r s or
               more      than       60     years     of a g e   and  should  wear
               distinctive dress                such   as     fluorescent jackets
               s u it abl y inscribed front and back.


2.   On the o c c a s i o n of ea c h m a t c h s t e w a r d s s h o u l d         attend a
     pre-match briefing                  and   be m a d e         fully aware       of their
     r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s and the lo ca t i o n of         members        of   the
     E m e r g e n c y S e r v i c e s , if  a p p r o p r i a t e , in  the        area for
     wh i c h they are responsible.


3.   S t e w a r d s s h o u l d be    distributed throughout               the g r o u n d
      in     accordance with a              detailed    pre-arranged schedule
     agreed         between        the    police    and    management.             Their
     numbers         and        location     should   not    be       less th an the
     minimum         stated        in t h e   safety    certificate.               Their
     d u t i e s m a y be d i v i d e d into f o u r m a i n c a t e g o r i e s :

     a)       C o n t r o l l i n g or di re cti ng m e m b e r s of the p u b l i c
              w h o are e n t e r i n g or leaving the ground.

     b)      Patrolling           th e g r o u n d to        deal   with any  emer­
              gencies.            eg:     raising           alarms,   extinguishing
              fi r e s etc.

     c)      Manning entrances,              exits           and      other  strategic
              points, p a r t i c u l a r l y exit          doors      and gates which




                                                                                                  1 0441
                                                                                Document Mo. 1 S 2 A c o n t ’ d


                are      not         continuously         open   whilst       the   ground     is
                 in use,

      d)       Undertaking specific        duties  relating                         to   emer­
               genc ies and e v ac uat io n procedures.


      Emeiaenc^_Prpcedures

      T h e i m p o r t a n c e of the         provision          of    formal emergency
      procedures            at e a c h g r o u n d c a n no t be o v e r - e m p h a s i z e d .
      Joint       consultation               in t h i s r e s p e c t s h o u l d  be   taken
      between         the      p o l i c e , the      management          of the      ground,
      fire, ambulan ce and                  other services.             I t Is     essential
      that s t e w a r d s and their s u p e r v i s o r s are fu l l y a w a r e of
      the part          t h e y h a v e t o p l a y in        the     plans       which     are
      produced.

      Management     should          ensure       that      written Instructions
      detailing    t h e a c t i o n t o b e t a k e n in t h e             event      of an
      emergen cy are served             on    all s t e w a r d s , a n d t h at s t a f f
      and    stewards     receive           practical             instruction            and
      training appropriate              t o t h e i r r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s in t h e
      ev en t of an e m e r g e n c y .

      Bodies       such      as   the fire      service,       the     police     and
      ambulance service            have   expressed         a    willingness        to
      a s s i s t in s u c h    training     and   c l u b s a r e u r g e d to t a k e
      full a d v a n t a g e of the o f f e r .

      E x e r c i s e s for s t a f f a n d s t e w a r d s s h o u l d be c a r r i e d out
      r e g u l a r l y to e n s u r e  the     smooth         o p e r a t o n of the p r o ­
      cedures          for   dealing wi th an             emergency.             A   record
      s h o u l d be kept c o n t a i n i n g     d e t a i l s of the t r a i n i n g and
      instruction          given       and    exercises            held,       and   should
      include the f o l l o w i n g m a t t e r s : -

      a)       Date     and       time    of   the   instruction         or    exercise.

      b)       D u r a t io n .

      c>       Name     of     the      person_giving        the   instruction.

      d)       Names     of       the    persons     receiving       the      instruction.

      e)       Nature        of    instruction       or    exercise.


5.    Control         of      stewards      s h o u l d be fr o m a  central point
      containing              efficient       means       to    communicate   with
      stewards          at      key     points         identified   in  discussion
      b e t w e e n m a n a g e m e n t and the p o li c e.


6 .   Chj_ef_St_ewards

      Clubs should              appoint a        C h i e f S t e w a r d r e s p o n s i b l e for
      co-ordinating                 the      duties      of     stewards         and       to   be
      i m m e d i a t e l y a v a i l a b l e for d i s c u s s i o n s w i t h the        senior




                                                                                                     1044J
                                                42
      police officer               present     concerning            any   problem     in   the
      g round.
                                                                             Document No. 1 9 2 A C O N T D
7.    S p e c i f ic D u t i e s   of   Stewards

      Specific        duties        to be u n d e r t a k e n   by    stewards    include;

     a)        Preventing     overcrowding,    ensuring         that   crowd
                limits   in    various  parts     of       the   ground   are
                complied    with and   that g a n g w a y s and    exits are
                kept clear.

     b)        Preventing,             so far         as      possible,       standing      on
                seats,         and      the      c l i m b i n g of      fences and     other
                structures.             W h e r e by v i r t u e of the s c a l e of the
                i n c i d e n t s t e w a r d s a r e u n a b l e to c o m p l y w i t h t h i s
                requirement,               they      should without            delay report
                t h e m a t t e r t o t h e n e a r e s t p o l i c e o f f i c e r , o r , if
                no      police        officer          is p r e s e n t ,   to   the    Chief
               Steward or designated club official.

     c)       The       investigation            and   identification             of       any
               incident or o c c u r r e n c e , r e p o r t i n g their f i n d i n g s
               to      police         or     management      in     accordance             with
               i n s t r u c t i o n s g i v e n at the p r e - m a t c h b r i e f i n g .

     d)        B e i n g a w a r e of the l o c a t i o n of f i r e f i g h t i n g and
               m e d i c a l e q u i p m e n t in t h e a r e a f o r w h i c h t h e y a r e
                responsible            and being       capable       of     effectively
               o p e r a t i n g the same.

     e)       Being fully            conversant        with     the       methods       and
               s i g n a l s u s e d to i n d i c a t e an e m e r g e n c y   situation
               which should have been                  previously          set   d o w n in
               w r i t i n g and s e r v e d on them.

     f)       Being       capable     of     recognising            potential           fire
               hazards and          suspect packages.              S u c h f i n d i n g s to
               b e r e p o r t e d to  t h e n e a r e s t p o l i c e o f f i c e r o r in
               his a b s e n c e the chief s t e w a r d or d e s i g n a t e d cl ub
               official.

     g)       E x c e p t in a n e m e r g e n c y s t e w a r d s s h o u l d n o t l e a v e
               their place        of duty          w i t h o u t the c o n s e n t of the
               Chief Steward          or      senior police officer present
               who       should,     if      it     is     considered          necessary,
               a r ra nge for a replacement.

     h)       All ex i t g a t e s s h o u l d be m a n n e d w h i l e the g r o u n d
                is     u s e d by the p u b l i c , a n d be            c a p a b l e of being
               o p e n e d i m m e d i a t e l y , f r o m i n s i d e , b y a n y o n e in a n
               emergency .

     i)       Reporting           to     the C h i e f    Steward          any damage       or
              defect         l i k e l y to c a u s e      injury          or dang er       to
               p e r s o n s in a t t e n d a n c e .

     j)       In   the  event    of an e m e r g e n c y or i n c i d e n t   the
               senior po li ce of f i c e r present will take             command




                                                                                                   1 044   K
                                        43
          a n d all s t e w a r d s s h o u l d p r o m p t l y c o m p l y w i t h a n y
          instructions          given       by h i m or by a n y p o l i c e
          of f i c e r ac ting on his behalf.
                                                                  Docum ent No] 9 2   A CONT’D
Iiiin in a

T r a i n i n g of s t e w a r d s shou ld  be c o m p l e t e d p r i o r      to the
s t a r t of the       season       to   a standard acceptable                  to t h e
police,            fire       and    ambulance     services          and         Local
A u tho rit y .

Refresher            training     should     be      g i v e n by    a competent
p e r s o n d u r i n g the m o n t h s of O c t o b e r a n d J a n u a r y .

S t e w a r d s s h o u l d be s u p p l i e d w i t h      a handout        detailing
their         responsibilities              in g e n e r a l t e r m s a s    set  out
above.

T h e a b o v e l i s t o f d u t i e s is b y n o m e a n s e x h a u s t i v e a n d
club management should liaise closely with appropriate
senior police, fire,                and ambulance        services officers
to    arrive        at    a final v e r s i o n that takes a c co unt              of
local f a c t o r s .




                                                                                            HD4 4 L
                                                                                                               Document No. 1 9 2 A c o {i t ' d .
                                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

        FROM:   SUPT STUART        OPERATIONS DIVISION                               REF:                          OPS 1WS/SM
                                                                                     STATION/DEPT:                            OPERATIONS
        TO:     CH SUPT MEADOWS         OPS & TRAFFIC DIVISION                       DATE:                                    18 March 1986

                 SUBJECT:          SAFETY IN SPORTS GROUNDS - POPPLEWELL REPORT -
                                   FINAL RECOMMENDATIONS - CMND 9710




                Attached is my report dated 29 January 1986, together with replies
                from divisions recovered to date. I understand A Division have no
                comment and nothing received from D Division to date.

                The only corrment from divisions is from Barnsley who remain, so far
                as recommendation 14 is concerned, strongly in favour of a total ban
                on alcohol at sports grounds, including 'executive boxes'. They feel
                this has brought about a drastic reduction of policing problems ard
                an overall improvement in crowd behaviour at Barnsley and it is perhaps
                fair to say that this applies throughout the county.

                I personally still favour scxne relaxation in this area as I am mindful
                of the majority of supporters who are law abiding and well behaved who
                enjoy a quiet drink and these, and indeed the clubs, are being penalised
                because of the anti-social behaviour of the hooligan element that causes
                problems at matches.

                CCTV has done much to curb the activities of the irresponsible element
                              i_   i_     a   _ JL-   • *i _ _ i_      j i _   ■       a _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __■   •     ____________________a   •   ■   i ___




                                                                                                                                                             i



GEN/2
                                                                    /w o a . ' V s
                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                               REF:'   OPS TWS/5M------
        FROM:   ACC (OPERATIONS)    MR W JACKSON
                                                               STATION/DEPT:   OPERATIONS
        TO:     SEE DISTRIBUTION:                              DATE:           20 March 1986

                 SUBJECT:     SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - SYP STANDING INSTRUCTIONS
                              FOR THE POLICING OF FOOTBALL MATCHES -
                              'EVACUATION AND STEWARDING'




                 The Interim Report of the Committee of Inquiry into Crowd Safety
                 and Control of Sports Grounds, under the Chairmanship of
                 Mr Justice Popplewell, was published in July 1985 and has been
                 supplemented by Hone Office Circular 54/85 which urges, amongst
                 other things, chief officers of police to respond quickly and
                 constructively to the spirit of the recommendations. The report
                 contained 24 recommendations including the following:

                 Recommendation 1

                 'Evacuation procedures should be a matter of police training
                 and form part of the briefing by police officers before a
                 football match.'

                 Recommendation 10

                 'Stewards in all grounds should not only be trained in fire
                 precautions and fire fighting but should also be trained
                 in how best to help the police in evacuation.'

                 As you are aware, evacuation plans and the training of stewards
                 have been examined. A common framework makes reference to plans
                 far simpler and allows officers with limited knowledge of the
                 stadium to contribute more effectively and with greater speed
                 in an evacuation situation.

                 In drawing up the suggested format it was acknowledged that
                 considerable flexibility is necessary to take account of the
                 many local factors that make each ground unique.

                 Whilst responsibility for the training of stewards lies firmly
                 with the club, the police have a vested interest in maximising
                 the crowd management potential of non police resources at sports
                 grounds. To this end it is felt the police should provide a
                 significant input into the training of stewards and that the new
                 appendix on stewarding (attached) provides a satisfactory basis
                 for ensuring adequate standards are achieved and maintained.

                 Appendix 'L', page 35 of the South Yorkshire Police Standing
                 Instructions for the Policing of Football Matches, should now be
                 removed and replaced with the new Appendix 'L' pages 35 - 43,
                 attached hereto.

                 Page 2 of the Index of the Standing Instructions should also be
                 amended so that the last line reads - Appendix 'L* 3 5 - 4 3
                 Emergency Evacuation Procedures/Stewards.




GEN/2
                                                                                        10 4 4 N
                               2                   Document NoJ 9 2   BCON I ’D

 Following the abolition of the County Councils on 31 March 1986,
 District Council Officers will be responsible for Safety of Sports
Ground Act matters as from 1 April 1986, together with representation
of the Local Building Authority, Fire Service and Police. It is not
envisaged that this will have any significant effect on established
procedures and the working party will continue to function as outlined
at paragraph 16.1, page 11, of the Standing Instructions. Reference
made however in that paragraph to South Yorkshire County Council
should be amended to read 'District Council'.




 'KJU       ~ '
Assistant Chief Constable
(Operations)


Enc


Distribution list attached




                                                                      10 4 4   O
                                     Document   NoJ ^ 2   B CQNT’ D

  Distribution


 Chief Constable
 Deputy Chief Constable
 ACC (Oper.ations)
 ACC (Management Services)
 ACC (Staff Services)
 Ch Supt    CID
 Ch Supt    Cjps & Traffic
 Ch Supt    A Division
 Ch Supt    B Division
 Ch Supt    C Division
 Ch Supt    D Division
 Ch Supt    E Division
 Ch Supt    F Division
Ch Supt     Discipline & Complaint
Ch Supt    Management Services
Ch Supt     Staff Services
Supt (Dep) A Division
Supt   "   B Division
Supt   "   C Division
Supt   "   D Division
Supt   "   E Division
Supt   "   F Division
Supt       Conrmunity Liaison Dept
Supt       Operations
Supt       Research & Development
Supt       Carmunications
Supt       Al
Supt       A2
Supt       A3
Supt       Bl
Supt       B2
Supt       Cl
Supt       C2
Supt       C3
Supt       Dl
Supt       D2
Supt       El
Supt       E2

                                                      1044P
                                     Docum ent No. I 9 2 B c O .'iT V


Supt      FI
Supt      F2
Supt      Road Traffic (Rotherham)
Ch Insp   Operations Room
Insp      Mounted
Insp      Dogs




                                                      10 4 4 Q
                                  DPP DOC




       OPERATIONAL ORDER




        SEMI FINAL 1988



LIVERPOOL -V- NOTTINGHAM FOREST
j R N T „^L_H$E               TEL No .0 7 4 2 7 2 0 0 1 3              5 M a m 89   9:47   N o . 003 P .02/25



                                                                            Docum ent N°. | ^ ^   CONT’D


                      s o II T H     Y O R K S H I RE        P O hj C J


                                           •F* D IVISIO N



                                                                              28th March 1988
          OPERATIONAL ORDER •F* 2 /8 8




                                     FTMU- - UMSCTOCt- v t p m M g g M J g ^
                                   tiA'niRrtfvY 9TH AHUIi 1988




           DlgnUBOTION


            Chi^f Constable

            Assistant Chief Constable (Operations)

            Chief Superintendent operations and Traffic

            Chief Superintendent, *F' Division

            Deputy Divisional Commander, ’F' Division

             Detective Superintendent.       'P ' CID

             Superintendent,    'P I* Sub Division

             Superintendent, 'F2* Sub Division

             Superintendent, ’E2' Sub Division

              •FI" Sub Division, Control Roan

              ‘F2 1 Sub Division, Control Roar

              Sub Sector Chief Inspectors

              Ground Control

              •F’ Administration
                                ^ 4-                    'C'. ’D', 'E* . and CID
              Chief Super m t endent,      A ,    » »




                                                                                                   1046
                                                           [Document No. |   93    CONT’D




                   A P P E N D I C E S


                 Senior Officers duties
A(i)
MU)              inspectors duties

B                Sector     1 (Ground) duties

                 Sector 2 (Liverpool) duties
C
                 sector 3 (N o t t i n g h a m Forest) duties
D
                 Ticket colour c o d i n g
E
p            ,   CID duties

 G                Dog Section

                  Moun t e d Section
 H
                  A d m i n i s t r a t i o n etc
    I
                  Traffic Cont r o l
    J
    K             Trains
                  Coaches - L i v e r p o o l and N o t t i n g h a m Forest
    h
                  vans     - Li v e r p o o l
    M
                   Vans     - N o t t i n g h a m Forest
     N
                   sp o r t i n g Events        (Control of A l c o h o * Act     1985
     0

        p          Cones

        q            Route signing

                    special Constabulary
        R
                    Ground R egulations
        S

         T          Maps

                     Schedule of m a n p o w e r
         U




                                                                                    1047
-~UF'N I v HL_ H S E                       TEL N o .0742720013                              5 May     39       9U7    No.OOo    P . 04/25



                                                                                                     Document No. | ^       3   CONT’ D

                                                  S O U W YORKSHIRE POLICE


                                                           •F* DIVISION


                                                                                               nME= 28 t*SC H 1988
     f>PKRATION OREER *F'                2/gg


                                                    F A CUP - SEMI F 1 W L
                                                 uTTj.QBraOUCH. SHE3TEELP


                                              L i v e r p o o l v NJnrwatfiMjg ^ :
                                                     fiA'TClRDftY 9 APRIL 1988


     jl.             INFORMATION

      1.1            Tty? F. A. Cup Semi Final                                            ’
                     Football Clubs will taKe place * j ^ t w d a y 9th April 1988. kick-off
                     Stadium, Hillsborough. Sheffield on Sa          ground will ope"> at



       1.2
                     maximise segregation, the staaum
                                                                              -tTsssrrssts
                     with Appendix 'T* .

        1 .3
                       in Leppings Lane.

                       N o ttin g h a m F o r e s t s u p p o r t e r s h ^                    v iftte     tu rn s tile s
        1 .4
                       Spion Kop and the South stJn^ a?.        ' of tlY? South Stand.
                       in P e n i s tone Road North and at the rear or                                                          (
                                                         . , arua A»t-aiis are shown at Appendix 'E •
                       v»     tickets have teen colour coded and details ar
         1 .5
                                                                     .        watvgp^n tty? turnstiles at the rear of
         1.6           ttTsSth                                    in Leppings Lane.                                         .

                           further assist in tte                                     « S S £ ? S g S S S I^F^tbaLL
           1.7
                        ground, tickets have been                                 FoothaU Club) in tte W i t h Stand
                        i S S J S T ^ S           e S ) and the South Stand <I*PPi"9S M »                  —    >•

                               routing o£ chicles and £ = £ « -                                                      g £ * °
           1.8
                         r    s     ^ « H m S 3              L . appropriate to their particular trcke .


           1 .9

            1.10                  5 2 * 2       S S 5 V U l i FootMli*1                     dr<Mn'


             2.

               2.1                                              253 £                                                               048
iRNI'.'h L_HSE                              TEL No .0742720013                          5 May      80     0:47   N g .u u 3 P . u 5^

                                                                                                                           (2)
                                                                             D ocum ent No, 1 9 3       CONT’D



                                                                              ,          nr^v^nt unnecessary


                 attained and displayed with a high s u w

 3               METHOD
                 Chief Su^rinten*nt M . « i U t» in —                         11 « « " ™ d *       ° * **" ’
 3.1             2 T * t S n > y C h i e f inspector Ooghton.

                 Tte operation will *                   th«* P » ® « - »       £ollcMS1'
 3.2
                             i .    Before tte natch (1000 - ISOOhrs)
  3.2.1
                 n-^         ■> -   During the match (1500 - 1630Hrs> **
  3 . 2. 2
                             3 . After the natch (IMOHrs until stand down) **
     J.2.3
                  ♦*       Subject to 30 minutes 'extra t u w •


     3.2.4        B * cperat ion will be                                                                      “*>'

                                                                     »       " » " * Bt ^                ”
                  Senior Officers arc-.-
                                                                                       OFFICE

                                                                                       Superintendent Marshall
                   Sector 1
                                        (Sheffield Wednesday                             ^
                                         Football Stadiun)
                                                        _    ,                         Superintendent Greenwood
                   Sector 2             (Liverpool Supporters)
                                                                                       Superintendent Chaprtvan
                   actors               (Nottingham Forest Supporters)                 Super

                                            ■11 be further divided into Sub Sectors with a Chief m s p e c or


      ^                                                             * ”       ^    X      :D . „        Traffic «      -

       3 -2 -6                                                           s r s f f ^ city                     • * the
                       Ml niotorway.

                       PRE MKTCH BRIEFING                                                                 nevec visited
       3.3
                       „      *™t      *»                                                    ana who. therefore, w i n
       3.3.1

                       be unfamiliar         wau   .—    ^                                          • *•         ill take

          3.3.2         ln     effort to                 g S T J                                            £ ? “ “
                        r>!»«» at 10.00am on Friday 8 th Ap                        penistone Road North. Ai
                        g ^ e n t ^ v ^ ^ -                                            and a * o ~ should attend,
                        supervisory officers 01 v»r-

          3 .4             iaamo'iwG —
                                     fob— ---                                .   unless otherwise
                                         c-tram in the attached Appendices w   .     ^a11 stadium at.
                           All Officers shown in t»=         Sheffield Wednesday Foot Dai
          3.4.1

                           Entry to the stadia* w i U be v               •
                           North.                                                                                            1049
rUF'N '' 'h L _ HSE                           TEL N o .0742720013                                       5 May   39    9=47     N o . 003 P . 06/

                                                                                                                                       (3)
                                                                                              Document No. 1 9 3         CONT’D




                                              n   rAoor* to ttv? Administration £>?sk situate
   3.4.2          On arrival, each Inspector will         ,     ‘     rt hiSserials present,
                  insic* tl* entrant to the gymnasiumand wall report
                                       * ™ in theirownvehicles                                      must findtheir own         parking
   3.4.3          Police Officers attending in tbr £
                  facilities outside the football groun^.

                   TV* p o k i n g facilities at Niagara Sports Ground ana C l a y w ^ l s Lane.
   3-4.4
                   Sheffield will not be used.

   3.5             PWTBFTNG ~ Igqai DMf

    3.5.1          After reporting for A n y at the                                                                  duties in
                                                                              of t * i r individual Inspector.

                   insryctors will ensure that officers under their comand disperse to their
      .5.2
                   £ £ 5 "           plaoes of duty with a mini.™ of delay.


    3.5.3
                   s a rw s r c * s s r .is r " —                                                                        " "
     3.5.4          S        I S          £       ‘i     =       S       ”«   K    4    S    * .:” c s - s -     “   ”


     3.6            GROUND SECURITY
                                                        „        . . •. riuh will be responsible for the overnig
     3 -6 ' 1       t S K ^ M l ^ o u r i t y                             a r r a n g e s at the g r ^ d .


      3 ‘6 ' 2                                         y"?                                                               ground.

      3 .7          g g H D f t L IMWB^Gft^CILg g f t g P g g

       ,.7 . 1      l i t e r s of this departwnt                                                   ^ 1^ ° ^ ‘at' ' i e r t o n Road
                     Dost will be situated in the gynnas                                       ,Aints of crime and arrests for
                     Police Station and will deal with a                               J ^ ^ t h i s event which do not require
                     S L n a l offences wade in                                                         ^dire c te d to whichever
                        ^mediate attention. Any such
                        of tl*? above locat ions is most con


       3 ‘ 7 *2         ^ w S ^ T c t f o n l t a ^                                                                      C O n tr0 1
                        Caravan (Hillfoot Bridge/Naepsend Lane).
                                                             ^    - M'Vau will have an overall responsibility for
        3 -7 ‘ 3        g £ ? £ S     3 T o t * £ u « "                  1    a whole and duties of personnel ar
                        shown at Appendix ‘F1.

         3.8             DOG S g T I O M
                                     of the Dog Section vill ^ i n l y ^                                         at tl* <*ach parti.
         3.8.1
                                                            S t a t i o n .            private vehicles parking areas and

                         ir «   iT    s       £   S         - «      -    * - « -       s ,a d iO T -


         3 8 2                  will not normally «                                      “ \ “ *e

                                                                                  °r* r sitoatio" “ y occur‘                            1 0 5 0
jP r-jT1 Hi   HSE                      TEL N o .0742720013                                      Mail 89        9 :4 i   o .0 0 3 P .0 i



                                                                                  Document No.
                                                                                                                             (4 )
                                                                                                                   OONT’D
                                                                                                         193




    3.8.3        Duties of tly* Dog Section personnel are set out at Appendix G .

    3.9          KXffTtD SECTION

    3.9.1

                 transport.
    3.9.2         Duties of (Bunted section personnel are set out at Apf*ndix '« •


    3. 10         OOWBROL BOOM
                                                         at Sheffield Wednesday Football
    3.10.1        A Control Room will be * s ^ l i s h e '     tetvjeen thP  south and West
                  S t a d i a in the Police Control Box situtu -



•
                  Stands -
     3.10.2       Super intendent m r r f        w i l l * ^ o v e r a l l controi with t * assistance
                  of Officers shown at Appendix                    l .
     3 .1 0 .3    Tto Control               will oversee tl» entire operationand willcerate on
                  both UHF and VHF channels.

     3.ii         n a m e ooiragL

     3.11.1       Traffic Poi^ ® wi“ ^ p^ 2 ' <M ^ F l S ^ n t                            ^ S S e ^ C i l l be S m .
                  personnel shown at Appendix J - rAUUi

      3 11 2         It will be necessary to switch                                           H ^ t s w e SaStifiea at
      3              iie flow of traffic can be maintained.                                        £or (nsurj^ that
                     Ano^'vdix 1 j' together with the off -     P°                               ow'tation and 'on at
                     S T ^     t u r n o f f at the » £ « - * « *                         ^    f o U ^ r s for this
                     its conclusion; Keys will be. supp
                     purpose.

       3.12          TRAVEL AND POLICING AHRftNggggg

       3.12.1        The routes
                     transit vans and private wiuw.-

       3.12.2        BOUIE SiqCHG
                      Signing of the routes to the ground has t e e n ^ r o * * ^ ^ i ^ c S t i n -

                      S    ^   j   s    m    s   s   t   s     g     ^       ^    r   -   T      -   -    -    -     * ■* ™      £ ic
                      Motor Cycle Wing.
                                                                             ,.           a f 4vpyi wino a^xopla^® wiJ-i- o®

          3 a 2 -3                                       i ? s & E D- £ f a - iw o h r s to t t K c lo “                    o£ ,h e
                      operation-

          3.12.4       K L T R I S L Z J ^ M                                                         ^    ,special, ^
                       Broadly speaking. Liverpool s^porter| ^ ^ ^         they will walk the
                       and alight at Wadsley            li(^ supervision.   Service trains will
                       half mile to the ground               station and supporters using this
                       also be operating to Midland Ra^     y Yorkshire Transport buses to
                                         S    T i^ S         ? t U       a    —                -m                               1 0 51
!RNT ’/h L_HSE                           TEL No .074272001:'                                        5 May     89      9:47 No. 00*5 P . 08/


                                                                                                                                     ( 5>
                                                                                         Docum&nt No. | 9 3          CONT’D




              s t a l l s of t r a m arrival/departur- tin** and duties relat ing thereto ar*
 3 .1 2 .5
              Shown at Appendix 'K*.

 3.12.6       RV TRAIN          - NgmNgjf l M j g ^
              — "                                                                  ^    v™,        w i l l a l i g h t a t M id la n d
              N o t t i n g h a m F o r e s t s u p p o r t e r s w ho t r a v e         Y     t r a v e i t h e t h r e e m ile
              S i l w S ^ a t ion m                                                                  Transport buses and

              S S nS 4 S t «             ? E X 2 t d r S S * r t h S i * of t * stadia.

  3.12.7          C*3tails of train arrival /departure tiites and duties relating thereto are
                  shown at Appendix 'K'.

  3.12.8          BY PORCH - LiyggOOL                                                                                            _
                                                                    t hv co ach w i l l b e e n c o u ra g e d t o u se th e
                  Liverpool supporters “h0 ‘^ l a^ p“ «                                  T ^ r s l e y (Junction 36).
                  M62/M1 TOtorvays, leaving th* latter «                                            ,
                  Duties relating thereto are shown at A p p e n d
                                                      w ^,u~r -rnvites should be directed
   3.12.9         Coaches found approaching               the stadiun itself,
                  to tte designated parting areas ana noi u
                            .    .    t u , designated parking areas, supporters will alight a
   3 ' 1 2 ' 10                                                          s^-rvision.


    3.12.11 gL O g g . -                                    ^ a ^ d to use
            Notti-ngham Forest s u p p o r t e r s r e l a t i n g thereto
                   «      S J E M            . d i v i s i o n operation Order. ^                         ^           ^

    3.12.12                                                     ’a £ a T ^                                 I*8*11 •
                                V 1 at the designated parking areas, supporters will alight and
     3 ‘ 1 2 - 13 £ l H       o 't L     V    o ^ c S         p o lic e s u p e rv is io n .


     3.12.14          b q r w s c t    vaw - L i v ^ g g ;                                                       lpa will
                                                                                   *-r-/msit van or similar vehicles wij -x

                      ^ S S a ^ S e                     £                                                          t o j u e j t to


                       therefore, of ali serials o u u ^ ^ ^ ^
                                                                               is~z?M                          r ^        - c      i r      ■




                       and their o c ^ n t , as                        ^                  ^    si^    tea parking area « * * *

       3 ' 1 2 ' 15                     w u ^ a l i ^ a n ^                  to the g r o * * under police supervision.


       , . u . » s u a 9 f f i 3 a = J s a a a i s B S

                       tottirvghan,                                            S S U y ? leaving a t
                        w i n be                                                       to channel        *     "nTSl SriaS

                        o u t s i t the ground to check t n » -
                        at Appendix 'N* -                                                                                                       \\JOd
'UF.’N ti.''h L _H$E                  TEL M o .0742720013                                        5 May       89        9:47 No.OOi       P . 09/


                                                                                   D ocum ent No. j          9 3           CONT’D      (6)




  3.12.17         All transit vans will be d i r e ^ p d t o ^ h p designated ^                          ^        9s        rvi£ion,
                  supporters will alight and walk to the grouna uno* ^


  3 .1 2 .1 8

                  * p „ d . 0£ th. ^  1.
                  be strictly enforced xn relation to coacnes a
                  vehicles.

  3.12.19         PRIVATE VEHICLES - LlVglPOCk

                   Liverpool simporters who travel

                                                                                        s «       - « -           ^          cross
                   and Foxhill estates.
    )   12 20      On arrival at tte designated parking areas, supporters will alight and
                   ™       the ground under police supervision.

   3.12.21         It is envisaged that traffic will also                                                                   of this
                                         S T    “ £   C   S        t           c        T           it to the designated
                   parking areas referred to at papragraph 3.12.1*-

    3.12.22        private y g n fTja - nottinghah fcbest



                       parking area in the Neepsend area of the city.

                       on arrival. s u p p o r t s w i U alight and w a * to tte ■ » * * u n * r Police
    3.12.23
                       supervision.

     3.12.24

                       Coachfts and transit vans will                                         ^ ^ u ^ S / f o T
                       until authorised to do so                                     S       tJ l n o o n i n g Journey,
                       these vehicles wil be the reverse ot

        3.12.25        CQftOCS M O TRANSIT VANS -              L

                        NO coach or transit van will »                                                                                  to use
                        “ I                                            ^                 "             d by b o H « officers.
                        following consultation with Ground             Control.

        3.12.26         PARKING RESTRICTIONS

                        Parking of Chicles in « * * —         “ «“
                                      t a f n g f h X . r l y hours of the day in accordance with
                        Appendices P and Q-
                                    « ^rvices have been inferred of all parking restrictions/
         3.12.27         The emergency services na
                         arrangements.

                                                                   3       5        ^        s    t^     2    ^        h    to^ s un 88 b 5 3
         3.12.28
U R NI 0 H L _ H S E                    TEL Mo .0 7 4 2 7 2 0 0 1 3                      5 May     89     9:47      M o . 003   P.10/2[

                                                                                                                         (7)
                                                                                   D ocum ent No. 1 9 3      CONT’D




 3.12.29          No « « < « will * 1 1 « any vehicle
                  restrictions without seeking the authority oi

  3.12.30         B P C V A L OF V E H I C L E
                                                                                      warrant removal, then
                  Wwr* a whicle is                          J ^ ^ ^ o n c e x ^ d through Ground control
                  this will be arranged            by   th^ Ottioei            Insp*ctor. Two Broirec



  3.12.31

                  n»nne.r

   3.12.32        CAR PARKING

                   ■n*re -ill be limited privately <£«tefl                    o f t ^ °*
                   the ground. No assistance wi     -         that private vehicles will,
                   oonrK-rcially run car Par*ts*  .        narking areas shewn at
                   as tar as praticable, use the                       „ * » * » of the
                   Appendix lT'.          mu*                             ^    SSr.'at Appends '*•.             Parto9
                   K      ! ^   s s s s s rs                                                 *> « *     *« ■» » •

    3 12.33        H a r m ycmshike T K A ^ K j OTj *ggg

                       south Yorkshire ^ a n ^ r t will 0 P « £
                       Railway Station to the g r o ^ * jidiaoent to Wadsley Bridge and facing
                       parked in Penis tone Road North ( A d 3 ^    ^ (Directly outside the
                       towards City centr e > ^ d                for transportation of Liverpool
                       ground and facing t        i   w     l     y    ■ D u r ^ Q tl* “ tcb
                       and Nottingham Forest support r                    d b u s Depot and the
                       will toe parked In Penis tone Road andJferries w a a
                       S r m . 1 will te O * only vehicles allowed so to park.
                                             h Yorkshire Transport buses both to and Iran the
                       The routing of South YorKsrure iia r*
    ^3 .1 2 .34
                       st a d u n is shown at Appendix K .

     3.12.35
                       SHEFFIELD WECiCSDAJf FOOIBAU, C M P ^ Oggg?^                     ^    Vf&

                        Only drivers                                                         S ^ s S S T s t ^
                        part of the ground which is situa                           officials, etc. will be allowed
                        Cert c^n coaches cont ® inX"9 , v^                    sp ^ x s before driving to a parking
                                                            s         a           &   - • , * * » « u *»«",
                        Grourd, Middlewood Road).
                                      m t m ™  will any Otter vehicle, other than Police vehicle.,
                        Unter no circumstances w i n o>tj
       3.12.36
                        be allowed access.

                         * . gates giv» 9 a c ^ s t o                                                      S S T t S t ’i - * "
       3.12.37
                         S n ’^ l S s S ' t r ^ e r s o n s having legitimate access.


        3.12-38


        3.12.39
                         * ^    £   2     . 3      S V S ffiS
                                S / S S S S . ‘Z Z * * * * ends.                                                          .... .. , (
3.12.40                                                                                                              of tl* gynnasiuj.


              ^           ^        ^   S     S     S                         S           ^         r    s      : ^      ~    < W         5 ^
                                  M £ t to an absolute

3.12.41       c B S m C T g g ^ g a E J g g ^ g ^                                                                    causing obstr~<ion

                 Street traders. tlC^ t ^ ^ rs^ ? &        they will ^ w i ^ t T o u t l i * d in
                 will be moved on. If the, p e r ^ ^     will ^ dealt with as ouc
                 brought to the Police               'Prisoner Process ).
                 paragraphs 4-1 *-1 1 0

                  PITTMAY mfrcftW                                                                                              citation.        These
                  Tr          ■« will carry Liverpool support«s to Wadsl^y                                           ^ h a v * the

                  5       E -c^hiiitv for policing this prope                                      y                   Etooia “"of
                                                                                                                     jnvitatio- of,
                  ^      “      r « * % £ J S S                                              « c w £ -
                  and acarpanied by. a w     •                                                 sidings, cuttings,
                  all other railway property, v*.
                                        , i r n r - . . pfrrm ui, CUB G»gy                             r e a n jg q g
  3.14            s S E f f i L S E S S S L H S S * ^ T r T t o - n d i x                                                      -s- •
                             - f K o G r o u n d R e g u l a t i o n s is shown at W P *
  3 .1 4 .1       h precis of the Gr                                                                                               potions

                      « * .           an officer seizes pn*erty *                            * » « ■ °£ **"
  3.14.?-


                      T           Z
                                  ^
                                         , «
                                          W
                                                  ~   -
                                                 -«>llar n u * »
                                                                   »™        •

                                               that oerson that the itan " W be/ ® ^ ° ^ y ° p 05 ( at the

                                  ^ 2     Of tl»                                                        W      at the rear of « *

                                  2 5    TSS:                                °£u “            t00151W°
                                                                                              „ +v*> owners name and the
                          c,          *fi* a U d            t. « * £ »               ”                 **
                          °           S tic k s      " c o lla r nvrrter .                                                          ^

                          D,          E*sur* that I t e i t ™ ^ S r ^ ^ t e r .
                                      Property Post a  -   ^

                              »   15 * —            £^             f^    r       c       ^     n            be in breach of those conoi
     3 .1 4 .3



      3.15                    U C E N ^ J g g g ^                                                                       vicinity of        th e   ground

                              tt, great                                                                              £ £ S £ l£ £ ? ~
                              will either                               f ^ S i v e door- whereby football                          vw~
                              e v e n i n g o r o p e r a t . ..


         3.15*2                   m                        — sa - S                                                                     s^ lwr
                                                                                                                            .. .        . ~ :       1 0 5 5
r U F:MIU H L _ H SE                          TEL No .0742720013                                       5 May            89       9:47     N o . 003 P . 12/25


                                                                                       Docum ent No.                \   9 3      CONT O        (9)




                                     *    not available to                   <* *>* * * *
    3.15.3
                   A procis of the- Sporting E v e n t : * / ^ “ “^                    ^       “ u y ' e S r c e d both in
    3.15.4


                       to enter the ground.

                       w    m    m       AW> g n n w n o M w o g » E
    3.16
                       In        even, of an e ^ n c y ■                       «                   -                    -
    3.16.1
                       S l i S T ^ y r , < ^ / vacuatlons o f ^ l             « *«*
                       pro«dure outlined Will be f o U o - d                                                                  , sy5lem and

                                                                                   rtTprovisiona! e ^ n c y
     3.16.2
                       and evacuation procedure is in force.

                                            " H E ATTENDANCE OF MR MEADWS IS M U X . *
                                            r^  S i r ED AT POLICE CONTROL"
                                                      • k * n ^ s s a r y ti*n an oral message will
                           Should an emergency evacuatxon be               and Serial Sergeants,
     3.16.3
                           t T p ^ a to“ “ " S S S S f - t                     o       t       o            M       taken.
                           givin= specific m o t i o n s as

                                      v t ,n -all Clear" situation, the                                                                      ion
      3.16.4               In th^ event of an all c -          necessity for emergency
                           passed to Police personnel that the nec-
                           has oeased.                                               ^ jmww ■
                                                          T/iNfSK REQUIRED AT POLICE CONTRA
                                        “MR MEADOWS IS NO IflNGEK
                                                                     of the stadiuu are shown on the
                            Evacuation procedures for various part
       3.16.5
                            appropriate serial order.


       4                    A E M P i isnwnow

9      4.1                  roisacs        ph c ^   s                                                                                t9ten, in the

                            m     ^sons a           r    x   e   s   t   e    d    o       r   o       f                                       2 °"
        4-1.1
                                                                     will e        i   «       ^        «       !       n    ^   ^    t    supporters,

                             S ffiffiW                                                  2*         of —                          supers,
                             whic^ver         is tost convenient.

           4.1.2

                                     1       «-tv> necessary papervorK wiu.cn ^
                                                                                               STSpolioe
                                                                                                   3 t? S » — ■f f -
                                                                                                         Room. Once tne




                                appropriax.                 £or p « “ 5sin? ,char9in9'                      .u
                                                                                                 orisoner will
                                                        . n e s t e d for a criminal offenoe. tne p   ^ ^    gyinnasiun

                   3            TStiy                                                                                       - a .    - « -     « * * *
                                or at tl* station, where tne
                                course of action.

                                                                                                                                                     1056
-UF'IMIUh I__HSE                    TEL No .0742720013                             Mai-i 89     9:47 No. 003       P . 13/25


                                                                      Document No.    \ 9 3    CONT'D
                                                                                                           ( 10)



              The duties of the -Prisoner Process" teans                            this « * « tion * "
4.1.4
              shown at Appendix "1".

4.1.5         TW> vehicles with detention                                 i u ^ h S ' t e t e n t i o n vehicle
              S f ^ S ^ - S r f t h e             P o l i c e Stations for           identical p u r g e s .


4.1.6         After initial process. Persons                                                         and
              S    S   S   S   S2 E " s £ i ” T i “ X   S   \    o    W   »   l    supporters).
                                                                 .     .aic under- their cormand do not
4.1.7
              STss’S r’SJ^TSrSS& « »
4.1.8         ejections

              Where circumstances are such                                then he"*will not be photo-
              Stadiun for breach*                       b f ^ c o r d e d on an -ejection slip’ for
               K g ’* £         K i 5 T l £ £ Register, prior to ejection.


 4.1.9         n m iKT APPEARANCE
                                                t. — j -- a Ka-iied to Court then the Court
               W h e r e an arrested person 15             ^ strictly     adheredto. On all
               dates allocated to thisoperationwill bes             ffi    Bridgestreet,
               occasions, therefore, the staff at the Charge or         ^             a
               Sheffield will be consulted as to a v a i l a b l y
               J r i S S V S t f a - * on M i l following char*.


     4.1.10       Provisional anangeitents have 5e2 L " ^ i S S S « s tSf rfiSSes necessitate
                  arrested and kept in custody or th®          llth        1988. In the event__
                  a Special Court being oonJeiJ ^ c5 h ie f superintendent Mole will be informed
                  of such criteria being mat t»«n           Z f frto operation,
                  in order that this contingency can be pur m V

                  MISSlNG/roUND CHILDKEM
                       “   '           .       ... ^ r«ftsed via telephone to Ground Control
 •     2          Reports of missing children will         taken
     4.2.1        S K d S that the necessary action can be taken.

                  Any child who has become sePar?‘^         f^       t^ 1|t^ r ta ^ d S n t r o l will then
     4.2.2
                   £   S S J E T S T A S i T S      £ £ r M           « » relaxed action can be tafcen.


      4.3          PrtlND PROPERTY
                         --------    * il he taken to the Administration Desk in the gytmasium
                   All found property will be taken *o tne
      4.3.1
                   and the register completed.


      4.4          UNIFORM                                                                       .
                   * U South Yorkshire W i o . ^            S         T       S        '         "        ’
      4.4.1
                                                                          ^                   and not s ^ t s .




                                                                                                                  1057
                                                                                                                          /
'UF'NTUHl _HSE                     TEL No .0742720013                                                  Mail 89      9 ; 4 7 No . 0 u 3    P . 14/   ' i   5


                                                                                              Docum ent No.    ]   93    CONT’D          (ID




  4.5            TRANSPORT - POLICE HSR9GNNEL
                 Ttere are no parking provisions for officers arriving m                                         private* veh
  4.5.1
                 Officers arriving in polio? transport ^ 1 1 aUght                                                      to the
   4.5.2
                 Penistone Road North. Drivers °* P°           -ntranoe to the gyimasiun for
                 A&ninis tr at ion Desk situate inside ^           .    xi  vehicle. Where such
                 instruct ions as to the util^ation ^ ^ ^ ^ S o i n e l carried
                 vehicles are used for purposesnotirivolving tne pp
                 therein, tten. on        c   c  o f t h e g a ^ a n d dispersal^o^^ ^
                                                  ^   I e   t i o   n


                 thp driver will return to the Admnistxation Des*
                 vehicle keys in readiness for the return 3 oumey.

   4.5.3         Polio* vehicles which are not taken into^ ^ ^ ^ 9 Cia^ h S ^ a^        fW l U
                 be parked at the Road T r ^ f i c ^ i vision in*SSrge of those'premises.
                 following consultation with the otnogr m u m y -

   4,6           REFreaions
                 Pa<*~i luncb-s will be provided and there will be distributed at
   4.6.1
                 i J ^ X K o E p r i o / t o tte allocated w l tin**.

                                  will be taken as Indicated on the individual Serial Order
    4.6.2
                  at the venues stated.

    4.7           WPS
                  Maps of the g r o w d and                                                       induHad >n this Order
    4.7.1
                  for information purposes.                             tSee Appendix

    4.8           OPERATIONAL ORDER - DlSTRmJTICM
                                                   > Hicit-ributAd to Inspector l^vel and above
    4.8.1         2 S . ‘* T S S S Ic S S S r^ d L t r i ^ t e i to all Sergeants involwd xn
                  only,
                  tty? operation.

     4.9           PRESS AND RJBLJCHY
                                                                          ,raffir routes and parking arrangenents for
     4.9.1                        J ^ t X ' S o S                       raison Officer and Press Liaison tepartrent.


                   All continents concerning the                                                     ^ l ^ ' t h r o u g h t h e Press
     4.9.2



     4.10          GCWLAXWS

     4.10.1        All caiplaints                                                         ^       ‘5S ^ h hW u S T S ? ? S s “ 2
                    5   ^ ?   S     f S       il M             n        S   S   r S   U       -    ,? U    o f O - Officers s h ^
                    at. Appendix "I".

                    mUCCKTKlC
        4.11
                    All oocmiunications relevant to the e « n t will be directed throu*.
        4.11.1
                    Ground Control.


                                                                                                                                         1§ 5 8
"U P N IU fiL .H S E                       TEL N o .U 7 4 Z iZ U U 1 *■                        5 Hay    89   9:47      No. 003 P. 15/25

                                                                                                                               ( 12)
                                                                                    Docum&nt No.   \    D CONT’D



                          l o w i n g UHF/VHF                                                *> “ tatl°n *° *“ *
4 .1 1 .2
               operat ion;-
                                                   i on ur'M    us^d by all supervisory
               A)         UHF personalradl°           0 utsid^  ground,
                          officers, bothinsideand outsio? t - 91
                                                    r*Karnv=>l 19 wil1               used by all CID personnel
                B   )                                  a   «   S   a n d                          private

                          parking areas•           .

                C)        VHF radio channel • will be <*■«» W                       roblle   V**6* '
                            * * D i v i s i ^ s operational f—                        ^      c o o t i e to be ™   «       e   d
 4.11.3
                    on UHF personal radio channel 35.




    r
                                  •n w> issued at the Adninistration Desk in the
 4,11.4         personal radios will be iss - ...
 gk             gyimasiun to all supervisory offioers.
                                                         4                                                                                    i
  4.11.5         Strict radio discipline w il1            is not tte case, Ground Control
                    kept as      short as possible           ^     anytransmission irrespective
                    has th?      overriding      option of cutting snore a. y
                    of rank.
                                       i        ilBrt Kp contacted on internalextension 3277.
                    Ground Control can also be oontaci.u
   4.11.6

   4.12                 AUDIO VISUAL AIDS UKTT
                        flUUJV            ---
                                                       -11 *n-and 'Match Day* briefing. Thereafter,
     4.12.1             Four itrattoers of this Unit w i l l _■ - Bri(J  station, and coach and
                        they will be operating in ^                supporters before and after the
                                                                    SS SS-?SS* -                       stadia-


    4.13                CVEXTDtS
                        c vprnMK                                                                                       ,       .u

     L.13.1


    4 . 14               RETORTING
                         w a M u i w OFF
                                     v** W H
                         It will be tl*1 responsibility of individual ^ ^ j j ^ ^ ^ ^ n o t ^ p r e s e n t a n d
     4.14.1              S U e r f ^ S £ £ » • off d u t y ^ u ^ S Y S T E M                       ^briefing
                         Insure that all radios are r«urr«d. He wiii ^ ^              report o££ auty
                         fora previously                                      « m   report off duty at Claywheel* Lan .
                         at t m Gymnasium-         Serials                 °D w
                                        •„ *» souoht via Ground Control before any serial ^
       .
     4 12.2
                         Authorisation will be sought via ^
                          "stood down"•




                                                                                                                                       1059
r U F'MI v H L _ H S E             TEL   No .07 42720013                     5 May    89    9:47   N c .003 P .16/25



                                                  D ocum ent No. | 9 3     CONT’D


                                       cmnc*   OFFICERS Ct/TIES


                                                                         Chief superintendent Mole
     CVEHALL OCMWfl)                                                     Call sign "FYl"

                                                                         Liaise - Chi^f I^P* Ought on
                                                                         Cali sign "F*2"

                                                                         Superintendent tojrray
     ground o o m t h x
                                                                         Liaison - Inspector Calvert

                                                                         S u perin ten d en t Marshall
      SECTOR 1 (GROUND)                                                  Call sign "FOCI*

                                                                         Chief Inspector Brayford
      SECTOR 1A                                                          Call sign "FVl"

     Aerials 1-10
                                                                          Chief Inspector Creaser
      SECTOR IB                                                           Call sign "FV2"

       Serials 11-19
                                                                          Liaison - Inspector ^Sev*?ll
       Reserve Serials 20-22                                              Call sign "India 28“



                                                                          Superintendent Greenwood
       SECTOR     two    {LIVERPOOL)                                      rpil sign “FX2“


        SECTOR 2A
                                                                          Chief Inspector Waring
        Serials 23-35 & 46                                                Call sign "FV3"


        SECTOR 2B
                                                                           Chief Inspector Beal
        Serials 36*45 & 47                                                 Call sign "FV4"

                                                                           Liaison - Inspector Delaney
         Serials 48-53 (Mobiles)                                           Call sign "India 29*



                                                                           Superintendent Chaproa^
         CTTTOR THREE (NOTTINGHAM F O W ^ )                                 r » n sign *FX3“


          SECTOR 3A
                                                                            Chief Inspector Price
          Serials 54-58                                                     Call sign "FV5"


          SECTOR 3B
                                                                            Chief Inspector S\*ir»r
           Serials 59-62                                                    f>n sign "FV6"

                                                                             Liaison - InspectorDonnelly
           Serials 63-66 (Mobiles)                                           Call sign "India 30"            ]0 6 0
-URNI'v'hL-HSE               TEL     No .0742720013                          la'-j 39   9U7    No. 006 P. 17/25



                                      D ocum ent No. ^ ^      CONT’D              ^jpendix ’ACii)1


                                              UCPPCTORS



                         a r m   n * ) - raiEF HEPE C T O B _ m M r E C g                     Call Sign
                                                                                              India 1
                         (Serials    1 -3 1         Inspector Howland       (F>
  Sub Sector
                                                                                              India 2
                 I       (Serials 4-6)               Inspector Taylor (E)
                                                                                              India 3
                         (Serials 7-8)                inspector Vickers (E)
                 3
                                                                                              India 4
                         (Serials 9-10)              Inspector Wilson (E)
                 4




                 fiBCTOR 1(B) - CHIEF IlgTBCTPB CBiASt£
                                                                                               India 5
                 5        (Serials 11-12)             In sp ector Gray (B)
   Sub Sector
                                                                                               India 6
                                                      Inspector Hooley (B)
                 6        (Serial 13)
                                                                                               India 7
                                                      Inspector Walker (OPS)
                     7    (Serials     14-15)
                                                                                               India 8 A
                                                       Inspector Sykes (F)
                     8    (Serials     16-19)                                                  India 8 B
                                                       Inspector Brocmhead (C)
                                                                                                India 9
                                                       Inspector Selwood (E)
                     9    (Serials 20-22)
                           (Reserves)




                                                                                                          1061
                                 Document No.   T9 3     CONT’D         SppendiJ   'A (ii)'




                                    IHSPBCTORS



                 gprrnft 2IA) - C H ™ TTKPBCTJB W R I W 6_ ^ J i g £ S ° b l
                                                                                   Call sign
                                                                                   India 10
                                            Inspector Cook* (C)
Sector 10        (Serials 23-35)
                                                                                   India 11
                                            Inspector Moore (C)
       11        (Serials 26-27)
                                                                                   India 12A
                                            Inspector Turner (C)
       12        (Serials 28-31)                                                   India 12B
                                            Inspector Townend (A)
                                                                                    India 13
                                             Inspector Grace (C)
       13        (Serials 32-33)
                                                                                    India 14
                                             Inspector Ingham (A)
       14         (Serials 34-35)




                  gBTTOR 2(B) - CHIEF IMSPECfOR HEALjLiyggggll
                                                                                     India 15
                                              Inspector Finch (A)
        15        (Serials 36-37)
                                                                                     India 16
                                              Inspector Scholey (C)
        16        (Serials 38-40)
                                                                                     India 17
                                              Inspector Robinson (Ops)
        17        (serials 41-42)
                                                                                     India 18
                                              Inspector Bullimore. (C)
        18        (Serials    43-45)




                   frpRTtlS 1KTIS
                                                                                      India 19
                                                Inspector Bullas (OPS)
            19      (Serial 46)
                                                                                      India 20
                                                Inspector Steel (A)
            20      (Serial 47)
                                                                                       India 21
                                                Inspector P S m t h (E)
            21      (Serial 48-50)
                                                                                       India 22
                                                Inspector Purdy (Q?H )
            22      (Serials 51-53)




                                                                                               1062
URNIUfiL_HSE           TEL No .0742720013                           Man 89       9:47 N o . 003 P . 19/



                                   D ocum ent No. { ^ 3   CONT’D



                                 UCFBCTORS



                          3iA> -    a n tr .n S S S m ^ ^ J S S 3 3 ! B U 9 ^ -

                                                                                      Call sign

                                                                                      India 23
                                              Inspector Msek (HQ)
                    (Serials 54-55)
Sub Sector 23
                                                                                       India 24
                                              Inspector Armitage (E)
           24       (Serials 56-58)




                                  -   cmep
                                                                                       India 25
                    (Serials 59-60)            Inspector ttDowll <»)
           25
                                                                                        India 26
                     (Serials 61-62)           Inspector Hayoox (HO)
            26




                     weme   units

                                                                                        India 27
                                                Inspector Hudson (F)
                     (Serials 63-66)
               27




                     T.1A1SQN PCgBCTQBS


                                                                                         India 28
                                                 Inspector Sewell (F)
                      Sector 1
                                                                                         India 29
                                                 Tncirairi'r|r m   i»~»y f,F *
                      Sector 2
                                                                                          India 30
                                                 Inspertnr n r w l Y y .(Iff)
                      Sector 3


                                                   >C&4
                                                          4 -




                                                                                              1063
                           TEL No .0 7 4 2 7 2 0 0 1 3                      5 May       89       9:47 No. 003 P . 20/
'URNI v RL_HSE

                                                                                             APPPPIX *B"
                           SUB SBCTCR _1
                                                                            Inspector Hcwlwid


erial 1
                            FfiRIHETER TRACK                                            Document No. 1 9 3            CONT’D
                 FI
                            Phases 1 and 2 (Before
>S 758 Morgan
>C 2954 Morledg^
C 1669 Walpole
                            spread around ground).                       ■FfrOuah0Ut this duty and tly>
C 750 Surens
C 2289 Green
   1910 Hulley
                            sjess           tr ^ w                ir ^ r r ^                       * .«-*•*
                                          ing^tr crowd «        U * following t —            -
PC 417 Illingworth
PC 1285 Smith               Before M            off.                                                       w     T
PC 759 Bradshaw
PC 2439 Booking
PC 446 Groom?               full time by the
                                                     7         3       i- £ £S
                                                         larticSlaTatte-nion should
                                                                                                          s?a
PC 700 Helliv*>ll           standing near the touch U _•     . ^    fenoe to gain
PC 442 Cookson               be                                           bolted at all
PC 2348 Hanson               acoess to the ground, tne ge ^              allowed access to
PC 1247 Street               tin^s except When in use.                   ~ f a Senior
p^^31 Greenway                   track from the           “
l^ p i 4 Finnigan            Officer (except to receive medical attent 10
PC 1402 Lan*>
PC 2776 Dransfieic           Phase 3
                                          ^ ■>   * rtffir#»rs of this serial will remain in
                             As ttv» ground clears, officers or x m *
                              location until instructed otherwise.

                              Bi^ryTcy Evacuat ion Procedure

                              In     e «n, Of such • « £ « % ' “ ^                      "    l     ^   o f ^
                              3.16 in the Serial instruction). K                                       , These
MEAL - Staggered
before match                                            5 5    E * a - *■***= m“sa9Pto "vacua'“
in gym                        2        g iv e n on ttv> p u b lic ad d ress sy stem .



                               SOUTH STAND U X E R LEV/EX
     rial 2           f:
                               Phase 1 (Before match)
 PS    1322 Tindle
 PC    1058 Thomas             A, 2 PC's Will to? located *hi™3 turnstiles                                      fnsurr
 PC    403 Howp *              p e r so n s^ e n te r in g                                                       ~
 PC    1210 Walker             p r o h ib ite d by th= ground r u le s (B anners, e t c
 PC    429 McCormack           missiles) or alcohol.
 PC    3034 Richardson
 PC    964 Davis
                                                                                                                na.
 PC    2022 Markham
 PC    2865 Hobson
  PC   432 Jones                  C)     Braining « • . will patrol rear of terraces to neintam
  PC    64 Stubbs
                                  order.

                                  Phase 2 (txirinq match)
                                  All Officers will be located at the rear of these terraces
                                  and maintain order as required.

                                  Phase 3 <After match)

                                  W a s serial will be pr^ared if ^ ^ t ^                                     t^ack to
                                  position in front of                                                    tl* match
                                  £« v e n t a pitch invasion or ensure ti* sax
MEAL                               officials if necessary.                                             ......        1064
>taejgered during match
rUPNI'JAL _HS E           TEL No .07 42720013                            5 Man        89              9:47 N o . 003 P . 21/25



                                                                                      Document No. |                                          93   CONT’D


                            SQlflW STAND W H 3 R tJEVEL

                            Phase 1 (Before match)
 Serial 3            FI
                            A) 2 PC's will     situated at the rear of
 PS    2425 Henrningway     to ensure persons entering                     etc., weapons,
 PC    548 Roberts          itene prohibited by the ground rules (Banners.
  PC   2554 Hag\>*          or missiles ) or alcohol.
 PC    414 Lodg^
  PC   184 Whittaker        Bl    IVo PC's will be situated behind                t   u   m   s   t   i   l   -   !   s   2   9   -   3   2


  PC   2987 Hallett         »           items shown above are not brought xnto the
  PC   1637 1/sslie         ground.
  PC   230 Borkett
  FC   2813 Snith            C)   Remaining PC-, will patrol the stand concourse to
i PC   570 Stoker            naintain order.
I PC    153 Hunter
) PC   408 Shutt             Phase   2   (During match)

                             O f fic e r s w i l l be lo c a te d a t th e e n tr a n c e s t o th e sta n d t o
                             neintain order as required.

                             Ptiftse 3 (After matchj

                             Remain until stand clears of all supporters.
 MEAL:
 Staggered during            Q<ERf3TNCT     evacuation procedures
 match
 ir» gym                      I„ t h . , w n t Of such a s i t u a t i o n a r is in g



                                                                                      S-ga,r.t
                              end of the Stand are open.

                              Furtlwr instructions will be as directed by control or
                              passed over tt* public address system-

                              Offio?rs will b^ nominated for individual points at the
                              start of this duty.




                                                                                                                                                   106 5
' UR NI U h L.HSE          TEL No .0 7 4 2 7 2 0 0 1 3              5 May       89     9:47 N o . 003 P . 22/25

                                                                                     Document No. | 9 3   CONT’D


                            m je m l                              II-pBCtor Toy lor

                            eniwt qraHD CAR
ferial 4
                            Phase l (Before match)
PS    2419 Charles
PC    774 Johnson           A) 2 PC's will t>p 1 ° ° * ^                      t^an* and
PC    860 Cooper            maintain order, ensur* t h ^     ^ u t b o n s - d persons
PC    2657 Jepson           officials and                  staff,
PC    712 Selwood           in conjunction with the club s s m
PC    1074 Thicket t                                    . ♦ nmst il^s 29-36 and prevent weapons
PC    1343 Wright            B) Superviseq ^ ^ s at                   s (Barr* rs, etc.,
PC    2707 Hamilton          M e n s prohibit e d b y t h » 3 r o ^ ^   m t o the ground,
PC    2424 Stockford         or missiles) or alcoholbemg w
 PC    2830 Dakin                            _ .      _rpa t^twfen the gates and the
 PC    493 Ramsdpn           C)       4 PC’Spatrol
                                               in tte ar.a ^ i n t a i n or(* x .
                             players entrance (in pairs> w
                                                      , w      at tb* gates at Fenistone
                             D) 2 PC's will assist clubstaff a          ^ “cXeS. These gat^s
                              Road to prevent              from 2pm to half an hour after
                              will close for vehicleaccess rrom h              Kick-off

                                          2 iPoring match)

                              RCTO!'. on patrol in car park »         ^




 MfcAL                         ph a k p    3 (After mat^i)
 After kick off
 in gym                                                                                       ^ -i.


                                  cniTH C T M C fTl"                 Lgg_gal

                                  t^cp l (Before match)
 ^          -


                                  A) 3 pc’s                                             ^ P 0*8**5 i<K*
   PS 2607 Eddison                e'vsure persons entering           v
L) PC 2409 Larkin
)) pc 2209 Brophy                 "       abOT’          ,*> oueues a. turnstiles 19-22 to prevent
}) PC
i) PC
      1615 Griffiths
       1619 Holt
                                  ;u                                      on.. ^
b) PC 32 Rawthome                               *                            i in the Vicinity of tty? televis
6) PC 222 Tranan                   ^ o f ^ l S ^ - r e                     security
7)    PC 26 Rathbone
B)    PC 3310 Fretwell
9)    pc 1506 Marsh
0)    PC 2080 Nettleship           322^       ieEi2aJS^      1             as    above        prevent entry
                                      Remain on patrol    in        vittxwt tickets.Prif^.t°.f
                                      into this area ^      ^    “ Lp o n s i b i U t y for the -hole of
                                      ^ r ^ ^ s e r i a l           4 are _ U * .

                                      nKase 3 fifter matchj
                                      —                           . fhl areabetween the. offlcia^
                                      ThiB serial will                enclosure at the rear of the
                                      car park and the exit            supporters entering the
       MEAL:                          west stand to prevent Live*P°°            leaving the South
       After half time,               #vfficial car park and supporter   „ .. tone poad (This will
        in gym                        Stand from e x i t i n g a n d            Haunted Dept     1066
- URNJUf i L_HSE     TEL No . 0 7 4 2 7 2 0 0 1 3                      5 Hay 8 9       9:47    No   . U ' J   i'   P   . z Z / 2 l




                                                                                   D ocum ent No.      -j          3     CONT’D


                       ofiFiti STfcMD CAR PARK (l£g>^3g. ****
Serial 6
                       p M s r 1 (Before match)
PS 1678 Royal
PC 2571 Tittertcr.
                       ■m is s e r i a l «                   :                   i l ef
PC 1564 Mao?
PC 1478 Capes                                                                  car
PC 41 Warrrel^y
PC 477 Batty                                               *.    this ar^a by a l l L iverp ool
PC 19 Duce
PC 1687 Hollins         t i S ? With tickets) fr o n entering.
 PC 556 Pattijnore
 PC 1177 Davis          V e h ic le s - i l l be p r i n t e d f n .                ... ~      P -» *»>
 PC 1813 Pashl<?y
                        lappings Lane.

                        Phase 2 (nm-inq match)
                                            •« «.w*c area throughout th* match to
                         4 PC's will remain m th is area w     uy
                         supervise barriers and prevent acess.

                         p h ^ P 3 (After match)
                                                          in tiosit ion and opposing fans do not ccmr
                                                r R ^ i- > u ^         « “   c le a r s o f »u ! « ” r t t r s '
 MEAL
 W?al after half t       pgRtaO KMCM™*
  in gym
                          In ttw W i t of soch>i      o f f i c S f ^ d ^ y ^ t h e car park
                          of the serial rnstructions^        lappings Lane and Fenjstone

                          E S                                                  ~   ^
                          emergency services - n o w .




                                                                                                                   1067
                              T E l N o .07 42720013                      5 May     89       9:47    N o . 00; P . 2 4 / 2b
F U R NI V A I   HSE

                                                                                        D ocum ent No. -j ^ ^       CQNT’D

                                ffllB SECTOR 3
                                                                          IN5P07TCR Victors

                                SPIGN KJf’ TEPR*3jg

                                Phase 1 sl^     2 (Before and duringjnatch)
 Serial 7
                          E
                                K >. will be located a. the
  PS   1203 Marples             terraces in pairs to maintain order ana ens
  PC   815 Moghul               entrances remain clear at all time
  PC   3167 Farrar
. PC   1782 Temple               In tte event of Liverpool Support                                           °
i pc   2748 Abrahams            this end of U * g r o u n d ^         at the rear of Gate 1
i PC   734 Thornton             extre*w? southern part o f t  -       tlwir own area. *
I PC   1103 Edwards             to await ‘™ n s f e r w vnder          ers * transferred
) PC   264 Hirst                Under ND cirorostanoes w ^       ^        ground via the
) PC   69 Pearson               from ttese terraoes to other parts or ^   ^
) PC    1783 Brafrm              perimeter track.
) PC    1183 West
                                 Phase 3 (After matchi
                                 Remain in ground u n t il t t y * * te r r a c e s a x -     c le a r o f a l l
  After kick off                 supporters.
  in gym



                                  hear of spion       *p p   tckwos


                                  Phase l (B efo re match)
   Serial 8
                                  A) 2 * ■ . w i l l *
    PS2001 Burran                 in o f f i c i a l c a r P ^ ^ i ^ p x S S b i t e d by th e ground r o le s
1)  PC620 Yates
2)  PC2226 Walker                 E E S .®        £      5 S Z . —
3)  PC3061 Schofield
      861 Wadsworth                         ■ ■     fibers will be at the rear of turnstiles
4)  PC                            B) Remaining officers wxi-i o^             ensure that items
5)  PC1494 Naylor                 situated on Penistone 1  toad ( *3/ 16) <        ^
6)  PC2238 Poole                  as s l w i above a re not brought in t o tn e gr
      2498 Scho]ey
m      2658 Rupei                  Phase 2 (During match)
9) PC 2499 Capes                                                           * _■»             rp^X of thP SpiOn
0) PC 2167 Frost
                                   S T t S S S . 1 ? ! ^                                #Kfi5S and
                                   security of kiosks, etc.

                                   Phase 3 (After m a t < M
                                   Pftnain in ground u n tU th e s e t e r r a c e s a re c le a r o f a l l
                                    supporters.
       MEAL
       After half tame,                          BtfliCI«nCW JP g Q C T M l^
       in gym
                                    In the event of                                           i S i S " 8 will
                                    3.16 in the serial instruction)                             instructions will
                                    ensure all exit gates are o p e ^                               ^
                                    be as directed by control either               dY
                                    address system.




                                                                                                                   1068
r kM i vHI— n t           ILL    N 0 .0 74 2 7 2 0 01 3     5 May   89   9 ; 47 No .003 P .25/ 25


                                                                 D ocum ent No. ]    3    CONT’D

                          ^ B S B T O '-<                      Inspector W U s c n

                          pagstcwE woftD Tiffagnug;

j&rial 9                  Phas^ 1 (Before match)

                          Thii s-rial will be responsible for turnstiles
?S   176 htorrison        will ensure persons entering these premises do not
PC   543 Boule            items prohibited by the- ground rules (fennprs. etc            po
PC   2725 PluTmcr         or missiles) or alcohol.   They « M               b T d w           in
PC   2979 Ward            and ensure orderly queues are formed.   This wiii oe
PC   2330 Wilsmer         conjunction with tainted Officers who are on duty at
PC   2290 Saxton          location.
PC   1500 Sigmons
PC   874 Williamson                 y (During natch)
PC   1847 Bungay
PC   2572 Cooper          This serial will be located at Entrance 'I' to the Spion
PC   394 Earnshaw          Kop.

                           Phas^ 3 (After match)

                           jm the cMBPnofflFTt of Phase 3 this serial willl^ave the
                           At the                          cvptv       in P^nistone J^oad.
MFAL                       ground and supervise loading of SYFTt buses m
Af t*?r half t ihip
in gyrr.




                           PHOSTONE ROM) TURNSTILES

                           Pfiagp l (Before match)
Serial 10
                           This serial will be responsible for tumstiles 55-64.
     2597 Thist lewcr>d    S S t will ensure persons entering these premises do not
                                  s items as s h*n above. Th^y will also maintain
     *496 West
                           S ^ r and ensure orderly queues are formed. This will
PC   2635 Hill
PC   3229 Price            be done in conjunction with Mounted Officers who ar.
PC   9 Evans                duty in this location.
PC   121 Nsedham
PC   1364 Feamehoujh                  7 (During match)
PC   1653 Davidson
PC   2857 Tu t o r t        -mis serial will be located at Entrance »¥* to the Spion
PC   148 Jarman             Kop-
PC   2785 Lowe
                            Phase 3 (After ma tch)

                            At the               of Phase 3. this
                            ttv? ground and supej^ise loading of SYPTC buses in
 MEAL
                                penistone Road.
 After kick off.
 in gym




                                                                                              1069
                       TEL N o .07 42 720013             5   May   89    10 *•01 Mo. 004   P. 01/25
    ■il v HL _HS E


                                                                   Document No. 1 9 3      CONT’D
                          SUB SECTOR 5
                                                       Inspector        fray
                          N3RTO STAND - UPPER LEVEL
 Serial 11               Phase 1 (Before natch)

 PS 2379 Swift           A) Five PC's and 1 Sergeant will be located in the area
 PC 97& Washingt cr.     at the rear of turnstiles 1-8 (Leppings Lane end) to ensure
 PC 2639 Wheclhc.„s-     that the fario   entering are not in possession of items
PC 4 Kowalski            prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc., weapons,
PC 2819 M c M n u s      missiles or alcohol)
PC 2893 Jarru“so-.
PC 2806 Butler           B) TV'n PC's and 1 Sergeant will patrol (in pairs' on the
PC 2887 Grant            upper level concourse to maintain order.
PC 3232 Thonpscr.
PC 3347 C o m e s        Phase 2 (tXiring match)
PC 3270 Saylor
PC 2834 Hudson           All Officers will be located on the upper concourse to
PC 2542 Hewitt           maintain order.
P ^ ^ 4 5 Priest '
P<flp.95                 Phas^ 3 (After match)
P C o 4 4 Stabler
                        A) At the caft¥n°n<5en»?nt of Phase 3 (l^n minutes before end
PS 595 Pric#>           of gamr) 1 Sergeant and 8 PC’s will take up position at
                        the ippe>r concourse exit gate (Top of ranp) to Fftnisto1'*?
                        Road to prpvent supporters leaving and entering Penistone
                        Road.    All supporters must be directed to Lappings Lane
MEAL                    exit.
After kick off
in gym                  B)   Remaining PC’s patrol until stand is clear.




                                                                                           1070
- URN I v HL_ HSE          TEL N o .07 42 72 00 13              5 May    89   10:01   N o . 004 P . 02/2


                                                                        |~Documant No. j ^      CONT’D


                                   NORTH STAND - LCHEK LEVEL

   Serial 12                       Phase 1 (Before match)

   PS    1381 Goddard              A) 2 PC’s will b*? located at the rear of Gate *0*
I) PC   2608 Hy<*■                 (Penistone Road) to assist the stewards and prevent
>) PC   2709 Norris                unauthorised access.
5) PC   2521 ClaRKL
I) PC   2834 Col/Tan               U)    2PC's will be located at the gate to the car park
>) PC   12 Taylor                  atthe rear of the gymnasium (Penistone Road) to assist
>) PC   136 Sttallnan              the stewards and prevent unauthorised acoess.
') PC   2589 Kenny
1) PC   2774 Wild                  C)    2PC's will b» located at the rear of turnstiles
*) PC   1884 Derby                 73-88 in F^nistone Road to ensure persons entering
>) PC   77 Schofield               are not in possession of articles prohibited by the
 ) PC   2753 Scattergood           ground rules i.e. banners, weapons, missiles or
 ) PC   1807 Brocmp                alcohol.
 ) PC   1989 Birchall
 )J£    2930 Ashford               D) Remaining PC's will patrol low»?r level concourse
        20 Grayson                 of North Stand.

  PS 1972 Fowler                   Phase 2 (Purine match)

                                  A) 2 PC's to refrain at tot*1 *0" for duties outlined
                                  above,

                                  B) 2 PC's to remain at car park for duties outlined
                                  above.

                                  C)   Retraining PC's will patrol concourse in pairs.

                                   Phase 3 (After match)
  NOTB:-
  1 Sergeant will &=*             At the commencement of Phase 3 (Ten minutes before end
  responsible for                 of game) 1 Sergeant and 8 PC's will take up position at



 •
  A, B, and C in                  lower concourse exit gates to Penistone Road to
  Phase 1                         prevent supporters leaving and entering Penistone Road.

                                  ALL supporters must be directed to Leppings Lane exit.

                                  B)   Retraining PC's will patrol until stand is Clear.
 MEAL
 After half timp-
 in gym.
                                  B g T O B C V EVACUATION PROCEDURES

                                  In tlv event of such a situation arising, PC's located
                                  at tha gates at the end of each level giving access
                                  to ramps leading to Penistone Road will ensure these are
                                  open.

                                  Officers will also take up positions at exit gates in
                                  Penistone Road and Leppings Lane to ensure these are
                                  Open.

                                   Further instructions will be as directed by control
                                   or passed over the public address system.

                                  Officers will be nominated for individual points
                                  at the start of this duty.
                                                                                                1 0 71
"URN I - PiL_PISE          TEL No .074 27 2 00 1 3                        5 May   hm   10:01   No .004 P .03 /2 5

                                                                                   [ Document No. j ^      CONT’D
                               SUB SECTOR 6                         Inspector      Hooley

                              tCST g E W P

 Serial 13
 - ---------           g      Phase 1 (ft^for? match)

PS    134 J Crawfoid          A) 2 PC's will be located at the North entrance gates
PC   3198 Akred               to this stand to assist stewards in supervising entry
PC   2083 Packer              and where necessary preventing entry of unauthorised
PC   1002 Wild                persons.
PC   2502 Kilby
PC   2102 Eustace             B) 2 PC's will be located at the South entrance gates
PC   1226 Sinpson             to this stand to assist stewards in supervising entry and where
PC   1772 Tyler               necessary preventing entry of unauthorised persons.
PC   1278 Lang
PC   2398 Ftoss               C) 2 PC's will patrol the concourse/bar area to maintain
PC   2367 Sykes               order.
PC   2062 Boooock



 •
PC   3055 Saunders            D) 6 PC's will be located at the front of the stand
                              to prevent missiles being thrown/stand tickets being
                              dropped to the terraces below or persons cli/tfcing from th*>
                              terraces to thp stand and to neintain order.

                              Phase   2   (IXirinq match)

                              PC's will be located at the entrances to the stand to
                              rraintain order.

MEAL                          Phase 3 (After natch)
Aftnr kick off
when relieved by              Re/rain in stand until clear.
Serial 16
in Gym

                              acRoercy     e w c u c t i c h procedures


                             In the event of such a situation arising indicated at 3.16
                             in the serial order. PC's will take up positions at the
                             emergency exits at the extreme front comers of the stand
                              and ensure the gates are unlocked.   Other officers will
                             take up positions at the entrance steps to the stand and
                             again ensure the gates are open.

                             Further instructions will be as directed by control or
                             passed over the public address system.

                             Officers will be nominated for individual points at the
                             start of this duty.




                                                                                                        1072
                                   TEL N o .07427 200 13                     May   39    10^01   No. 004 P. 04/2 5
 M R N J U h L_HSE

                                                                                        Document No. j ^     CONT’D
                                      SUB SBCTXJR 7                        Inspector      Halter   (Ops)

                                      LEPPIHGS LAME TERRACE AND REAR ENCLOSURE (SOlTTH)

  Serial 14                           Phase 1 (Before natch)
                              fi
  PS 1483 Higgins                    This serial will ensure that supporters entering through
• PC 78 Booth                        turnstiles A-G do not enter in possession of items
1 PC 1453 Philips                    prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc., weapons
  PC 1425 Woof irK>=-'-.             missiles or alcohol).
  PC 120 Harris
  PC 601 Tawnend                     They will also ensure order is maintained on the terraces.
  PC 1885 WaXp
PC 3191 Turner                       Phase 2 (During natch)
 PC 2348 Flet Cher
 PC 2345 Saunders                    This serial will be located in the oentral tunnel to the
 PC 2712 Wood                        Leppings Lane terrao*s to maintain order as required.

 MEAL                                Phase 3 (After match)
 After kick off
                                     Supervise exit of supporters into Lappings Lane.




                                     LEPPINGS LAIC TERRACE AND REAR ENCLOSURE (NORTH)

Serial 15                            Phase 1 (Before match)
                           B
PS 1576 Doultori                     This serial will ensure that supporters are entering through
PC 185 Connell                       turnstiles 9-16 do not enter in possession of items
PC 2939 Davis                        prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc., weapons,
PC 1728 Cooper                       missiles or alcohol).
PC 1893 Sm ith
PC 1540 Lockwood                     Th°y will also ensure order is maintained on the terraces.
PC 771 Turnbull
PC 117 Southern                      Phase 2 (During natch)
PC 2825 Ford
P^1271 Gregory’                      This serial will be located in the tunnel to the North
l^P®97 Trigg                         Pen in the Leppings Lane terraces, to maintain order as
                                     required.
PS 637 Hirst         (Op® )
MEAL                                 Phase 3 (After natch)
After
                                     Supervise exit of supporters into Leppings Lane.
half time
in Gym

                                     B C R G B C Y EVACUATION PROCEDURES

                                     In the event of such a situation arising, indicated at
                                     3.16 in thr? serial instructions, PC’s will take up
                                     positions at the exit gates and ensure they are open.

                                     Further instructions will be as directed by control
                                     or passed over the public address system.

                                     Officers will be nominated for individual points at the
                                     start of this duty.




                                                                                                           1073
                                                                 lvi a   m   oj   i 'j- u i   nti.
 i r n i u h l _h s e      TEL N o .074 27 20 01 3



                              SUB aBCTOR 8
                                                                Inspector Sykes
                                                                Inspector Btxxatead

                              TJgPPTNOS I ^ C T U W d T I i S
                                                                         Document No. | 9 3              CONT’D
Serial 16                     Phase 1 (Before match)

                              •mis serial will be responsible for turnstiles A-G.
PS   2171 Keener
                              They will ensure that persons entering do not possess
PC   451 Cooper
                              it ere prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc*'
PC   654 Kettleborcxjgh
                              weapons missiles or alcohol). They will maintain order
PC   1095 Slater
PC   72 Lipski                and ensure orderly <jueues are formed.
PC   1679 Oxley
PC   3130 Brown               ph*<;p 2 (During match)
PC   1144 Reynolds
PC   3291 Parkps              This serial will be located in the West Stand.
PC   1027 Yeomans
PC   3390 Shea                 Phase 3 (After match)

                               At th? commencement of Phase 3. this serial will leave
                               the ground and take up a position in Leppings Lane
jfi&L
                               opposite tfr? turnstiles to await exit of supporters and
       half time
 in Gym                        prevent disorder.




                               ia y iN G B LMC tu h h stiles

                               Phagp 1 (Before match)
 Serial 17
                                This serial will be responsible for turnstiles 1-8’
        229 Cable
                                They will ensure that persons entering do not possess
) PC   128 Lynsky
) PC   2831 Dransfi^ld                                                                               »   —
) PC   1177 Castleto^
) PC   1440 Charleswsrth
) PC   2981 Barnes              Phase 2 (During match)
) PC   1277 Smith               This serial will be located in the oentral tirnel to
) PC   205 Beardsall
                                the Leppings Lane terraces.
) PC   990 Thonpson
) PC   138 Saunders
                                PhwRg 3 {After match)
) PC   2528 Hughes
                                At tb» oonronoarent of Phase 3, this serial wall leave
                                the ground a n d take up a position
                                opposite the turnstiles to await exit of supporters
                                and prevent disorder.
   MEAL
   After half time




                                                                                                             1074
 JR NI V PL - H S E    TEL No .0742720013                5 Man   89   10:01   No. 004 P. 06 /25


                                                                 Document No.          CQNT’D
                                                                                193


                          USPPINGS L M C TORNSTIL^S

 Serial 18                Phase 1 (Before match)

  PS   1378 Pledy*        This serial will be responsible for turnstiles 9-16.
) PC   84 Hunt            They will ensure that persons entering do not possess
) PC   2260 Smith         items prohibited by thr* ground rules. (Banners, etc.,
) PC   1931 Winter        weapons, missiles or alcohol.    they will maintain
) PC   2643 Durphey       order and ensure orderly queues are formed.
} PC   1143 Rockett
) PC   1839 Powell        Phase 2 (During match)
) PC   1976 Taylor
) PC   2155 Edwards       This serial will be located in the tunnel to the
) PC   2338 Wassell       North Pen.
) PC   3309 Robinson
                          Phase 3 (After match)

                          At the ccnfif“?noeiw*nt of Phase 3 this Serial will leave
                          ttv* ground and take up a position in Lappings Lan*1 opposite
 flu.                     thr* turnstiles to await exit of supporters anc prevent
 After kick off           disorder.
 in gytTi




                          LEPPINGS XJtfC TUPWSTtLES

 Serial 19                Phase 1 (Before match)

 PS 182 Tissingt^n        ■mis serial will be located at Leppings Lane and ensure
 PC 1051 Hobson           that orderly queues form. They will assist other
 PC 2518 SheIt or         Serials at this location as required and in the event


 •
    1723 Bisiioi:         of vehicles, coaches, etc. arriving, supervise their
    1927 Taylor           unloading.
    PC 1477 Hill
 PC 1190 Celton           Phase 2 (During match)
 PC 377 Hibbard
 PC 3017 Snalley          This serial will be located in the West Stand
 PC 3020 Osborne
 PC 2662 Shiel
                          Phase 3 (After match)

                          At th? comienoement of Phase 3 this serial will leave
                          Lb? ground and take up a position in lappings Lane
 MEAL                     opposite the turnstiles to await exit of Supporters
 After half time          and prevent disorder.
 kick off
 in gym.




                                                                                       1075
■ J RNJ VA L. HS E            TEL No .0742 720013               5 Mr u       89   10:01   N o .004   P .07/2

                                                                         J   Document No. j          CONT’D

                                 SUB SECTOR 9                   Inspector         Sewell/Selwood


                                GROUND RESSMBS

Serial 20                l      Phase 1 (Before natch)

 PS 1288 Payne                  This serial will act as a Reserve Serial and remain
 PC 2190 Harris                 within ttv? Gymnasiun adless direct otherwise.
PC 2435 Griffiths
PC 2717 Savoury                 Phase 2 (During rretch)
PC 2592 Shimwell
PC 1991 Baker                   As above
PC 3217 Allen
PC 62 Cooper                    Ptose 3 (After match)
PC 3162 Pears
PC 1618 Sherwood                As above.
^ ^ 3 1 7 0 Fairclough


      L2 noon in gym.



                                GROUND RESERVES

Serial 21                       Phase 1 (Before match)

Inspector Selwooc               This serial will act as a Reserve serial and
PS 842 Hudson                   refrain in the area adjacent to the Police control
PC 2512 Craigie                 box between the South stand and Leppings Lane
PC 2372 Justice                 terr aces.
PC 2577 Trewick
PC 1619 Schofield               Phase 2 (During match)
PC 190 F m h
PC 1990 Cuff                    As above
PC 2019 Laisides
PC 2130 Frost                   Phase 3 (After match)
F ^ 1 1 2 Basford
                                As above
         Cornel

     After half tiup
ym




                                GROUND RESERVES

Serial 22            FI /F2     Phase 1 (Before match)

PS 454 Chapman                  This serial will act as a Reserveserial and remain
PC 525 Bevington                in tte area between the South Standand theSfcion
PC 2683 Nield                   kop unless directed otherwise.
PC 143 Bates
PC 11 Short                     Phase 2 (taring match)
PC 157 West
   J301 Cook                    As above
  — 124 Pratt
   611 Booth                    Phase 3 (After match)
PC 3231 Lagha
PC 474 Gildinq                     ttbove
                                                                                                     1076
MEAL
                                                                               [■'!a   I.j   o     1 1.1 ■U 1 N 0 ■ u IJ4 r .U O /
 >RNI vHL_hSE             TEL N 0 .U f4 il ( Z U U l


                                                                                             m m dix     *c*
                              SUB SECTOR 10                               Inspects                 Oo5e

                              PUBLIC QUEER - W D C L B C P D ROM?
                                                                                                 Document No. j 9 3         CONT’D
Serial 23                    Phase 1 (Before match)

PS    1005 Wood              PC’s will patrol in pairs in Middlewood Road from Wads ley
PC   1429 Bashforth          La*** to Croft on Avenue to maintain order and prevent any
PC   2910 Cannock            clash of supporters.     Direct supporters to sidf street
PC   2929 Ben->?tt           parking and fraintain security of business premises, paying
PC   260 Shiprran            special attention to local public houses and shops.
PC   1266 Addsead
1C   3183 Treck              Phase 2 (During match)
PC   947 Uttley
PC   1779 Willia^is.c*n      Refreshments at Traffic D?pt., Claywheels Lane.
PC   953 Muggiest cr>?
PC   1996 Tarry              Phase 3 (After natch)
PC   14 Qaiyam
PC   2969 Dunn               On canmencenent of Phase 3, this serial will resune patrol
                             in location as above. Paying particular attention to shops
                             and supermarkets and prevent any clash of supporters.



                             PUBLIC OREER - MlDCUaOQD ROM)

Serial 24                    Phase 1 (Before iratch)

                             PC’s will petrol in pairs in Middlewood Road from Croft on
PS   329 Wilson
                             Avenue to Winn Gardens to maintain ordpr and prevent any
PC   219 Purnell
                             clash of sipporters. Direct supporters to side street
PC   282 Davies
                             parking and maintain security of business premises, paying
PC   2369 Burke
                             special attention to local public houses and shops.
PC   1917 Cook
PC   2403 Marten
PC   389 Lawrenoe            Phase 2 (During match)
PC   500 Crossland
                             Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane
PC   3212 Nesbit
                             Phase 3 (After match)

                             On ccnmenoement of Phase 3, ttds serial will resiw? patrol in
                             location as above. Paying particular attention to shops
                             and prevent any clash of simporters.



                             RJBLIC OREfK - KtDDLEWQQD ROAD

Serial 25                    Phase 1 (Before match)

                             PC's will patrol in pairs in Middlevood Road froro Wadsley
PS 1843 Thompson
                             Lane to Minto Road to neintain order and prevent any clash
PC 376 Simtons
                             of supporters.   Direct sipporters to side street parking
PC 2145 Benton
                             and maintain security of business premises, paying special
PC 2740 Bennett
                             attention to local public houses and shops.
PC 160 Sadique
PC 807 Johnson
                              Phase 2 (During match)
PC 3311 Baker
« 2 0 0 5 Hamilton
                              Refreshments at Cloywheels Lane.
^ K 0 5 6 Lister
PC 1537 fellors
                              Phase 3 (After match)
PC 2519 Birkinshaw
                              On corwenoewent of Phase 3, this serial will resune patrol                                      .n 77
                              in location as-«bove, paying particular attention to shops                                       u
                                          ’• . *   ..',"V 'n v*- r ____   .•                             _____ _________________
 ■R N I \} H L _ H S E           TEL No .0 7 4 2 7 2 00 1 3                      Ma y J^L-IO -.-.1--11 N n . 0 u 4   P. 0 9 / 2 5

                                                                                       | Document No. j                CONT’D

                                       SUB SECTOR 11                             Inspector       Itoare


                                       PUBLIC ORDER - H M t t a C O D HOAD

Serial 26                    i         Phase 1 (Before match)

PS    1956 Biggins                     PC's will patrol in pairs in Middlewood Road from Minto
PC   3138 Geary                        Road to Hillsborough Precinct to maintain order and
PC   2515 Smith                        prevent any clash of supporters, paying special attention
PC   2317 Blackburn                    to shops and in particular licensed premises.
PC   162 Gillett
PC   270 James                         Phase 2 (During match)'
PC   2946 Cfaley
PC   660 Dexter                        Refreshments at        tfcrmertcn noec'
PC   2652 Sapsforc
PC   3305 Gibson                       Phase 3 (After natch)
PC   520 Hogg
                                       Oi ccmnencement of Phase 3, this serial will resume
                                       patrol in location as above, paying special attention
                                       to shops and licensed premises and prevent any clash
                                       of supporters.




                                       RJBLIC ORDER - HILLSBOROUGH PRECINCT

Serial 27                c             Phase 1 (Before match)

PS 2557 Earnstew                       PC’s will patrol in pairs in Middlewood Road from
PC 58 Hoyland                          Hillsborough Precinct to Bradfield Road and from
PC 440 Eaves                           Bradfield Road to the Old Blue Ball Public House.
PC 3304 Rickley                        Patrols will also be required in the Hillsborough
PC 1371 Barnes                         Precinct, paying special attention to the supermarkets
PC 2426 Bradw=*ll                      where looting could take place.
PQflfcL96 Smith
PoBr757 Thcntis                        Phase 2 (Itaring natch)
PC 2232 Sweeting
PC 3202 Bowler                         refreshments at Hanwrton Road.
PC 2775 Bowring
                                       Phase 3 (After match)                                         r    r~"
PC 2775 Wyer
PC 211 Brickley
PC 3147 Sherwood                       On commencement of Phase 3, this serial will resimp
PC 1344 Hanson                         patrol in location as above, paying particular attention
PC 1507 Walker                         to shops and to prevent any clash of sipporters.
PC 88 Dalton

PS 1059 Bowers




                                                                                                                      1078
- 1JR N I H L _ H S E    TEL N o . 074272001'                5 Mail 89    10:01   N o . 004 P. 10/25


                                                                    j Document No. ]   93   CONT’D


                             SUB SBCTOR 12                    Inspector   Turner
                                                              Inspector   Itowrend

                            PUBLIC ORCER - PARKSICE RCAD/CAJCHBAR LAME

Serial 26                   Phase 1 (Before match)

PS    1512 Gibson           PC ’5 will patrol in pairs in Parkside Road and
PC   2897 Devi H e          Catchbar l^ne to maintain order and prevent any clash
PC   2738 htorari           of rival supporters, paying special attention to
PC   1020 Maxwell           shops and licensed premises. It is essential that
PC   2331 Robinson          vigilance is maintained on this road as it is the
PC   2891 Woodward          nain route between either end of the ground.
PC   1198 Washington.
PC   3056 Sloar»=*          Phase 2 (IXirinq match)
PC   1511 Barron
PC   90 Southall            Refreshments at Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept.
PC   2694 Pellegri'np
                            Phase 3 (After natch)

                            On comnienovflFfnt of Phas<» 3 this serial will r°sunp
                            patrol in location as abovn, paying special attention
                            to prevent any clash of rival supporters.




                            PUBLIC ORDER - P H C S T O C 1QU3/LEPPINGS UtfB

serial 29                   Phase 1 (Before match)

    2620   Cropley         Tftis serial will be responsible for manning the barriers
    2711   Pattesor.       to be placed at the mouths of the following roads to
    1837   Brookshav       prevent access by supporters. It is essential that
    3337   Walker          access be prevented to all but residents. At similar
    1091   Foster          events in the past considerable damage has been caused
       3   Oliver          by groups of supporters, both before, during and after
       0   Snowden         th^ game.
:   H62    Martin
:   1698   ftertin         J)   Penis tone Road North/Vere Road
:   2508   Mitchell        2)   Fenistone Road North/Fielding Road
:   1965   Wood            3)   Lappings Lane/Vere Road
                           4)   Leppmgs Lane/Fielding Road

                           Phase 2 (During match)

                           Remain at locations given above to prevent supporters
                           who are unable to enter the ground gaining access to
SALS During match          these roads.
:aggered at Claywheels
m e to ensure oc*.*3r      Phase 3 (After match)
>r points in Phase 2
                           Rertain until all crowd h a w cleared and consent to remove the
                           barriers is given by Sector Inspector. It is essential
                           that no vehicles be allowed into Leppings Lane until all
                           supporters have cleared the area.




                                                                                            1079
                            TEL No .0742720013                      May   89   10 =01 N o . 004 P. 11/25
     iRNI'Jh   L-HSE

                                                                          D ocum ent No.         CONT’D
                                                                                           193


                               T O L I C QREBR - PEW1STOHE ROAD/lfiPPIMOS U W E

SeriAl 30                      P h ^ e 1 ( B e fo re n a tc h )

PS   2640 Perry               This serial will b* responsible for manning the barriers
PC   184 '
         Geeson               to t*? plaoed at thr> nouths of the following roads to
PC   552 :
         Harts ho r^i         prevent any supporters gaining access. It xs essential
PC   249 Yates                that access be prevented to all but residents.     At
PC   1166 Kiboume             similar events in the past considerable damage has be^n
PC   1211 Redpath             caused by groups of supporters both before, during and
PC   3257 Crookes             after the game
FC   2497 Serhatlic
PC   1734 Foster              1)    Pen istone Road North/Bickerton Road
PC   1845 Zommerfi^ld         2)    Leppings Lane/Bickerton Road
PC   2644 Roberts             3)    lappings Lane/Leake Road
                              4)    Leppiogs Lane/Famdale Road

                              Phase    2   (Poring match)

                              Rerrain at locations giv^n to prevent stppot'ters who are
                              unable to enter th^ ground gaining acopss to theso roads.

                              Phas^ 3 (After match)
1LALS During match
Staggered at Clayvheels       Remain until all crowds have cleared and consent to renove
.anc to ensure ccr.^r         barriers is given by th e Sector Inspector. It is essential
‘or points in Phase 2.        that no vehicles be allov*?d into lappings Lane until all
                              supporters have cleared the area.




                              PUBLIC CROSJ* - LETPDCB U W E

Serial 31                      PhasA 1 (Before match)

      4 Adams                 This serial will be responsible for manning the barriers
cM   89 Fiatnan               to be placed at the mouths of the following roads to
c 2371 Bairs tow              prevent access by supporters
c 2225 Pervis
>c 1484 Collins                1)   Lpppings Lane/Shenst one Road
   1432 Wright                 2)   Lappings Lane/Eskdale Road.
>c 2054 Wilkes
c 2889 Fenton                  (2 PC's on each road)
V 2942 Williamscr.
c 1023 Holmes                  The refraining PC's will patrol lappings Lane in pairs to
c 1724 Brown                   maintain orcter and prevent persons arriving at the
                               ground in coaches unloading except at the turnstiles.

                               Phase 2 (During match)

                               Remain at locations given above to prevent supporters who
                               are unable to enter the ground gaining access to the roads and
                               to maintain order.

                               Phase 3 (After match)

                               Remain until all crowds have cleared and consent to remove
EALS During match              barriers is given by Sector Inspector. It is essential
taggered at Claywheels         that no vehicles be allowed into Leppings Lane until all
ane to ensure o c w r for      supporters h a w cleared the area.                         1U o U
 IRNTUfiL_H$E             TEL N o .07427 200 13               5   Mflu 89   10:01   N o .004   P. 1 2 / 2 ?

                                                                      Docum ent No. |   9 3    cO N T’d ]

                              S(JB SECTOR 13                      Inspector   Grace


                              RJBLIC ORDER - LEPPINGS LANE ROUNDABOUT

grial 32                      Phasr> 1 (Before match)

PS   888 Leader              This serial will be located at the roundabout at the
PC   2334 Williams           junction of Lappings Lane/Fenistooe Road North/Herries
FC   1775 Hunphr^ys          Road. They will ensure that Liverpool supporters who
PC   2147 G i l l i e s      travel down Halifax Road/Penis tone Road North from the
PC   1925 Suter              motorway do not gain access to Merries Road or that part
PC   1508 Hurst              of Penis tone Road leading to the Spion Kop. They will also
PC   2686 Mitchell           ensure that Nottingham Forest supporters whose vehicles
PC   2473 Stock©?            will be parked in Merries Road and ppniston^ Road do not
PC 2263 Chang                gain acoess to Leppings Lane or Fenistone Road North.
PC 213 Yarrow
PC 1217 Hall                 Phase 2 (During match)
PS 1480 Chapman
                             Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

                             Phase 3 (After natch)

                             Location as in Phase 1 to ensure that supporters
                             leaving tlr* ground do not comp into contact.




                             RJBLIC GRDBt - LEPPDCS LANE K X N A B C U T

rial 33                   1 Phase 1 (Before match)
>S 2957 lianas
C 2119 Bertram               This serial will teve similar responsibilities as
                             outlined in the serial above in relation to segregation
C 2833 Holland
^■£311 Brown                 of supporters before the match but will also have
v!^R>30 Lumlfy               responsibility for ensuring that the traffic island
C 967 Taylor                 remains clear of traffic to allow convoys of Liverpool
c 1431 Jackson               supporters ooaches to round it to gain access to
C 2114 Pashlpy               their designated unloading/parking places.   IMless
                             directed otherwise they will prevent such coaches gaining
C 1710 Fleetwood
C 1671 Lodge                 access into Leppings Lane.
C 1645 Bagnal)
                             Phase 2 (During match)

                             Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

                             Phase 3 (After match)

                             At the end of the match they will prevent all traffic
                             travelling into lappings Lane and that part of Fenistone
                             Road leading from the ground until directed to allow
                             traffic to flow again by control.




                                                                                                1 0 8 1
-U R N I U h L-HSE         TEL No .07427 20013               5 May              l Nn .0   0   4 P .13/25

                                                                     |   Documarst No.    ] 9 3    CONT’D

                               SUB SECTOR 34                   Inspector     ln$fian>

                               WJBLIC GREER PKIKL - P B Q g K H E HOAD HWM

ierial 34                      Phas? 1 (Before rot eft)
                       A                       ~
7S 2858 Cocker                 ITiis serial will be responsible for part of Penistone
   900 Efcwson                 Road North from the t-raffic island at the junction with
°C 2097 B a m e s              Loppings Lane to the Travellers Rest Public Hous*».
■C 3250 Sfuclds                This road will b? extensively used by Liverpool supporters
   14 J 7 McDonnell            en route from Wads ley Bridge Station and coach parking
   2043 Landers                areas in Claywheels Lane and Penistone Road North/
     919 Evans                 Halifax Road. They will maintain order and ensure
*C 1414 Gordon                 that supporters do not possess items prohibited by the
K! 1296 Geddes                 ground rules (Banners, etc., missiles, weapons or
C 2359 Woodcock                alcohol).
?C 157* Hood
                               A) 2 Officers will be located at the top of Niagara
                               Road to prevent access into this road by football
                               supporters or any other unauthorised person who tries
                               to gain access to the Niagara Police Sports Ground.

                               B) Rejreining offioers will be located in pairs
                               on static points at the kerb edg^ or, if necessary, on
                               the central reservation (dependant on the vclxirr of
                               traffic) to ensure public oide-r.

                               Phase 2 (During natch)

                               Refreshments at Claywheeis Lane, Traffic Dept.

                               Phase 3 (After match)

                               Offioers will be situated in locations as given for
                               Phase 1.




                               PUBLIC OREER PATROL - PPttSTONE HOAD NORIH

ferial 35                     Phase 1 (Before match)
                       A      *                        .
                              This serial will be responsible for the part of
’S   1201 Meppen-Wal
                              Penistone Road North from the Travellers Rest Public
c    830 Sharp
                              House to Wardsend Road North.   This road will be
C    1766 White
                              extensively used by Liverpool supporters en route from
C    2672 Curtis
                              Wadsley Bridge Station and coach parking areas in
C    2216 Hillier
                              Halifax Road. ttv?y will maintain order and ensure that
C    1326 Lugton
                              supporters do not possess items prohibited by the ground
C    3096 Fovey
                              roles (Banners, etc., weapons, missiles or alcohol). Offioers
C    2349 Paton
                              will be located in pairs on static points at the kerb
C    2952 Pearson
                              edge or on the central reservation (dependant on volune
C    1846 Ackroyd
                              of traffic) to ensure public order.
C    2676 Beech
                               Phase 2 (During match)

                               Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

                               Phase 3 (After match)
                                                        1
                               Offioers will be situated in the locations as given
                               f o r Phase 1 .                                                    1082
 'URN IU h L_HSE           TEL N o .074272001:                 Mar   - 0£l   iri:n 1   Kln nr|4 p 14/?^
                                                                     Document No.             CONT’D |
                                                                                       193
                               SUB SBCTCK 15                 inspector         Finch


                               OCSCH KK3TTCQN - QUttWHEELS LANE

Serial 36              A       Phajs° 1 (Before natch)

PS   2408 Wilson               This serial will supervise the unloading of
PC   2788 Price                Liverpool coaches in Claywheels Usne. PC's will ensure
PC   2127 Smart                that supporters leaving the coaches do not possess
PC   918 Webster               items prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc.,
PC   2313 Lonsdale             wapons, missiles) or alcohol. Once Claywheels is full, this
PC   3318 Popplewell           serial will be relocated and assist serials 41 & 42 in Halifax
PC   2923 Dalryirple           Phase 2 (During match)                                    Road
PC   3131 ]>wis
PC   2584 Misk                 Refreshments at Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept.
PC   1934 Smith
PC   2354 Otter                Phase 3 (After natch)
5 2663 Ltiuley
                               Supervise loading of supporters onto
                               coaches.




                              OQftQt RECEPTION - OAMMEEI.S LANE

Serial 37                     Phasp 1 (Before natch)

*5 2835 EdJington             Hvis serial will supervise the unloading of
*C 3314 Ashton                Liverpool coaches in Claywheels Lane. PC's will
C 1420 Woodward               ensure that supporters leaving the coaches do
*C 126 Langley                not possess items prohibited by the ground rules
C 2241 Franklyn               (Banners, etc., weapons, missiles) or aloohol. Once Claywheel;
C 590 Griggs                  is full, this serial will be re-located and assist serials 41
C 80 tervin                   Phase 2 (IXring natch)             & 42 in Halifax Road.
C 1442 Charter
C J B 7 3 Robson              Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels I^ne,
C ^ B 4 Moore
C 2649 Bashforth              Phase 3 (After nratch)

DS 2827 Morgan                Supervise loading of supporters onto ooaches.



                              NOTE:-

                              Claywheels Lane will be subject of "No parking"
                              cones for it's full length to allow Liverpool's
                              coaches to park - THESE MJST EE ENFORCED -
                              Barriers will also be available to prevent access
                              from Penistone Road.

                              Access must be allowed for persons workings at
                              the various premises including the brewery and
                              bakery in Claywheels Lane which will be open on
                              this day.




                                                                                                1083
rURNI''Hi   HSE               TEL N o .0742720013                  Hay frjfr""i'0"!01   Mo .001 P          i„
                                                                          Document No.              CONT
                                                                                           193
                                  SUB SECTOR 16                    Inspector     Scholey


                                  PUBLIC ORDER - TRAIN RBCEmXW/WftDSUEY STATION

ferial 38                         Phase 3 (Before natch)
                          B

 PS    1248 Gilhooloy            This serial will work in conjunction with Mounted
 PC   2185 Cooper                Officers to supervise Liverpool supporters leaving the
 PC   303 Priest                 trains at Wadslpy Station. They will marshall the
 PC   2713 Pretwell              supporters arid only allow them to leave when all
 PC   3137 Flynn                 have left the station premises.    Where neoessary
 PC   1287 Snith                 searches will be carried out to ensure that it ere
 PC   1297 Hall                  prohibited by the groind rules (banners, etc.,
 PC   1037 Cahill                v*?apons, missiles or alcohol) are not in their possession.
 PC   1601 Ellis
 PC   2149 Wilson                This serial will HDfT escort supporters to the ground
 PC   254 Pripp                  but remain static at this location.

                                 Phase 2 (During match)

                                 Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywhe^ls Lane.

                                 Phas*» 3 (After natch)

                                 Resurr location at Wadsl^y Station to ensure order
                                 is naintained and queues form in a proper jr&nner.




                                 RJBLJC ORDER - ’TRAIN RECBmON/WADSUSY STATICH

Serial 39                        Phas* 1 (Before natch)
                    B
PS 2324 Hagiy*                   This serial will work in conjunction with Mounted Officers
PGotf 7 Kenyon                   to supervise Liverpool supporters leaving the trains at
Pfl^F>81 htarshall               Wadsley Station. They will marshall the sqpporters and
PC 155 Old                       only allow them to leave when all have left the station
PC 244B Speed                    premises.   Where necessary searches will be carried
PC 3224 Lynes                    out to ensure that supporters are not in possession
PC 107 Carling                   of items prohibited by the ground rulei (banners, etc.,
PC 1727 Parkes                   weapons, missiles or alcohol).
PC 3023 Martin
PC 2732 Higginbor t otn          This serial will NOT escort supporters to the ground
PC ?S70 Beaumont                 but remain static at this location.

                                 Phase 2 (During match)

                                 Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

                                 Phase 3 (After match)

                                 Itestt!** location at Wadsley Station to ensure order
                                 is maintained and queues form in a proper manner.
'URNIWflL.HSE          TEL   No .07 42720013                  May   89   10:01   N o . 004 P. 16/25

                                                                    Document No. 1 9 3     CONT’D




                             MDO HUS RECEPTION - MARDSENP ROM) NUPTH

ierial 40                    Phase 1 (Before match)
                   B
>S 2092 Varga                This serial will supervise the unloading of Liverpool
XT 2743 Charlton             mini buses in Wards°n<j Road North. PC's will
C 2614 Ogley                 ensure that supporters leaving the coaches do not
C 494 Krowles                possess items prohibited by the groind rules
C 228 Gledhill               (Ba-Tiers, etc., weapons missiles) or alcohol.
C 2015 Barden
C 2222 Roebuck               Phase 2 (During natch)
C 2997 Riddiough
C 1360 Dawson                Refreshments at Traffic D?pt. Claywheels Lane.
C 2953 Hudson
C 400 Ryan                   Phase 3 (After match)

                             Si^jervis* loading of Supporters onto mini buses.




                             This road will be subject to "No Parking" cooes and
                             only mini buses, etc. will be allowed to park.
                             Barriers will also    available for erection
                             at the entrance to this road to control entry.




                                                                                          1085
 'URNIVfil   HSE     TEL No .07 42 720013                 5 May   89   10:01   N o . 004 P. 17/25

                                                                  Document No.           CONT’D
                                                                                 93
                         SUB SBCTCfc 17                    Inspector     Robinson

                         CQf£H RECEPTION - HALIFAX HQAD
Serial 41                Phase 1 (Before match)
  PS 2881 Pearson
                         This serial will siyervise the unloading of Livrarpool
 PC 1254 Bradley         coaches in Halifax Road/Penis tone Road North. PC's
 PC 2993 Nugent          will ensure that simporters leaving tb? coactes do
 PC 1067 Rogers
                         not possess items prohibited by the ground rules
 PC 2903 Wheatley        (Banners, etc., weapons, missiles) or alcohol.
 PC 2840 Pearson
 PC 304 Macreadl^        Phase 2 (iXiring match)
 PC 2735 Wade
 PC 258 Smith
                        Refreshments at Traffic Dept-, Claywteels Lane.
 PC 1239 Raybold
 PC 2201 Olriey         Phase 3 (After natch)

                        Supervise loading of sqpporters onto coaches.




                        OQACH RECEPTION - HALIFAX HGftP
ferial 42               All duties will be identical to and work in
                        conjunction with the serial above.
PS 1561 Reynolds
PC 1738 Green
PC 2100 Jepson
PC 1849 Wheldon         ft?fresfrnents at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.
PC 2214 Brownley
PC 845 Cowling
PC 2779 Burrows
PC 2354 Plumridge
PC^ £ 4 2 Braddock
PCfllDl Duffield
PC ^o36 Mclnness




                                                                                       1086
 JRNIUrtl   HSE        TEL N o . 0 7 4 2 7 2 0 0 1 i            May   89    10:01   M o . 004   P. 1 8 /25

                                                                      Document No.              CONT’D

                           SUB SECTOR 18                    Inspector      Bulliaan


                           PUBLIC QROER - HALIFAX HOAD

 ial 43                    Phase I (Before natch)
                   }

 1230 Ward                 Hiis serial will patrol Halifax Road from Wadsley
                           Station to Southey Green Road. Officers will work
 1891 Staniforth
 1320 Wilson               in pairs to naintain order, etc.
 1130 Binns
 2932 Denton               Phase 2 (During match)
 2689 Laoey
 3181 Mineher              Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane
 76 Durham
 422 Slater                Phase 3 (After match)
 1548 Durrand
C 1946 L^ggate             Patrol location outlined above.




                          PUBLIC CHEER - HALIFAX HOAD

ial 44                    Phas^ 1 (Before match)

 2291 Dickinso^           This serial will patrol Halifax Road from Southey
 3028 Davis               Green Road to Browning Road. Offioers will work
 2848 Robinso'".          in pairs to maintain order, etc.
 2783 Vallance
 2828 Lighten             Phas* 2 (During natch)
 106 Goss
 1208 Thonpson            Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.
 1559 Bollons
 38 Pearce                Phase 3 (Aft^r match)
 2531 Sneddon
 2169 Lowery              Patrol location outlined above.




                          PUBLIC CRBP* - HALIFAX IQAD

ial 45                    Phase 1 (Before match)

S 2936 Lindop             This serial will patrol Halifax Road from Browning Road
 675 I>y                  to Deer lands Avenue. Offioers will work in pairs to
 2343 Gardener            naintain order, etc.
 2623 MoCornack
 2298 Cooper              Pliase 2 (During match)
 1944 Ogden
 1982 Bint                Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.
 464 Clayton
 1292 Myers               Phase 3 (After natch)
 1232 Hood
 2009 Porshaw             Patrol location outlined above.



                          NOTEi-        These offioers will ensure that Liverpool
                                        sqpporters travelling in private cars are
                                        directed to park in side roads on adjoining              1A O 7
                                        estates                                                  I Uo/
F l.iR N T11R t H S E        TEL N o .074272001;                  Man   2 _Q._ 1   n •fi1 ..hir, fifi/1 p... 1Q/9S

                                                                        D ocum eot No.                  CONT’D
                                                                                                 93
                                 SUB S E O C R 19              Inspector


                                 F*«KfTC QUEER - C O C H RBasmON/asftWCH SgIM>

Serial 46                        Phase 1 (Before match)
                        HO
PS   195 Howell                  This serial will work in conjunction with Road Traffic
PS   2737 Hallett                Offiopj?s on the A616 at Oughtibridge on the one-way
PC   391 Roberts                 system to cfr?ck at random coaches and mini buses
PC   1226 Smith                  carrying Liverpool supporters.
PC   1940 Pattison
PC   718 Pont                    Vehicles stepped will be checked to ensure passengers
PC   93 Turner                   are in possession of tickets, are not under the
                                 inf lienee of alcohol or in possession of alcohol and
PC   904 G amer
PC   909 Reddish                 are considered fit to attend this event.
PC   37 Marsden
PC   1012 Wilkinson              Where this is not the case, or where they are in
                                 possession of alcohol or ts^ider it’s influenoe,
PC   808 Rosevear
                                 consideration should be taken regarding action under
                                 tte appropriate legislation or returning them to the
                                 motorway.

                                 Al l coaches/mini bus^s checked will have a
                                 lat*?l (issued to sector conroanders) affixed to
                                 tiv? windscreen prior to them being allowed to
                                 leave.

                                 Phase 2 (During match)

                                 Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheeis Lane.

                                 Phase 3 (After match)

                                 Reserve duties, as directed by control.




                                                                                                     1088
  iRMTljKL _H SE        TEL N o .074272001:                    Mai. ,30   10..mQ4'i
                                                                    Document No.                CONT’D
                                                                                      93

                           SUB SECTOR 20                    Inspector     Steele


                           PTEQ.Tr nwcER - o c w y RBCEPT10W/SEARQ< 9 C W D - 1            JX

Serial 47                  Phas*1 1 (Befor* natch)

PS   2723 Mullins          -mis serial will work in conjunction with Road Traffic
PC   820 TYarpkins         Officers on the A6J on the Sheffield side of the
PC   1606 O l d i ’ig      Tankers ley motorway junction (Exit 36) to check at
PC   1681 Stevenso-.       randtom coaches and mini buses carrying Liverpool
PC   1963 Oxl*»y           supporters.
PC   1393 Marks
PC   1664 Kerr             vehicles stopped will be checked to ensure passengers
PC   1612 Picket           are in possession of tickets, are not under the
PC   2872 Harratt          of alcohol or in possession of alcohol and are considered
PC   1450 Cunninghar       fit to attend this event.
PC   2091 Mighton
                           Where this is not the case, or where they are in
                           possession of alcohol or under its influence consideration
                           stould be taken regarding action under the appropriate
                           legislation or returning them to the motorway.

                           All coaches/mini buses checked will have a label
                           (issued to sector commanders) affixed to th^ windscreen
                           prior to them being allow?d to leave.

                           Phase 2 (During match)

                           Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

                            p»v>sf» 3 (After matrch)

                            Reserve duties as directed by control.




                                                                                            1089
    - U R N t " h L_H SE       TEL N o .07 42 720013                 5 Hay   89    10=01   N o . 004 P . 21/25


                                                                             | Document No. ^      ^   CONT’D

                                 SUB SBCTOB 21                      Inspector      P S m t h (E)

                                  H3BI1E PATROL - CALL SIQ* TANOD PTC*

    rial 48                       Phas<> 1 (Before natch)
                           F
■S    542 Lee                    TTiis serial will patrol the Stocksbridy area,
C     850 Tharps o'.             paying particular attention to licensed prerases
C     1251 Davidson              and to fnaintain order.
C     2129 Brook*4
C     1363 Snyk                  Phase 2 (During match)
C     1301 Cherry
C     3180 Hayes                 Refreshments at D^pcar Polio- Station, at 3prn-3.45pm
                                 Resvme patrol 3.45prn.
                                 Phase 3 (After match)

                                 Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.




                                 M3BILK PATROL - CALL SI CM 'TANOD TWO*

rial 49                          Phas*- 1 (Before match)

S    681 Hill              F     “IYiis serial will patrol the t>*epcar/Ought ibridg°
C    844 Re^s                    area, paying particular attention to licensed
C    2628 Churms                 prenuses and to rent a n order.
C    3082 Fletcher
C    288B Ellis                  Phase 2 (During match)
C    583 Davis
C    384 Roach                   Refreshments at D?epcar Polio* Station.          M^al at 3.45pnv-4.30pm
                                 Patrol prior to 3.45pm.
                                 Pfiaso 3 (After match)

                                 Patrol in ar^a as outlined in Phase 1.




                                 MCBILE F A T W X - CALL S K U T W G O TOREE*

xiaj 50                          Pha5<~- 1 (Before match)

■£ 457 McSloy                    This serial will patrol the Wads ley /Middlewood area,
                                 paying particular attention to licensed premises, to
^   2961 Jenkinso"
                                 maintain order.
C   2933 Wadsworth
C   540 Sumpter
                                 Phase 2 (During match)
C   263 Barton
C   305 Jarvis
                                 Refreshments at Claywheels Lane at 3f*n.
C   276 Robinson
                                 Resune patrol at 3.45pn in area shown far Phase 1.

                                 Phase 3 (After match)

                                 Patrol in area as outlined above.




                                                                                                   1090
-1jR N T'1R L _ H S E       TEL No .07427 20013                5 Hay    89    10 =01 N o . 004 P . 22 /25


                                                                   Document No. j ^ ^       COHT’D

                               SUB SECTOR 22                Inapoctor        Purdy (HQ)


                               MOBILE PATROL - CALX. SICK "TANGO FOUR*

rial 51                        Phase 1 (Before rratch

PS   323 Proctor               Patrol Foxhill area, paying special attention to
PC   420 Efcvis                licensed premises.
PC   2333 English
PC   1083 Cox                  Phase 2 (During match)
PC   1041 Turner
PC   1492 Nangl*1*            Meal at 3.00pm at Claywh&els Lane, Traffic Dept.
PC   2481 Glossop             Resume patrol at 3.45pm Foxhill/Parson Cross area.

                               Phase 3 (After natch)

                              Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.




                              MOBILE P A T W X - CALL SIGN "TANGO FIVE"

rial 52                       Phase 1 (Before natch)

                              Patrol Parson Cross area, paying special attention
3S   2664 Herbert
"C   3245 Hepworth            to licensed premises to maintain order.
K    2884 Heritage
                              Ptiase 2 (EXirinq retch)
X:   2976 WilliaiB
K    333 Ogilvie
x:   57 Shelley               3.00pm patrol Parson Cross/Foxhill area.
                              3.45pm Metal, Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.
K    722 Gee
                              Phase 3 (After natch)

                              Resume patrol as outlined in Phase 1.




                              MOBILE PATROL - CALL SIGN "TANQP SIX"

rial 53                 r     Phase 1 (Before match)

5    655 McCall               Patrol Grenoside area, paying special attention to
;    2786 Moore               licensed premises and to maintain order.
2    257 llackrtey
:    2760 Harding             Phase 2 (During match)
:    36 Mahon
:    3300 Swift                3.00pm Meal - Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane
:    1719 Boam                 3.45pm Resune patrol Grenoside.

                               Phase 3 (After match)

                               Resune patrol as outlined in Phase 1.




                                                                                               1091
rU R N T''h L_ H $E        TEL No .0 74272001 3                5 May   89   10:01   N o . 004 P . 23/ 25

                                                                               APFBPIX *D"
                                 SOB SECTOR 23                     Inepeclor    Hoek    (HQ)

                                 Q C W H HBUEW10W ~ HERRIES HOAD BUS GMWOE/
                                 r e a r CAft PARK/HEKRIg ROAD
                                                                               Document No. 1 9 3     CON'
    ScrLail 54                   Phas*- 1 (Before match)

                                 •mis serial will supervise the unloading of Nottin^aT
    PS   1482 Briers
                                 Forest Coactes at Herries Road Bus Garage.   PC's will
)   PC   74 Khan
                                 ensure that supporters leaving the coaches do not
)   PC   1423 Newbold
                                 possess items prohibited by the ground rules i.e.
)   PC   1729 Hanpshire
                                 banrers, weapons, missiles or alcohol.
)   PC   1828 Metcalf?
>   PC   513 Cor lew*?11
                                 Any over-flow will be directed to park on the south
)   PC   1644 Gagg
                                 side of Henries Road South and Rawson Spring Road.
)   PC   68 Wattham
)   PC   588 Thonpscn
    PC   1535 Fairclough         Phase   2   (During match)
)   PC   532 Thcrrpson
                                 Ref r e s e n t s at Traffic dept.. Claywheels Lane.

                                 Phaso 3 (After rotch)

                                 Supervise loading of simporters onto coaches.




                                 CQK31 RETKPT10N - HEKRIES BQAD BUS GARATO/
                                 REAR CAR PARK AND HERRTES ROAD

    Serial 55                     Phase 1 (Before match)

                                  This serial will supervise the unloading of Nottingham
     PS 885 Green                 Forest coaches at Herries Road Bus Garage. PC's will
    PC 2595 Broks                 ensure that supporters leaving the coaches do not
    PC 96 Tbyne                   possess items prohibited by the ground rules i.e.
    PC 529 Scholey                ba n ^ r s weapons, missiles or alcohol. Any ove r~ f ?wc.W1Ar
                                  d S S S d to S r k on the south side of Herries Road South and
      .562 Cross                           ^ ^        ...                  Rawson Spring Road.
      *2818 Marshall              Phase 2 (During match)
    PC 2197 Laverick
    FC 2650 McWalter              Refreshnents at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.
    PC 1319 Loxley
    PC 316 Cocker                 Phase 3 (After natch)
    PC 2744 Blackmore
                                  Supervise loading of supporters onto ooaches.,




                                  NOT E i-

                                  Herries Road and Wardsend Road will be subject
                                  to "No parking* restrictions which will be strictly
                                  enforoed in relation to private cars.




                                   SYPTE buses will park on Herries Road on the
                                   opposite side to their garage.


                                                                                               1092
'URNT''PI   HSE        TEL   No .074272001:                5 May   S3   1 0 ‘01 N o - 00
                                                                    Docum ent No. 1 9 3    CONT’D

                              SUB SECTOR 24                 Inspector    Armitacr *E*


                              BUS/COMM KBUSCTION - HEKRtBS BOAD 3 C W W

Serial 56                      Phase 1 (Beforp match)

                              This serial will ensure that He.rries Road South remains
PS   1057 Duggan              clear of all parked cars to allow the unloading of Si PTE
K:   3088 Couplanc            buses carrying Nottingham supporters. Coaches will
PC   2449 inchclif:-          unload on the North side of this road, having travelled
PC   2516 Cooper              along Penistone Road from the Midland Station.
PC   1345 Dungwarth
PC   2899 Blackburn           They will supervise unloading and ensure that si^jorters
PC   1332 Scruby              are not in possession of items prohibited by the ground
PC   857 Raistrick            rules (Banners, etc., v^apons, missiles or alcohol).
PC   197 Lewis
PC   2204 Bashforth           *tty»y will also supervise the unloading of any Nottingham
PC   2097 Cousins             coaches who may be directed to unload and park on the
                              hard stouldfer in this road (South side) as an overflow
                              from other parking locations.

                               Phase 2 (During reitch)

                               Refresent s at Traffic Dept., ClaywhfWs La->e.

                               Phase 3 (After match)

                               Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches/buses.




                               CTMCH KfcCKt'nON - HERRIES BQAD SCMH

Serial 57                      Phase l (Before match)

PS 2488 Jones                  lhis serial will te? located at the junction of HerTies
K ^ 2 4 4 ffart in             Road and Herries Road South to ensure that Nottingha^
I^P04 Gilbert her              coac^>s arriving at this location are directed to the
PC 1113 Wroe                   car parking areas at SYPTE Bus G a r a y in Hernes- Road.
PC 1947 Langford               Any overflow will be directed to park on the South
                               site of Herries Road South and Rawson Spring Road.
PC 55 McMillan
PC 1568 Goodge
                               Mini buses, vans, etc., will be directed to the parking
PC 1539 West
PC 3051 Westwood               area iT> Rawson Spring Road.
PC 1335 Powell
                               They will ensure that passengers do not iriload until they
PS 2322 Kennedy                are in tb? appropriate parking area.

                               Phase 2 (During match)

                               Refreslments at Traffic Dept.. Claywheels Lane.

                                Phase 3 (During match

                                Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches.



                                IDBBi-   Herries Road South will be subject to "No
                                Parking’ cones to allow Nottingham coaches to park.
                                HIE Bfg?mic n c K 5 w m * BE h W I O B P . Coaches W i l l
                                parted on the hard shoulder on both sides of this toad.] 0 9 3
      U R N t " h L_ HSE                    TEL No .07427 20013               5 Hay   89   10:01   N o . 004 P . 25/25


                                                                                         Document No. J    -    CONT’D




                                               MINI BUS RECEPTION - RAMSON SPRING BOM)

srial 58                                       Ptose 1 (Before match)

                                               This serial will supervise thp unloading of Nottingham
                         824 HoImps
a a s ?! a a a a a a 3




                                               Forest mini buses in Rawson Spring Road.
                         119 Connor
                         522 Marsden
                                               PC's will ensure that supporters leaving the coaches
                         279 Burgess
                                               do not possess items prohibited by the ground rules
                         1811 Beech
                                               (Banners, etc., weapons, missiles or aloohol).
                         1904 Neath
                         1941 Bat hx op
                                               Phase 2 (During match)
                         22 Flethoer
                         3222 Saffrey
                                               Refreslwents at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.
                         2901 Burton
                         1747 Saunderscy*
                                               Phase 3 (After match)

                                               Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches.




                                               NOTE:-

                                               This road will be subject to *No Parking" oon*s      and only
                                               mini buses, vans, etc. will be allow?d to park.
                                               Barriers will also be available for erect ion at     the
                                               entrance to this road to control entry.




                                                                                                               1094
                                                                                    Inspector          HcOwieU (HQ)
                                   SMB SECTOR 25


                                                                                        Docum&nt No. j         9 3   CONT’D
                                   pnnr.TC CREEP J HBRRIgS HQAD

   Serial 59                       Phase 1 (Before match)
                         HO
                                   This serial will be responsible for patrolling
   PS  2928 Williamson
                                   terries Road (PC’s in pairs) frcm the railway
 1)PC  250 Calwrt
                                   viaduct to tft? Fiv? Arches Public House, to
 2)PC  390 Leach
                                   maintain order and ensure that any
 3)PC  866 l/?vine
                                   restrictions are enforced. Dxrect Nottxn^ar
 4)PC  1140 Buckley
                                   Forest si«iporters in private vehicles to park
 5)PC  1614 Lund
 6)PC  1866 Harrison               in locations in side roads.
 7)PC  378 Sinmons
 8)PC  3072 Turner                 Phase 2 (during match)
 9) PC 1761 Marston                Refreshments at Traffic Dept.. Claywheels La.-**.
10) PC 1023 Peter
                                   Phas» 3 (After match)
      kPS 894 Brown   Training
                                   Patrol in the area outlied above to mainta-.
                                   order.




                                    W 1 H U C GREER ~ IfcHRXES BQAP

                                    Phase 1 (Before match!
      Serial 60               HQ
                                    T h is s e r i a l w i l l bp w p o - f f i i b l s f o r p a t r o l l i - ^
    PS   818 Brown                  I V n w s Hoad (PC'S in p a ir s ) from thP Fiw?
 1) PC   2564 White                 Archps Public House to the traffic island
 2) PC   163 Jessop                 tfc? junction with Moonshine Lane/Shirecliffe
 3) PC   3237 Hislop                Koad to maintain order and ensure that any
 4) PC   1744 Pulfrey               parking restrictions are enforced.
    PC   1822 Hutchinso-
    PC   2609 Morgan                Direct Nottingham Forest supporters-Ln private
 7) PC   786 Btimrson                        t o p i * in lo c a t io n s in s i * road s.
 8) PC    683 Bond
                                     Pha*e 2 (During match).
       PS 2264 Hewitt (Training)     f t .f w s t a .- n t s at Traffic Dept.. Claywh~ls La-*.


                                     Phase 3 (After match)

                                      P a tr o l in th e area outlined above t o m aintain order.




                                                                                                                     1095
                                                                       Docum&ntNo. ] 9 3       CONT’ D

                                    SUB SBCTOR 26
                                                                           Insp ect car   Bayk xk


                                    p rw .i c CROER - HWISTONE ROAD

    Serial 61                       Phase 1 (Before natch)

     PS   2663 Krwwles              PC's will patrol in pairs in Penistone Road from
1)   PC   3189 Scot h e m           Parksi^3 Road to Borough Road to maintain order and
2)   PC   2255 Carling              prevent any clash of supporters.    Direct s importers
3)   PC   1992 Stimson              to si<fe street parking and maintain security of
4)   PC   2388 Pearson              business premises. Special attention to be given to t
5)   PC   65 Oldham                 enforcement of parking restrictions on Penistone Road.
6)   PC   2184 Clay     *B          Ph*se 2 (During match)
7)   PC   2950 Carver *
8)   PC   28 Drewitt "E             Ref r e s e n t s at Traffic Dept.. Claywheels Lan*.
9)   PC   963 Evans       •
                                    Phase 3 (After match)
     PS 1197 Rye        *E



•
                                    On conmenoement of Phase 3. this serial will
                                    resurr patrol in location as above and prevent
                                    any clash of supporters.




                                    p U p M g Q R C E R - PENLSTCfC BQAD

                                    Phase 1 (Before match)
     Serial 62
                                    PC's will patrol in pairs in Fenistone Road from
         969 Hodgkins©'*.   "C      Borough Road to Burton Street to maintain order
         3015 Parkinsor             and prevent any clash of supporters. Direct supporters
         3084 Grant                 to side street parking. Maintain security of
         426 Hodgson                business premises.
         817 Wadsworth
3     PC 2701 Hague                  Phase 2 (During match)
         2547 Ramsden
         2186 Malloy           B     Refreshments at Clayw*>els Lane, Traffic Dept.
         2066 lockwood-DiJtes B
         325 Haycock           B
                                     Phase 3 (After match!

      PS 2181 Weston          “C*    On OTKTOTO"! of Phase 3, this serial will resun*
                                     patrol in locations as above and prevent any clash of
                                     Mypgrters.




                                                                                                    1096
                                                                              Document No, ^ ^ ^   CONT’D

                                           SUB ctttdr 27                 Inspector      Hudson



                                           MTRTTJ! PATHOL - CALL SIQH *TAWOO SEVB<*

 Serial 63                                 Pfyigp 1 (Before match)

      PS 784 Glover    •£"                 Patrol Firvale area, paying special attention to
1)    PC 2902 Roberts F                    Licensed premises.
2)    PC 2154 Keen     R/T
3)    PC 2859 Knights                      Pfr»ge 2 (During match)
4)    PC 1182 ftritchara *
5)    PC 2469 Greaves    "                 3 .00 cm W?al - Claywheels Lane-
                                           3.45pm Resume patrol Firvale/Southey Green area.
6)    PC706 Swinbum      *
                                           Pha«t<* 3 (After match)

                                           Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.




                                           M B I L E PATROL - CALL SIGN "TANGO EaCHT*

 Serial 64                                 Ptvi^e 1 (Before match).

                                           Patrol Southey Green area, paying special attention to
      PS   847 Mitchell     E
1)    PC   1283 Kitching    F              licensed premises.
2)    PC   2892 Smith        R/T
                                           PhAtto 2 (During match)
3)    PC   194 Reed          •
4)    PC   2402 Thorrpson
                             VI            3.00pm Patrol Firvale/Southey Green area.
5)    PC   2601 Mushett
                                           3.45pm Meal Claywheels Lane.
6)    PC   1323 Axup
                                           Phasp 3 (After match)

                                           Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.




                                            KXtrt.F. PATROL - CALL SIGN "TANQP KtHE*

                                                  l (Before match)
     Serial 65
                                            Patrol Hillsborough/Langsett Road area, paying special
      PS   2591 Charleswort h       F
                                            attention to licensed premises.
1)    PC   165 Hinds              R/T
2)    PC   599 Makin              R/T
                                                   ?. (During match)
3)    PC   212 Charters           HO CID
                                  N   »
4)    PC   2447 Hodgkinson                  3.00pm M?al - Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept.
                                  ■   ■
5)    PC   930 Fox                          3.45pm resune patrol Hillsborough.

                                            Phase 3 (After match)

                                            Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.




                                                                                                   1097
                                                                       Document No. j 9 3   CONT’D




                                   MJBttJE PATROL - CALL SIGN T A N 0 3 TEJT

 Serial 66                         Phago 1 (Before natch)

     PS   2991 Miller              Patrol Owler+on/Ne^ps^nd area, paying special attention
                              F
     PC   2944 Church         •    to licensed premises.
1)
2)   PC   1107 Tallow        R/T
3)   PC   315 Roberts         ■    Phase 2 (During match)
     PC   740 Rowbothait'.    ■
4)
5)   PC   1017 Walton         ft   3.00pm patrol Owlerton/Neepsend areas.
6)   PC   534 htertin         ■    3.45pm meal - Claywheels Lane, Traffic t>?pt..

                                   Ph**e 3 (After match)

                                   Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.




                                                                                        1098
                                         Document No. „                CONT’D
                     LIVERPOOL                                9    J            appendix


I STAND               STAND

                              n o    R    t   *
                           .>■1 1.   r*                                    entrance



ENTRANCE

                       NOtttNGHA                   v       LIVERPOOL
                           forest
                           r,AT                                    ,




                                                                                              NORTH
                                                                                              •BLUE*


                           SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F-C. p ic
   TO BE GIVEN UP


i STAND              I STAND-


                                                                           ENTRANCE


 ENTRANCE




                                                                                               VEST
                                                                                               •BROW'




                                                                          THIS PORTI ON l O
                            SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. pic                    at fctTAIWfO
    TO BE GIVEN UP                MILU»0«0W«H. SHIMUlO



 I STAND.              | STAND:

                              ^e-pp/^fc*£                  LA^Jl
                                                                             ENTRANCE
                                FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                   CHALLENGt CUP
   ENTRANCE:                         SEMI-FINAL
                         NOTTINGHAM                    v    LIVERPOOL                           LIPPING
                               fo r e s t                                                       Lone
                                     at HIU-MWKOUQH stao*
                                                        um
                                SATURDAY STM APRIL 1888
                                               KICK-OFF 3pm
                                                                                        +       •QBESN*
                     NOTTINGHAM rORRSST.
                                                                           APPENDIX
i s ta n d             STAND;          | D ocum ent No. f       CONT’D
                           Kb<3        I      —        ....

                                                                   ENTRANCE


 ENTRANCE

                                  r U vU»'f   \   TV

                                                                                          KOP
                                                   'li                          t         •ORANGE'




                           SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. p4c         ? H 1& P Q R T I Q * TO
    TO BE GIVEN UP                 MUU»OD(K«H SMfKmp               BE * £ T A t * € D




I STAND              1 *TAND:



                                                                   ENTRANCE


 ENTRANCE




                                                                                           50DTH
                                                                                           •GREY'




                           SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. pfc         THIS POflTION TO
                           *n                 SHtMilLO            B f R STAINED




  I STAND:            I STAND'

                            O KSLCVt d l £>
                                                                      ENTRANCE
                                K)OTBALl ASSOCIATION
                                   CHALLENGE CUP
   ENTRANCE
                                     SEMI-FINAL
                         NOTTINGHAM v LIVERPOOL
                           FOREST
                              AT HILLMOROUGH STAOHJM
                                 SATURDAY STM APRIL 1888                                    SOOTH
                                      KICK-OFF 3pm                                          UNCOVER*
                                                                                             •YELLOW’




                                SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. p ic      THIS PORTION TO
                                     NtlkStQROuGH.(HEMihO            B ( HETAI H i D

                                                                                             1 100
                              Document No. -j ^      CONT’D            Appendix 'F'




CID General Sub Divisional Duties



FI   DS    829    Oughton     I/C            8am -

     DS    702    Wroe                       8am -
                                              ■
     DC    87     Mould
                                              H
     DC    3206   Levin
                                              ■
     TDC   1788   Hirst
                                              •>
     DC    1197   Smithies
     DS    366    Claves                    Noon -
                                              9
     DC    1582   Clarke
                                              II
     DC    366    Stevenson
                                              <1
     TDC   2405   Dynes

     DC    1720 PhiUiskirk




F2   DS    517 Smith                         8am -
                                              M
     DC    3211 Priestley
                                              **
     DC    1424 WOod
     DC    1152 McManus

     DS    727 Lindley                     Noon - 1
     DC    3292 White
                                              II
     DC    2540 Lindsay

     DC    1600 Jones                        6pm -



                                           OUTSIDE GROUND - PICK-POCKETS
     GROUND

     DI Scaife                             Pc     358    Hydes
     DS   551     Wilson                   TDC    2569   B lake
     DS   1578    Holdemess                TDC    3119   Bagguley
     TDC  1386    Dobson                   Pc     1181   D ra jlin g
     Pc   11      Wood
     DC   1108    Locking
     DC   1209    Askew
     DC   2270    Perkins
     DC   1745    Sturgess
     DC   332     Keightley




     PARKSIDE SECTION STATION

     DCI   Addison
     DI    Towell
     DS    476 Hudson
     DC    2088 Brown
     DC    2812 Lawrence




                                                                                 1101
                              Document No.   | 9 g   CQNT’D |           lp f




   WADSLEY BRIDGE SECTION STATION

   DS      846 Williamson
   DC      2968 Hall
   DC      146 O'Brien
   TDC     168 O'Neill
   PC      1242 Amutage


THBtTS FROM VEHICLES

Duties in relation to thefts from motor vehicles.       The Officers will
be based at Parkside Section Station.

Group A


    DS     839 Hogg
    A/DS   854 Gilbertson
    DC     396 Roosby
    DC     127 Wragg
    DC     539 Jackson
    DC     1289 Monfredi
    DC     810 McFarlane
    PS      2590 Broadbent




Group B

Based out at Wads ley Bridge Section Station, Halifax Road.

    DI     Garrett
    DS     1150 Wyatt
    DS     262 Sellers
    DC     2793 Marples
    DC     1979 Maxwell
    DC     3331 Williams
    DC     2947 Liversidge
    DC     1668 Johnson


All Officers to report to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
Gymnasium for briefing at 9.45am Saturday 9th April 1988.




 PRiaCtEg

 The following Officers will man a Criminal Investigation Department
 post situated in tte Sheffield Wednesday Football
 deal With prisoners arrested for crune -omnitted outside the grounds-

     DC     649 Fox
     DC     1161 Staniforth
                                                                   Documejit No.               CO..
                                                                                     I 93
                                                                             APPENDIX        »n*
                                                                                             'G



                                 DOG SECT I O N


Members of the Dog Sect ion will be d e p loyed as follows:


                                                       AR E A
      DOG V A N



                                   W a d s l e y Bridge Railway Station

                                   Leppi^gs Lane Traffic Island

                                   Herries Road C oach Park

                                   Leppings Lane Turnstil©s

                                   Penistone R o a d /Parkside Road

                                   P enistone Road/Br a d f i e I d Road

                                   Hillfoot Bridge

                                   Penistone Road to city centre

                                   M i d d l e w o o d Raad/Wadsley Lane

                                   M id d le w o o d R o a d / H i l l s b o r o u g h Co r n e r

                                    Middl e w o o d Roa d / D e e p c a r

                                    Stocksbridge/Oughtibridge

                                    T anke r s l e y




 in addition to the above. two handler,                  together w i t h         'explosives
 d 0 9 s will parade at S h e f f i e l d W e d n e s d a y Football S t a d i u m at 6.00 am
 on S a t u r d a y 9 April   1988 to search the interior of the ground.




                                                                                                    11 0 3
                                  Document No.                  CONT’O *
                                                           ZJ          |Appendix *H‘




                     KCONP1D SECTION


Me.itoers of tte Mounted Action will be. deployed as follows



       HORSES                     ARE*



          6                       lappings Lane

         10                       Penistone Road Northturnstiles

          6                       Wadsley Bridge Railway Station

          4                       Halifax Road *

          4                       Herries Road *




         30




                At Phase 3, two nembers of the Mounted S*ct ion

                will be deployed in the Middlewood Road/

                Catchbar Lane area.     The remaining two will

                take up a position at    L e p p in g s   Lane Traffic

                Island.




                                                                              I 104'
                                           I Document No. j ^ ^   CONT’O i
                                           *---                          1   APPENDIX «X«
                     ACKINISTRATICW, CCWTRQl AND CUSTODY STAFF, ETC.



administration

Inspector Bennett
PS 838 Long
PC 3018 Shelton)
PC 1173 Kixlc   )




PROPERTY - LIVERPOOL                                     PROPERTY - NCHTENGHAM    FOREST

PS 2010 Pov«ll                                           PS 870 Brown
PC 3253 Canpfc^ll                                        PC 2387 Collins



PS 102 Fidlpr )
PC 538 Horne ) Corv!iS “ M?als supervision (Ground)


Inspector Lawson )
                           Logistics - Claywheels Lane
PS 2095 tfrien   )
PS 204 Spencer   )




<3*0Ufffi GGTfTROL                                       SECTOR DRIVERS

Inspector Calvert                                        Chief Supt             Insp. Broughton
PS 616 Goddard                                           Sector 2          -    PC 1863 Buxton
PC 1035 Ryan                                             Sector 3          -    PS 383 Woodward
PC 1370 Bichard                                          Directors Entrance)    PC 3071 Stepten
PC 1421 Guest                                                               )   PC 3048 Crutten




OJSTOCT (QOUND)                                          PRISON BUSES

ftilioe Roan                                             PS   526 Langdale
                                                         PC   992 Kassell
Inspector Croft                                          PS   449 Basford
PS 1164 Coll*»y                                          PS   1460 Gover
PS 2956 Gordon
PS 805 Buxton                                            PROC E S S READER
PC 1403 Jones
PC 766 Marshall                                          Inspector Bums
PC 2493 Webster
PC 1577 Barden
                                            Document No.          CONT’D    APPENDIX • T
                                                           193



PROCESS S U T F WI SO R - ItCPBCTOR BURNS


                                                           PRISONER PROCESS (BOCLESPIELD)
PRISONER PROCESS (HRPS)
                                                           UVERPOX
NOTTINGHAM FOREST

                                                           Inspector Etheridge
Inspector Aicheson
                                                           DS 510 Homer
DS Charlesworth
                                                           PC 428 Hutchinson
PC 744 Hirst
                                                           PC 1784 Donahue
PC 253 Hyles                                               PC 1826 Walton
PC 621 Bell



                                                           PRISON BUS {BOCU3SFIELD)
PRISON BUS (t«PS)
                                                           PS 862 Myers
PS 544 Rouke
                                                           PC 48 McCudden
PC 392 Auty




                           OQMPUttWPS AGAINST TOE FC&IOE



                                                Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                  Inspector B. Walker
                                                (Gymnasium)

                                                Hanrrerton Road Police Station
                  Inspector K. Walker


                                                Ecclesfield Police Station
                  Inspector D. Riley




                                                                                   I tO'6'
                                                              Document No.     _         CONT’ D
                                                                  —-       \ / 3


TRAF FI C POINTS                                                   APPENDIX        'J'




1   A61 - Grenoside traffic lights                                    PC 2120 Tho rp e


2   Halifax Road/Kilner Way           TL                             T W 109 Dixon


3   Halif ax Ro ad /F oxhill Road          TL                        T W 43 C h a r l e s w o r t h


4   Halifax Road/ Cl ay wh ee ls     Lane       TL                   T W 117 T h o m p s o n


5   Penistone      Road Nor th /H er ri es      Road Sou th   TL      ^    ^    Ta y l o r     E


6   Penistone Ro ad /P arkside Road             TL                   T W 83 B a l d w i n


7   Penistone Road/ Br ad fi el d Road                               T W 130 Green


8   Penistone Ro ad /N eepsend Lane                                   T W 96 Wells           •E 1

    All o t h e r traffic    lights wil l be cove r e d by         1D l ' O f f i c e r s




Police Sergeant 102 Fidl^r will en sure that traffic lig ht key s are
avail ab le for iss ue to Off ic er s no minated for these po ints. He wil l
also supply reflect ive jackets if required.
                                                                         Document No.            CONT’D
                                                                                         95
                                                                            APPEN DI X   *K 1




T RAINS

1.   N O T T I N G H A M FOREST

Five special trains carr ying N o t t i n g h a m Forest supporters will strive
at Midland Station;  the times w ill not be a v a i l a b l e until the week of
the Semi Final and therefore will be given at the briefing.

Each train has a capa city of 550.

The fare for these special              trains    is i n clusive of the bus fare to
the ground.

SYT will run buses from the station to the ground u s i n g a route along
Penistone Road and u n l o a d i n g in Herr i e s Road South; these buses will
be under m otor cycle escort.

After the m atch a similar o p e r a t i o n w i l l take place to return
Notti n g h a m Forest supp orters to the r a i l w a y                   L route
Penistone Road North opposite the ground and using an identical
back to the station.

Departure       times will be g i v e n at       the briefing.

There     is the facility to d e l a y the trains                in the event of extra time
being played.

2.    LIV E R P O O L

Two special trains c a r r y i n g L i v e r p o o l suppo r t e r s w i l l arrive at
Wads l e y Bridge Station at times yet to be arranged;                      these will be
made available at briefing.

Each train has a c a p acity of 550.

Departure       times w i l l also be given at           the briefing.

Again there is a facility to d e l a y the trains                    in the event of e xtra
 time being played.




 those a r r iving at Midl a n d s                           ,      Nottingham Forest supporte
 t r a v e l l i n g ^ l o n g ^ L a n g s e t t Road™ ^ l e ^ c d ^ d     - A r r iv i ng      at pepping
 Lane where they will unload.

 At the end of the game,                                    the^dllnd^atiwa^sLtion.
 ? h " e n b u ^ s V i i ? l 1S e t li3
                                      ca«d   in Penistone Road North on the                -to city'
 c a r r i a g e w a y outside Beeley Wood Special School.



                                             * * * * * *



                                                                                                1 108
                                       Document No. 1 9 3    CONTD
                                                                      Appendix *L'




                                  OQACHES


LIVERPOOL

    1       All Liverpool coaches should leave the Ml Motorway at. Exit 36
             (Tankersley) and travel via the A61 to designated parking areas.

   2        The geographical location of Liverpool, coupled with the
             countrywide support enjoyed by the Club, suggests that coaches
             could well approach the stadium by other routes, particularly
             the A616. If this is tlv^ case, then they must be brought to
             tte (tesignated coach parking area.

    3       Liverpool Executive Club coaches will be supplied with a red
             notice (Copy attached) to display In the windscreen and these
             will be permitted to unload at the ground. This facility will
             not b** extended to any other coach for whatever reason.

    4       Th^ Serials engaged on duty at Tankersley and Ought ibridge will
             operate selective stop and search procedures to ensure (A)
             Passengers have tickets, <B) they are not in possession of alcohol
             and (C) tfr?y are not drunk. When this has been done, each
             coach will have an adhesive sticker placed on the nearside of
             the windscreen and it will be allowed to proceed to the designated
             parking area.

    5       All coactes will be allowed to travel to the ground without
            specific escort, although mentoers of the Road Traffic Motor Cycle
            wing will be providing overall mobile supervision. All coaches
            will be directed to tte traffic island at Leppings Lane where,
            in the first instance, ttey will park in Claywheels Lane. Once
            this area is full tten coaches will be directed to park on the
             'out lane' of tfr? dual carriageway in Halifax Road, parking to
            conmence at the top of the dual carriageway and then work towards
             the stadiun.

    6       All coactes will park before being permitted to set down passengers,
             thereby ensuring that t.te occupants know exactly where to return
             to on completion of the football tnatch.

    7       Where it is discovered that passengers on a coach are not in
             possession of tickets, or are in breach of legislation concerning
             alcohol at Sporting events, then Ground Control will be informed
             for consideration as to returning such vehicles out of the Force
             area under escort.

    8        Where individual passengers only are involved who have oonsvmed
              alcohol in such amounts that they are drunk or ^ i n posses­
              sion of alcohol, then they should be arrested and detained pending
              transport.

   KOTTOOttM FOREST

       ,     Nottingham Forest supporters
              to use the Ml Motorway leaving at Exit        (iinsi-y)
              of S I operation will be dealt with by         Division officers and
              is the subject of a separate order.

                                                                             11 09
                                                      Document No. ^ ^ ^   CONT’D




10    Nott ingharo Forest Executive Club coaches will be supplied with
       a white notice (Copy attached) affording the same facilities
       as in Paragraph 3 above.

 11   Thes*? roaches will be parked in the South Yorkshire Transport
       Garage, Herrins Road South and, if necessary, Rawson Spring
       Road.




                                                                       1110
                                                   Document No. 1 9 3          CONT

                                                               A p p e n d ix "M*




             traicit vans      - LivagooL




Transit vans, etc. carrying Liverpool supporters will
S ^ o u r a c p a to travel via the M62 and Ml Motorways
leaving tl* latter at Junction 36 (Tankersley).
However, it is envisaged that such chicles will also
approach tte stadiun from the Flouch (A616).

Such vehicles will be stopped and thoroughly searched
to ensure that ttey are not carrying alcohol and the
passengers have not consumed the same to an extent
where thry are drunk.

All passengers will h* checked t.o ensure that they ar
in possession of tickets-

Aft^r the search has been ccrpleted an adhesive sticker
will be placed on the nearside windscreen to confirm
ti>? search has be*?n ccnpleted.

TJ*> vehicles will then proceed to thp dpsignated
parking area in Wardsend Road North where passengers
will alight and walk to the ground.

tt is not feasible to attest to c^rv?l such vehicle5
throiMh one *ct*?ckpoint ■ and therefore it will be the
Z 7 S a U serial on duties outsi* the stadu*.to
ronltor and cteck such vehicles and their occupants.

 Should any vehicle arrive, without having been checked
            o u t s k i r t s , which is found to be carrying
                   without tickets or m breach of the
 ^ g i s l S i o n relating to the
 o f a lc o h o l en r o u te t o s p o r tin g e v e n ts , th en Ground
 C on trol w i l l be in fe r r e d fo r co n sid era t io n a* t o
                     v e h ic le to the


 s ^ S      or arrest, dependant on their individual condition
                       Document No. |   93   CONT’D
                                                      A p p e n d ix 'N '




   TOAHSIT V » E - M J T T I N q W FOREST




Transit vans, etc. carrying Nottingham Forest supporters
will be encouraged to travel via the Ml Motorway leaving
the latter at Junction 34 (Tinsley)

Such vehicles will be stopped and thoroughly searched
to ensure that they are not carrying alcohol and the
passengers have not consunpd the same to an extent
where they are drunk.

All passengers will be checked to ensure that they are
in possession of tickets.

After tb? search has been completed an adhesive sticker
will be placed on the nearside windscreen to confirm
tty search has been completed.

    v*?hicl^s will then proceed to the designated
parking area in Rawson Spring Road where passengers
will alight and walk to the ground.

It is not feasible to attenpt to channel such vehicles
through one "checkpoint * and therefore it will be the
duty of all serials on duties outside the stadiim to
monitor and cteck such vehicles and their occupants.

Should any vehicle arrive, without having been checked
on the outskirts, which is found to be carrying
passengers without tickets or in breach of the legisla­
tion relating to thff carriage and consumption of
alcohol on route t.o sporting events, then Ground
Control will b** informed for consideration as to
returning tte vehicle to the motorway for escort.
If necessary, the driver and passengers will be dealt
with for breach of the relevant legislation by way of
sumtons or arrest, dependant on their individual
condit ion.




                                                                  1113
                                                             Document No. 1 9 3                          CONT’D
                                                                                                                  APPtNDlX 'O'




                             SPORTING EVICTS (CWTWOt. CF A U T H X ) ACT 1 9 6 5
                                AS         BY THE "PUtiLlC C R O E R ACT 1986



1.   VDUCLES
      (Aj     it is an o f f e n c e for a n o p e r a t o r to k n o w i n g l y c a r r y alco hol or a l l o w it
              to b e c a r r i e d o n a p u b l i c s e r v i c e v e h i c l e o r mini b u s / v a n or trai
              t r a v e l l i n g to o r f r o m a football match.

      (B)    it is a n o f f e n c e to p o s s e s s alco hol on a p u b l i c s e r y ic^ ^                       i^ ® : h °*'
             b u s ' v a n , or tr ai n e t c w h e n t r a v e l l i n g to o r f r o m a fo otba
             d r u n k on s u c h v e h i c l e .
      (C)    A Cons tab le m a y s t o p a n d se ar ch a public                 s e   r  v e h i c l e ,
                                                                                           v   i c   e    or mini bus,van.
             o r t r a i n et c w h e r e h e h a s r e a s o n a b l e g r o u n d s to su s p e c t a l c o h o      8
             carried.

2.   ENTRY INTO GROUND
      (A)     It is an o f f e n c e to p o s s e s s a l co hol w h e n e n t e r i n g o r a t t e m p t i n g to e n t e r a
              f o o t b a l l gr ou nd.

      (B)    It is a n o f f e n c e to e n t e r o r a t t e n p t to e n t e r a football 8J*o«nd w h e n in
             p o s s e s s i o n of b o t t l e s , c a n s e t c (or        part of ) w h i c h a r e c a p a b l ® of c a u s i n g
             i n j u r y . T h i s i n c l u d e s d r i n k i n g g l a s s e s but not t h e r m o s flasks.

     (C)     A C o n s t a b l e m a y s e a r c h a n y p e r s o n h e s u s p e c t s is a t t e s t i n g to e n t e r the
             ground with articles mentioned.

3.   C O N D U C T IN G R O U N D

      It is a n o f f e n c e to e n t e r , a t t e m p t to enter, o r b e in a football g r o u n d w h e n d r u n

4.   S A L E O F ALCOfrPL IN G R O U N D

      (A)    A l c o h o l i c d r i n k m a y o n l y b e s o l d in th o s e p a r t s of the
             w h i c h wi ll b e out o f v i e w of t h e pitch. A l c o h o l m a y not b e taken out of
             d e s i g n a t e d ar e a s .

      (B)    A n y C o n s t a b l e in u n i f o r m m a y c a u s e a b a r in a           jJ ™ " *                **
             h e b e l i e v e s the c o n t i n u e d s a l e of alcohol is d e t r i m e n t a l to good o r d e r o r
             p u b l i c safety.

5.   PYROTECHNICS

      It is a n o f f e n c e to p o s s e s s f i r e w o r k s , sm ok e b o m b s etc, w h e n in or e n t e r i n g /
      l e a v i n g a fo o t b a l l g r o u n d .

6.   PWERS

      In a d d i t i o n to the p o w e r s to s e a r c h , a C o n s t a b l e m a y ar re st a n y p e r s o n c o mn itt i
      o r w h o h a s c a n n i t t e d a n o f f e n c e u n d e r the Ac t.




                                                                                                                              1114
                                                          Document No. | (^   3   CQNT’D

                                                                APPENDIX      *P'


                                  PARKING RESTRICTIONS

NO PARKING CONES

No parking cones will be placed in the follcrtn'ing locations prior to 7.00 am on
Saturday 9 April 1988 by civilian staff under the direction of Police Sergeant
102 Fidlers

1.    Halifax Road - out of city lane frtm Parson Cross Road to Cowper Avenue

2.    Foxhill Road - out of city side from Hal ifax Road to Parson Cross Road

3.    Wardsend Road North - both sides

4.    Penistone Road - from Claywheels Lane to Railway Bridge - both sides

5.    Claywheols U m e (including one way system) from Penistone Road to Limestone
      Cottage Lane. (Both sides)

6.    Niagara Road - both sides

7.    Leppings L^ne - both sides

8.    Merries Road - from Penistone Road to V«rdsvorth Avonue - both sides

9.    Wardsend Road - both sides

10.   Henries Road South - both sides                                  *

11.   Galsworthy Road

12.    Rawson Spring Road - both sides

13.    Parksido Road - from Penistone Road to Catchhar    Lane -
      one side only - alongside park

14.   Catchbar Lane from Parkside Road to lappings Lane
      One side only - alongside school

15.   Middlewood Road - one side only (alongside park) frcm Parks ide Road to
      Hawksley Avenue

16.    Penistone Road - both sides frcm Leppinqs Lane island to Neepsend Lane

17.    Liversey Street - one side from Penistone Road car parkentrance
                                                           Document No. 1 9 3      CONT’ D
                                                                                             Appendix *Q"



                                        [OJTE SIGNING


LIVERPOOL COACH AND CAR ROUTES

1        M1-A61        to b® placed i*'i locaticn by Road Traffic

2        A 57-A628     H a y f W d s cros s road- C*-rbysh ir- to indicate foot b a n traffic
                        is to follow.       A 628 to be placed out by Road Traffic duri g
                       night of 8 April 1988.

3        A628/A616 to be placed m           location by D?epcar Officers.

A dditional s ig n in g w i l l be rep eaters at in te r v a ls on the rout*.



NOTTINGHAM FOREST CQiMUH AND CAR ROtfTES

All Nottinqham Forest vehicles will use a route fran the motorway, arriving «
Brightsid^ La^v?.         At this point, cars will to directed along Sutherland Street.
G o J r Street, Brunswick Road. Nursery Street to Neepsend Lane.

Coaches and Vans will travel via                        St., Firvale. and Herries Road to the
Ground.

SIGNING
                                                                          Owler Lane
1          Route split sign
                                                                          Herries Road/Barnsley Road
2          Coach rout^ sign
                                                                          Barnsley Road/Pitsmoor Road
3          Directional sign
                                                                          Pitsmoor Road /Rutland Road
4          Directional sign
                                                                          Rutland Road/Neepsend Lane
5          Directional sign
                                                                          tfeepsend Lane /Rut.land Road
    6      Directional sign
                                                                          Herries Road/Shirecliffe Rd Islanc
    7      Coach route sign
                                                                          Herrins Road/Shirecliffe Rd Islanc
    8      Car route sign

    A dditional sig n in g w i l l be r ep ea ters at in t e r v a ls .
                                     . -    v ft nn*m         The sicm s hav^ inovable arrows and when
                        r a    c ^     X     - ^ i t h         «   arrow A n t i n g in th e appropriate
    direction to follow the routes given above.

    Signs will be placed out by            civilian staff responsible for parking cones.




                                                                                                   1116
                                                          Document No. ^ ^     7*   CONT'Q

                                                                  APPENDIX       *5*




                   SPECIAL CONSTABULARY DUTIES



Special C onstables will -be on duty in co nn ection wit h this
event to supplement the regul ar Of ficers               They         q{
p a r t i c u l a r b e i n v o l v e d in connection wi      ar ound
traffic a w a y from the immediate v i c inity of the ground.

They w ill parad e at 9.45 a m in the gym n a s i u m for b r i efing
and take up their duties as soon as possible.

R e f r eshments wil l be a v a ilable      in the g y m n a s i u m duri ng the
match.
Radios will NOT be         issued to membe rs of the Special Constabulary,
except   superv i s o r y ranks.



                                   DUTIES


(a)      Herr i e s Road - e n courage and supervise         g"b y lde
         road on Longley. Norwood and Sh ir ecliffe esta t e s by
         N o t t i n g h a m Forest supporters.

         ranrrcnff rnad - pnc o u r a Q C and supervise pa rking in area
 (b)
         between Langse tt Road and Infi rm ar y Road by N o t t i n g h a m
         Forest    supporters.

         N e e p s e n d Lane - e n c o u r a g e and supe rv is e p a r k i n g in area
 (c)
         around old gas w o r k s b y N o t t i n g h a m Forest supporters.

         Halifax Road - e n courage and supervise p a r k i n g in side
 (d)     r o a d s on Parson Cr oss/Ioxhill esta t e s by Liverpool
         supporters.

 (e)     "sfdf^adt       o r M a r l c U f f r i n d a w i s e w o o d V e s?a?“ k S 9 Liverpool

         supporters.
                                                                                       Document No. 1 9 3                   CONT'C i
                                                                                                 ..........................................   I
                                                                                                      ATTWDIX *S*



                                               GK1M1 RBGtfLATfCKS


Unauthorised         p e r s o n s a r e not p e r m i t t e d to en te r up on the field of pla\.

Ttie c l i m b i n g of f l o o d l i g h t p y l o n s , s t a n d s or o t h e r b u i I d i n g s i n t he ground i s
forbidden

T h e c o n s u n p tion of i n t o x i c a t i n g liquors is p e r m i t t e d o n l y in a u t h o r i s e d Peaces
and in a c c o r d a n c e w i t h the S p o r t i n g Ev en ts (Control of Al cohol Etc) Act

F i r e w o r k s , s n o k e c a n i s t c r s , bottles, glasses, cans, flags, banners, poles and
o t h e r s i m i l a r a r t i c l e s o r c o n t a i n e r s including a n y t h i n g wtiich co ul d or might be
u s e d as a w e a p o n , a r e not p e r m i t t e d w i t h i n the ground, a n d a n y p e r s o n in p o s s e s s i o n
of s u c h a n a r t i c l e or c o n t a i n e r m a y be re fused e n t r y o r e j e c t e d fror. the ground.

U n d e r n o c i r c u n s t a n c e s is it p e r m i t t e d to throw a n y object o n t o the pitch.

A n y p e r s o n w i o fails to c o m p l y w i t h i n s t ruc ti ons f r o m a s t e w a r d m a y be e j e c t e d from
the g r o u n d .

A n y p e r s o n w h o r e m a i n s in a g a n g w a y m a y be e j e c t e d fr om the ground.

T h e C l u b r e s e r v e s the ri gh t to r e f u s e a d m i s s i o n to or eject a n y p e r s o n w h o
r e f u s e s to b e s e a r c h e d b y a P o l i c e Of ficer.

T h e C l u b r e s e r v e s the right for its se rv ant s a n d a g e n t s to r e m o v e fr on this ground
a n y p e r s o n wtxi d o e s no t c c r p l y w i t h G r o u n d R e g u l a t i o n s a n d w i t h the R u l e s an d
R e g u l a t i o n s o f T h e F o o t b a l l Association an d T h e F o o t b a l l L e a g u e or w h o s e p r e s e n c e
on th e G r o u n d is or c o u l d r e a s o n a b l y be c o n s t r u e d as c o n s t i t u t i n g a so u r c e of
d a n g e r , n u i s a n c e or a n n o y a n c e to o t h e r sp ec tators.
           Document No. j      CON! J j   A p p e n d ix *T *




      M A P S




Division of stadium


Liverpool routes and parking areas


Sector 2


Nottingham Forest routes and parking areas


Sector 3


Overall parking areas (Sectors 2 & 3)


Location of mobile- units (Tl-10)
                       Sheffield Wednesday F. C.                                                                PoNce
                                                                                                                Room
 CONT',




                                                                                               First-Aid Room
                              Hillsborough Ground                                                                                                               n
                                                                                                                              VV ^ V o ; - ' .
                                      LIVERPOOL SUPPORTERS
 0 o ^ W i i W Lj:^3




                                                                                                 Qymnatk/m                       v\£%.
                                                                                                                                                     -77-88
                                                                                                                                                       ,73-76
                                            <?£                                                                                                         55-72

                                                                                                                                                                       s
                                                                                                                                                                .O v

                                                                                                                                                      '^O
                                                                    «<



                                                                                                                         10
                                                  1-16


                                                  A/G                                                                                            \
                                                             [t



                       \way    Fans   Entrance

                         and    Enclosures



                                                                                             SOUTH STMtO-,
                                                                  19-22
                                                                                                                                        37-42
UJ                                                                                  23-28                          •32        ’3 6   |p*it
                                                                          0 tflcM
 i:                                                                                                              Car


                                                                                                                                NOmNGHflM FOREST SUPE
                                                                                    Dlr+ctort Cntrnnca
                                u/nw*nr .rx.. . .TZZZa
                                H-
                                z
                                o                                                                                                             Ovl
                                hO                                         lifcm PINAL 1988
                                ON
                                                              I   W   "     — " " S *■> » « U C *”E*S
                                 o
                                z

\N/HiNl 80S PARKING             E

                                                                                                                              s
vhdSewhom)                      3
                                O
                                o
                                o



                                                                                                                         t

                                                                                    Crown Inn’ PH.



                                            4MKXIC     - OAWHHEIS UIS

                                                                                                            '/

                                                       ■-RXHIti. ESBWE

                                                                                                                              X-
                                                                                                                                   w

                                                                                                                                       r ..



                                                                      § W V F M U K < - HALIFAX ROAD
                                     <~>r



                          ^I,m-        «=-   f m s w   ocbs   Eswre
                                                                          |m V M O T O R W A Y   JUNCTION 36 - TANKERSLUY_j



    S   M FIELD W h D N E S D A Y
             r — it, .■ ("kih
                     Document No. 1 9 3     CONT’D     APPENDIX 'Kiiti?.
r
           graff FINAL 1988

         SECTOR 2 - LIVERPOOL

                                                      HALIFAX ROAD

                              LIVERPOOL m a r H E S



          tffcvERPOOL CAR PARKING -      ^
          fftjHILL AW> PARSON CRGSS KTOXES




WADSLEV BRIDGE
                                                             SEMI FINAL 1 9 8 8

                                                  H O T S TOUgST ROUTES AHD P»RKINg_AggAS
                                                                                                   NORTH


                                                                                                              N S L E V
     NIAGARA                                                                                               VIA D U C
      Ground                                                                                                    tio n 3



                                                                        a                                     SOUTH


                                Sniff MID WfONtSOAV


                                                                          f irvole


                         Coach P ark in g                                 ] / *■— ^ \ U P ^
                         sggggse. G arage and
                         W finries itoad S cuth

                                                                                              z>

To M a n c h e s t e r
         A 57
r
                                                                Document No. 1 9 3    CONT’D

                                                                       Notts Forest
                                                                       Coach Par*




                                                                           Hfttt r w » 8 t
                                                                           <
                                                                           w ££&
                                                                              )  ard M ini b
                                                                «p°        ****




                      P     A   R   ic i^ ^
                                                                         R Don


                      HitUborough Pork




                                                           'wO"* 0 -




                                                                              S .
                                                                               '4 o




                    *">V>
    V   V * r                                                       Mr

        ♦       «
        \v>

                                       5/ W v "
                                          V   CV   \   V   A.
                                                              Document No.       CONT’D




                        W   .




                        m   m




                                                              m m




                                                                              %

                                                                9vpp«d *■# t00^ ® ^
                                                                             i^X'-X
                                                                             “"’■Vv
        J

                                        \
                                    k               OVA                      &
„ r n u fi
       ■'                                           n     ;
                                »
                                        I
    S   i




                                            r
                                                                                   ■•«Tb OiH
                                                                                  (V -( T 7 0 J




1       § I» '.xe&i~T
                            s m r DffDKVd - TYNXi DOS 400 f i
Document No. ] Q ^ CONT’D
                                                                 Document No. j g ^   CONT’D


                                                                     APPENDIX 'U*




                             SCHEDULE OF TOTAL MANPOWER



                   Ch Supt      Supt      Ch Tnsp         Insp        PS       PC

    GROUND            1          1          3             10          27       241

    CONTROL ETC                  1                        9           16       25

    PUBLIC ORDER                 2          4             20          44       346

    MjBIL£S                                               4           10       60

0   CID                          1          1             3           9        29

    RESERVE                                               1           3        30



                     1           5          8             47          109      731




                                                                                      112 7
                     DPP DOC 194




    FA CUP SEMI FINAL

  SATURDAY 1$ APRIL 19S9



LIVERPOOL v NOTTS FOREST




F D ivision OPERATIONAL ORDER
                                                     ? Document No.   J   CGNT’O I



                    SOLTIU   YORKSHIRE      POLICE



                             •F' DIVISION




OPERATIONAL OREER 'F* 1/89                              6th April 1989




      F A CUP SEMI FINAL - LIVERPOOL v NurrJLNGHAM FOREST

                   SATURDAY 15TO APRIL 1989




DISTRIBUTION




Chief Constable

Assistant Chief Constable (Operations)

Chief Superintendent Operations and Traffic

Chief Superintendent    'F' Division

Deputy Divisional Conmander 'F' Division

Detective Superintendent      'F' CID

Superintendent    'FI' Sub Division

Superintendent 'F2' Sub Division

Superintendent    'E12' Sub Division

'FI' Sub Division, Control Room

'F 2 1 Sub Division, Control Room

Sub Sector Chief Inspectors

Ground Control

'F'   Administration

Chief Superintendent 'A1, 'B', 'C', 'D', 'E', and CID




                                                                          1 129
                                   Document No.




         APPENDICES




Server Officers Duties

Inspectors IXities

Sector 1 (Ground) IXities

Sector 2 (Liverpool) IXities

Sector 3 (Nottincfiam Forest) IXities

Sper-men Tickets

C1Z Duties

Doc Section

Mounted Section

Adrur_istration, etc.

Traffic Control

Trams

Coaones - Liverpool and Nottingham Forst

Trcr-sit vans - Liverpool

Transit Vans - Nottingham Forest

Spcrring Events (Control of Alcohol) Act 1985
and Ground Regulations.

Cones

Route signing

Special Constabulary

Maps

Briefing «;*»»ting uirin

Scteuule of manpower
                                                                    Document No. |   9 4    CONT’D


                                Sa m   YORKSHIRE POLICE

                                       »F' DIVISION
                                                                DA1E;   6 th *cril 1989
OPERATION ORDER 'F' 1/89


                                  F A CUP - SEMI FINAL

                                HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD



                            LIVERPOOL v    H J T T D O « M FOREST

                               SATURDAY 1 5 m APRIL 1989




          ZNPOfWATION

1.1       Z-ne F.A. Cup Semi Final tie between Liverpool and Nottin^am Fores
           ? ixDtball Clubs will take place at the Sheffield Wednesday       ff
           Radium, Hillsborough, Sheffield on Saturday 15th Apnl.989, kick-off
           =:t 3.00pm. The gates allowing access tc the ground wil_ open
           1X2 <blg»s^ and admission will be granted tc ticket holders :nly.

12        1 - an effort to minimise traffic and spectactor c o n g e s t s and to
          -rraximise segregation, the stadium has been divided in accordance
           .v;ith Appendix 'S'.

1 3       Liverpool supporters have been allocated tickets for the ^est
           and Terraces and the North Stand and access will be via tne turns til
           _n Leppings Lane.

1.4       Nottingham Forest supporters have beer, allocated tlck® ^ J°L!tiles
           5:oion Kop and the South Stand and access will be via the turns til
           un Penis tone Road North and at the rear of the South Sta^i.

           Tine tickets have been colour coded and details are showr. at Appendix
1.5
           .     |




           A sterile area has been created betweer. the turnstiles £-. the rear of
1.6
           -ne South Stand and those in leppings ^ane.

1.7        no further assist in the segregation of opposing ^ P P ° ™ " ^ in the
           Tiround, tickets have been allocated tc ne,Jtr^          .            North
           football Association and Sheffield Wednesday Football C _ d ) in the Nort
           ficand^("penistone Road end) and the South Stand (lappings Lane end).


1.8        TTne routing of vehicles and spectators has
           ensure that the approach of respective
                   end of the stadiurr appropriate to their particul^ ticket.

               -xtra time will be played in the event of a draw at full-time.
1.9
               L* following extra-time, the match rerains drawn, then m e replay will
 1.10
               uake place at Manchester United Footba- Stadium.


                                                                                           1 131
                                                    Document No.   ,   q   ,   CONT’ D
                                                   - —----------- LZ-i                 J (2 ;


:.      DETENTION

        :: is the intention of the Police to allow this retch t; -.*-•* place and
        tr ensure public croer and safety both inside an<- outs*a     '      ^
        ground, to segregate and control opposing fans ana p r e v ^ unnecessary
        obstruction of the hiahway and damage to p r o p ert y. -      i-em
        and displayed with a high standardof snvirtness ana process-onalism.


3.      >CIHOD
3.1     Chief Superintendent Duckenfield will be in overall corrsrc of this
        event.

3.2     The operation will be in three phases, as follows:-

3.2.1   Phase 1      -   Before the match (1000 - 1500hrs)

3.2.2            ?   -   During the match (1500 - 1630hrs) **                      .

3.2.3   Phase 3      -   After the match (1630hrs until stand down)

        ** Subject to 30 minutes ’extra time1

3.2.4   The operation will be divided into three sectors, each c_jciich will be
         designated to a Senior Officer who will have responsible-fort
         Sector. The Sector areas are shown on the map at Appencu. S an
         Senior Officers are:-

        SECTOR                                          OFFICER

        Sector 1         (Sheffield Wednesday            Superintendent ^ e n w o d
                           footb=J-l Stadium)

        Sector 2         (Liverpool Supporters)          Superintendent fershall


        Sector 3         (Nottirrfvam Forest                                   ->-=,rnwn
                         supporters)                     Superintended _^F*nan

         Each Sector will be further divided into Sub Sector with = Zhief Inspector
3.2.5
         in charge, as shown at Appendices A(i) and A ( n )

3.2.6   Separate Operation Orders have been p^epa^ ^ y ^ ^                               t h e ^ l 00
         in respect of Policing arrangements for Sheffield City                     ,
         Motorway and the ra-tes to and from the stadium.

3.3     PRE MATCH BRIEFING

3 3 1        event is being Policed by Officers, sane of rf® . h «                         « s i ‘f u
         Sheffield Wednesday Football Stadium previously and who, ^ r e f o r e , wii
         be unfamililar witr. the ground and locality.




                                                                                             1 132
                                                    Document No.   194   CONT’D




3.4        REPORTING FDR DITTY

3 .4 . 1   All It fleers shown in the attached Appendices ••ill, unless  otherwise
            sta:ec, attend at Sh effield Wednesday Football Stad ium at 9.45am on
            Saturday 15th April 1989 and occupy a North Stand seat as identified
            in their Serial Instructions, for briefing at 10.00am prcnct.    Entry
           to trj£ stadium will be via the 'Gyimasiur Gate' in Penistone Road North.

3.4.2      On arrival, each Inspector will report to the Administration Desk
            situate inside the entrance to the gymnasia- snd will report his
            serials present.

3.4.3      Police Officers attending in their own vehicles must find their own
           parking facilities outside the football grourc.

3.4.4      The rarking facilities at Niagara Sports Ground and Claywheels Lane
           will NOT be used.

3.5        BRIEFING - MATCH CAY
3.5.1      After reporting for duty all Officers will be briefed in the North Stanc
           as tr the general requirements of the day an- will commence duties in
            accordance with the instructions of their individual Inspector.

3.5.2      Inspectors will ensure that officers under their command disperse to their
            respective places of duty with a mininur. of delay.

3.5.3      Sergeants will brief members of their respective serials as to their
            individual duties as outlined in Appendices E, C and D.

3.6        GROUP SECURITY

3.6.1      Sheffield Wednesday Football Club will be responsible for the
            overr-ight (14th/15th April 1989) security arrangements at the Ground.

3.6.2      Inmediately following briefing, two 'explosives' dogs will search the
            stadium assisted by the Serials scheduled for duty inside the ground.

3.7        CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION EEPAKPffiNT

3.7.1      Mentxers of this Department will be on duty at the ground. A manned
            CID oost will be situated in the gyimasiurr. at the ground and at Hammerton
            Road' Police Station and will deal with all complaints of crime and arrests
            for criminal offences made in connection vie. this event which do not
            require imnsdiate attention. Any such ccrpl^ints will be directed to
            whicinever of the above locations is most con»,snient.

3.7.2      In addition, teams of officers will operate ntinly on footoutside the
            ground, paying particular attention to the problem of pickpockets and
            'aut r— crime'.

3 7.3      Detective Superintendent McKay will have an cverall responsibility for
            crire and CID Operations as a whole and duties of personnel are shown
            at Aooendix 'F'.




                                                                                  1 133
                                                                       Document No. ^   CONT’D




!.8       DOG SECTION

         MerrDers of the Dog Section will mainly be used as a deterrer.: ^ fcre
         and after the rretch or the routes tc and from the stadium, =.--t e
         coach parks, transit van parks, railway station, private v j - z l e
         parking areas and escorting supporters to and from the sta:— cn.

3.8.2    They will not normally be used in public order situations b-z the
          Sector Cormonder has the overriding discretion to use dogs     • -
         circunstances where he feels a serious public order situs cr. may
         occur.

3.8.3    Duties of the Dog Section personnel are set out at Appendix                        « .

3.9      MJUWIED S E C T I O N

3.9.1    ^tenters of the Mounted Section will be employed outside the =r°un3
          to maintain order, segregate supporters and escort them fitr and
          to their transport.

3.9.2    Duties of the Mounted Section personnel are set out at Appendix 'H .

3.10     CONTROL ROCM
3.10.1   A Control Room will be established at Sheffield Wednesday -.otbaL-
          Stadium in the Police Control Box situate between the Sou^r. -nd
          West Stands.

3.10.2   S’
          jperintendent Murray will be in overall control with the
          assistance of Officers shown at Appendix ' I .

3.10.3   T->e Control Room will oversee the entire operation and will                      operate
          on both UHF and VHF channels.

3.11     T R A F F IC    CO NTRO L


3.11.1   Road Traffic Division will be responsible for traffic con,
          and will be producing a separate operational order.

3.11.2   'F' Division points are shown at Appendix 'J'.

3.12     TR AV EL       A N D   P O L IC IN G   A K R A N gM E N T S


3.12.1   The routes to the ground and designated p a r k i n g areas for =aches.
          transit vans and private vehicles are shown at Appendix -

3.12.2   ROUTE S I O O N G
           Sioninq of the routes to the ground has been arranged in cor.-unction
           with Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. In t       h      e      ^
           contingencies exist fcr detours to be urplemented by mentor- o
           Poad Traffic Motor Cycle Wing.




                                                                                                  11 3 4
                                                           D onum '"'t No.        CONT’ D
                                                                    -------19 4


 3. i2 .5     BY TRAIN - LIVERPOOL

             Ert-adly speaking, Liverpool supporters will travel on 1special1 trains
             arii alight at Wads ley Bridge Railway Station where they will walk the
             h*=_f r_Ie to the ground under Police supervision. Service trains will
             als-r be operating to Midland Railway Station and supporters using this
             service will travel by 'special' South Yorkshire Transport buses, under
             es cc— , to the Leppings Lane end of the ground where they kill alight.

 3.12.4     Details of the train arrival/departure times and duties relating
             thereto are shown at Appendix 'K'.

3.12.5      BY TR AI N - NOTTINGHAM FOREST

             Nc ttir.nham Forest supporters who travel by train will alight at Midland
             Ra_lw=y Station in the centre of Sheffield and travel the three mile
             jcumey to the ground by 'special' South Yorkshire Transport buses,
             uroer escort, and will alight on the Penistone Road North side of the
             stadi'j- .

3.12.6      Detai_= of train arrival/departure times and duties relating thereto
             are sr.^wn at Appendix 'K'.

3.12.7      B Y OQfrCH - L I V E R P O O L

             Liverpool supporters who travel by coach will be encouraged to use the
             Mel VI motorways, leaving the latter at Tankersley (Junction 36).
             IX:ties relating thereto are shown at Appendix 'L'.

3.12.8      Coaches found approaching the venue by other routes should be directed
             tc the designated parking areas and not the stadium itself.

3.12.9      Or arrival at the designated parking areas, where practicable, an officer
             will board each coach and inform the passengers of the restrictions
             irrposed by law and the Ground Regulations. Supporters will then alight
             anc wc_k to the ground under police supervision.

3.12.10     B Y OCftCH - N O T T I N G H A M F O R E S T

            Nottingham Forest supporters who travel by coach will be encouraged to
            use the Ml motorway leaving at Tinsley (Junction 34). EXities relating
            thereto are shown in the 'D' Division Operation Order.

3 .12.11    Coaches found approaching the venue by other routes should be directed
             to the designated parking areas and not the stadium itself.

3.12.12     On arrival at the designated perking areas, where practicable, an officer
            wi;i board each coach and inform the passengers of the restrictions
             irrcosec by Law and the Ground Regulations. Supporters wil_ then alight
            and walx to the ground under police supervision.

3.12.13     BY TRANSIT VAN - LIVERPOOL

            Li\"erpcol supporters who travel by transit van or similar vehicles will
            be encouraged to use the M62 /Ml motorways, leaving the latter at
            Tar_-:ersley (Junction 36). However, it is not feasible to attempt to
            channel such vehicles through one 'checkpoint' and it will be the duty
            therefore of all Serials outside the ground to check these vehicles and
            their occupants as outlined at Appendix 'M'.
                                                                                            1135
                                                                          Document No. j C| 4       CONIX1
                                                                                                     -   »   ( -




               All transit vans will be iurected to the designated par-_r.g are-e where
               supporters will alight and w a l k to the ground under polios supervision.

               BY TRANSIT VAN - NOTTINGHAM FOREST

               Nettingham Forest supporters w h o travel b y transit van cr simi.
              vehicle will be encouraged to use the Ml motorway, leaving at Tinsley
              (Junction 34). Hovever, it is not feasible to atterrpt tc chanme_
              such vehicles through one 'checkpoint' and it will be the duty, therefore,
              of all serials outside toe ground to check these vehicles and their
              occupants as outlined at Appendix 'M' .

-.12.16      All transit vans will be directed to the designated parking area where
              supporters will alight ani walk to the ground under police supervis ion.

u -12 . 17    S P O R T I N G E V E N T S (CONTROL O F A L O O H O L ) A C T 1985 - A S AM EJ CED

              A precis of the Act is shown at Appendix 'O'(i). Thv legislation will
              be strictly enforced in relation to coaches and transit vans or similar
              vehicles, as veil as persons entering or attenpting to er.ter the ground.

2 .12.18     PRIVATE VEHICLES - LIVERPOOL

              Liverpool supporters whc travel by private vehicle will be encouraged
              tc use the M62/M1 motorways leaving the latter at Tankers ley (Junction
              36 . They will proceed to the designated parking areas on the rarson
              Cross/Foxhill estates.

2.12.19      Cr. arrival at the designated parking areas, supporters will alight and
              walk to the ground under police supervision.

2.12.20      It is envisaged that traffic will also approach the stadiun via the
              Flouch (A616). There is a contingency plan should the volune of this
              tr3 -ffic be such that it is impracticable to direct it to the designated
              parking areas referred t; at paragraph 3.12.18.

2.12.21      PRIVATE VEHICLES - NJTTDOtfM FOREST

             Nottingham Forest supporters who travel by private vehicle will he
             encouraged to leave the HI motorway at Tinsley (Junction 34) anc proceed
             to the designated parking area in the Neepsend area of the city.

2.12.22      On arrival, supporters will alight and walk to the ground under police
              supervision.

2.12.23      C O A C H E S A N D T R A N S I T V A N S - R E T U R N JCXJRNEY

             Coaches and transit vans .ill not leave their designated parking areas
             until authorised to do s; by Ground Control.   The return journey for
             these vehicles will be the reverse of that on the incoming journey.

2.12.24      CdftQffiS A N D T R A N S I T V A N S - GfcNKKAL

             No coach or transit             van vill be allowed to load, unload or park — 1 any
             area other than the             designated parking areas, nor will they be a_lowed
             to use routes other             than those designated unless diverted by Pc-ice
             Officers, following             consultation with Ground Control.


                                                                                                               1 136
                                                                                I Document No. ]   9 4   CONTt'
•                                                                                                          —   '

     ■•13     :     PARKPC RESTRICTIONS

                   Parkir r c: vehicles in the irrrrediLte vicinity c: tr.e ground and on main roads
                   will 1 -; strictly controlled by use cf parking cor.-es. These will be set out
                   curir. r the early hours of the day in accordance witr. Appendices P and Q.

    3.12.26        The Erteroenrv Services have been informed of all parking restrictions/
                   arrar.7 e.tfcr.t5 .

    3.12.27       It will be the responsibility of Police Sergeant 1C2 Fidler to ensure
                   that m e s e cones are in position before 0700 hours Saturday 15th April
                   1989.

    3.12.28       No officer will allow any vehicle to park in contravention of these or
                   any c n e r restriction without seeking the authority of Ground Control.

    3.12.29        REFCV^L OF VrSTTCT.ES

                  Where a vehicle is parked in such a position as tc warrant removal, then
                  this vi 11 b= arranged by the officer concerned itrcugh Ground Control
                  follow-ng consultation with his supervisory Inspectcr. Two Brimac recovery
                  vehicles will be available to remove vehicles.

    3.12.30       Where a \"elide is parked in contravention of parking restrictions and does
                  not n-erit removal, then the driver may bedealt with in the usual manner.

    3.12.31       CAR PARKING

                  There will be limited privately operated car par.<s m the vicinity of the
                  ground. Nc assistance will be given in the operation of these ccmnercially
                  run car parks. It is intended that private vehicles will as far as
                  practicable, use the designated parking areas sncwr. at Appendix 'S'. This
                  opera lion will be carried out by members of the Special Constabulary whose
                  duties are shown at Appendix 1R 1 . Parking will b= permitted on all roads
                  where restrictions do not apply.

    3.12.32       SOLTIS Y O R K S H I R E T O M B P O R T B U S E S

                  South Yorkshire Transport w/ill operate 'special buses1 frcm Midland Railway
                  Station tc the ground. At the end of the match, buses for transportation of
                  Liverpool Suoporters back to the railway station will be parked in
                  Penisione Road North frcm Wardsend Road North tc lappings lane roundabout -
                  facir.c towards city. Buses for transportation cf Jirttingham Forest
                  supporters back to the railway station will be parked in Penistone Road
                  North outside the ground and facing towards city.

    3.12.33       The routine of the South Yorkshire Transport buses both to and fran the
                  StadiJET. is shown at Appendix 'K'.

    3.12.34       KHKKF "il'in WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB -               O F F IC IA L   CAR PARK

                  Only drivers possessing official passes will be a_icwed access to this part
                  of the ground which is situate at the rear of the South Stand. Certain
                  coaches containing F.A. and Club officials etc, wt— ^ be allowed to enter
                  the car park and drop passengers off before driving to a parking area away
                  frcm m e cround (Sheffield Wednesday Football C_ur ^raining Ground,
                  Middlewood Road).


                                                                                                                   1 137
                                           Document No.   ^4   CONT’ D




Under no circumstances will ar.y other vehic.e, other than Police
be a l i c w d arcess.

Trie cates aiving access to the South Stand Car Park will close at       ...■pl­
ane wil l not re-open until half an hour after kick-off.  This fact
beer, publicised to persons h aving legitimate access.

Club Stewards will be employed at the access points i n Lappings Lane
and Penistone Road North to control access and egress.

Vehicles owned by the television conpany providing coverage of the sane
will be permitted to park in the South Stand car park at both the
Lepcmgs Lane and Penistone Road North ends.

P A R K I N G - PO LI CE V E H I C L E S

Authorised Police vehicles will park in the car park at the rear cr trie
gymssium accessed via the 'Gymasium gate' adjacent to Gate 'O' . Lr— %
official vehicles will be allowed access and movement into and out cf the
ground must be kept to an absolute minimum.

OBSTRUCTIONS - OTHER THAN BY VEHICLES

Street Traders, Ticket 'Touts' and any other person causing obstruction
will be moved on. If they persist then they will be arrested and trrught
to the Police Room where they will be dealt with as outlined in par=rcrap--
4.1.1. to 4.1.8 (Headed 'Prisoner Process').

RAILWAY PROPERTY

Trains will carry Liverpool supporters to Waasley Bridge Station. — ese
trains and the Station will be manned by BTC Police who have the
responsibility for policing this property. Officers should only e...=_
the station for    the purpose of police duties at the invitation of,
and accompaniedby, a member of the BTC Police. This also applies r: all
otter railway property, including sidings, cuttings, lines, etc.

SHEFFTFTQ WECNESEftY FOOTBALL CLUB GROUND REGJIATIONS

A precis of the Ground Regulations is shown at Appendix     0 (ii).

Where an officer seizes property by virtue of the Ground Regulation
he vill:-

A)    Supply the person from whcrr. the article has been seized with
      his 'collar nurrtoer' .

B)    Inform that person that the item may be recovered on ccnpletior.
      of the game fran the Police Property Post at the rear of the
      Spion Kop, in the case of Nottingham Forest supporters, and the
      Police Property Post at the rear of the West Stand, in the case
      of Liverpool supporters.

C)     Affix a label to the item bearing the owners name and the offiaer=
       1Collar number'.

D)     Ensure that the item is taken to the appropriate Police Property
       Post and entered in the Property register.
                                                                       Document No.   ] g /t   CONT'D


                    *. -_ = ccr.citicr. c. e n try to tne ground th a t p e r s o n agree t i bo
                    searcnec.        kr.y te rse r, re fu s in g t c be searched will ir. breach cf   those
                    c c n c itic r.s anc vill be refu sed e n tr y .

                   LICENSED PREMISES

                   ^•ne 9^=— majority of licensees in the immediate vicinity of trie ground
                   will either close their premises completely at lunchtine and early evening
                   or operate a 'selective door’ whereby football suppcrrers are not
                   adrritte-d.

       l   5.2     It will be the responsibility of all Serials outside the ground to
                   identity those premises which remain open and to monitor the behaviour of
                   persons resortir.g thereto.

       .5 . 3     Additional attention must be given to ’Off Licence’ premises and
                  consideration given to suitably advising proprietors should excessive sales
                  of alcohol be evident.

    3.15.4       Alcohcl is not available to members of           the public inside the cround.

    3 -16        EMERGENCY AND P.’ACUATION PROCEDURES

    3.16.1       In the event cf an emergency situation arising (ie fire or barb call)
                  which ray require evacuations of all or part of the stadium, the procedure
                  outlined will be followed:

 3.16.2           Ground control will pass the following message over the P A svstem and
                  this will indicate to Police personnel that a provisional emergency and
                  evacuation procedure is in force:

                            "THE ATTENDANCE OF MR MEADOWS IS URGENTLY PZOUIRED
                            AT POLICE COOTROL."

3.16.3           Should an emergency evacuation be necessary then an cral message will be
                  passed to Police personnel via Inspectors and Serial Sergeants, giving
                  specific instruct ions as to the action to be taken.

3.16.4           In the event cf an ’all clear’ situation, the following message will be
                  passed to Police personnel indicating that the necessity for emergency
                  evacuation has oeased:

                            "MR KZADCWS IS NO LONGER REQUIRED AT POLICE CONTROL.*

3.16.5           Evacuation procedures for various parts of the stadi'jr are shewn on the
                  appropriate serial order.

4                ADMINISTRATION

4.1              PRISONER PROCESS

4.1.1            All persons arrested or detained inside the ground will be taken, in the
                  first instance, to the Police Rocm at the rear of the North Stand. Those
                  arrested outside the ground will either be taken tc the Police Roan or
                  Hamnerton Road Police Station (in the case of Nottingham Forest
                  supporters) whichever is most convenient.

4.1.2            Three vehicles will operate in the area for the sole purpose cf
                 transoortatior. cf prisoners in order that mobile units may rerain free for
                 normal duties.

                                                                                                        1 119
                                           Document No.        CONT’D




Wh er e a prisoner is taken to the Police Room, details wii- c*e obtained,
the prisoner searched, the arresting officer arid prisoner ptctographec
tooether and Form PACE 19 completed.      The arresting officer will ther.
c a r pi ete the necessary paperwork which he will hand to the Process
Supervis or in the gymnasium, which is adjacent to the Police Room.
O.ce the paperwork has been checked, it will be handed to ire Officer
it. Charge of the Police Room ano wall accompany the prisoner and his
property to the appropriate station for processing/charginc.

Where a person is arrested for a criminal offence, the prisoner will
firstly be taken by the arresting officer to the CID point ir. the
gymasium or at the station, where the officer in charge veil decide
or. zhe further course of actior..

The duties of the "Prisoner Process" teams engaged on this operation
are shown at Appendix "I".

TV; vehicles with detention facilities will be parked adjacent to the
Police Room for the retention cf prisoners and a further detention
vehicle will be parked at each cf the two Police Stations tor identic^—
purposes.

After initial process, persons detained will be transferrer to
Hamerton Road Police Station (in relation to Nottingham Forest
supporters) and Ecclesfield Police Station (in relation tc Liverpool
supporters).

Inspectors must ensure that officers in serials under their command do
net go off duty without firstly submitting the requisite paperwork.

EJECTIONS

Where circumstances are such that a person is to be ejected from the
stadium for breach of the ground regulations, then he will not be
phctographed, etc. but will be taken to the Police Room where his details
will be recorded on an 'ejection slip' for entry in the Police Room
Reccister, prior to ejection.

CO UR T APPEARANCE

Where an arrested person is charged and bailed to Court then the court
dates allocated to this operation will be strictly adhered to. On all
occasions, therefore, the staff at the Charge Office Bridge Street,
Sheffield will be consulted as to availability of dates before a
prisoner is released on bail following charge.

Provisional arrangements have been made should the number c: persons
arrested and kept in custody or the seriousness of offence;
necessitate a Special Court being convened on Monday 17th April 1989.
In the event of such criteria being net then Chief Superin .endent
Ducienfield will be informed ir. order that this contingency can be put
into operation.
                                                  Document No.   i^    C Q N T ’d | ; i ;




 4.2       MISSING/FOLKD CHILDREN

4.2.1      Reports of nssina children will be passed via telephone to Ground Control
            in order that the necessary' action can be taken.

4.2.2      Any child un: has become separated from his parent 'guardian will be
            taken to the gymnasium at the rear of the North Stand. Ground control
            will then be informed via telephone in order that the required action
            can be taker..

4.3        FOUND PROPEFTy


4.3.1      All found propertywill   be taken to theAdministration     Desk in the gyrmasiu
           and the register completed.

4.4        UNIFORM

4.4.1      .All South YorkshirePolice   Officers will wear fulluniform, including
            helmet (witr. chin strap down) and gloves. Anoraks will be worn in
            inclement wither. Female officers should wear trousers and not
            skirts.

4.5        TRANSPORT - POLICE P E R S O M E L


4.5.1      Officers arriving in police transport will alight at Gate 'O’ in
           Penistone Road North and driversof vehicles already ncrinated for use
           during the pzlice operation will report to Inspector Scarfe at that
           location. That Officer will give direction as tc relocation of
           vehicles. Ir. completion of the game and dispersal of the crowd,
           drivers will report to the Traffic Administration Desk in the
           cymnasium tc collect the vehicle keys in readiness for the return
           journey.

4.5.2      Police vehicles which are not taken into use during this operation
           will be par>sd at the Road Traffic Division preirises at Claywheels
           lane, follor-ing consultation with the officer in charge of those
           cremises. *^=vs for such vehicles will be handed m to the logistics
           officer at that location.

4.6        REFRESHMENTS

4.6.1      Two reals (cne hot) will be provided and these will be distributed
           at mealing locations prior to the allocated meal times.

4.6.2      Refreshments will be taken as indicated on the individual serial
           crder at the venues stated.

4 .7       WAPS

4   7 _i   >iaps of the Ground and surrounding area are included in this order
            at Appendix 'S'.




                                                                                    1141
                                        Document No. ] ^   fi   CONT'D




OPERATIONAL ORCER - DISTRIBLTTICM

7rJ.s Operational Order will be issued to Inspectors and above.
A Serial Order will be distributed to all Sergeants.

P R E S S A N D PUBL ICI TY

Publicity has been given to traffic routes and parking arrangements
for the event by the Football Liaison Officer and Press Liaison
department.

All comnents concerning the event and replies to enquiries from
the media will be handled by Chief Superintendent Djckenfield
cr through the Press Liaison Office which is under the control of
Superintendent Pratt.

CCMPLATNTS

Any complaints against the Police will be dealt with in accordance
vith Force Standing Order 5S. Corrplainants who approach Police
Ifficers engaged on this operation will be directed to the Officer
shown at Appendix 'I '. Complaints received at Hanmertor. Road Police
station and Ecclesfield Police Station will be dealt with by the
Duty Inspector.

OHLINI CATIONS

All communications relevant to the event will be directed through
Ground Control.

Trie following UHF/VHF channels will be utilised in relation to this
operation:-

 A)   UHF personal radio channel 25 will be used by all
supervisory officers, both inside and outside the grounc.

 B)   UHF personal radio channel 19 will be used by all CID
oersonnel engaged on duties in the Parson Cross and Neepsend
private parking areas.

 C)     VHF radio channel 1 will be used by mobile patrols.

'FI' Sub Division's operational functions will continue to be
transmitted on UHF personal radio channel 35.

Personal radios will be issued at the Administration Desk in the
cvmnasium to all supervisory officers.

Strict radio discipline will be maintained at all times. Messages
rust be kept as short as possible and, where this is not the case,
Ground Control has the overriding option of cutting short any
transmission, irrespective of rank.

Ground Control can also be contacted on internal extension 3277.
                                                           Document No.   9 A   CONT’D




                 VICEO CAMERAS

                 Ir. addition tc the static cameras sited at the Footsa— rtadium,
                 "E-TDers of the 'Jnderwater Search Unit will be opera tir.g = hand-held
                 •."dec caTera tc monitor the arrival and departure of surcorters.
                 j -ina the match they will operate inside the stadiu".

4.13            CVERTPE

4.13.1          All overtime claims will be submitted to supervisors- officers and
                '.ill be clearly narked "SEMI FINAL - LIVERPOOL v N0C7IN3iAM FOREST".

4.14             REPORTING OF F DOTY

4.14.1           It will be the responsibility of individual Inspectors .o report
                 the whole of their Serials off duty, account for any nerDer not
                 nresent and ensure that all radios are returned. He vi_l also
                 submit the de-criefmg form previously supplied to        Serials
                 1-2-1 will repcrt off-duty at the Gymnasium. Serials 22-64 will
                 report off-duty at Claywheels Lane.

4.12.2           Authorisation will be sought via Ground Control before £ny Serial
                 is 'stood dowr.'.




CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT

'F' D I V I S I O K




                                                                                           I
                                                              Document No.   194       CONT’D


                                                                  APTOPPC *A(i)1


                                S O O O R OFFICERS DUTIES



 Qxief Inspectors and above will NOT use a call sign but will be identified
 by their rvme and rank.


 CWERALL GCHftND                                  Chief Superintendent Duckenf ield

                                                  Liaison - Inspector Sewell
                                                            Call Sian India 26
 grjjnd   QCMTRQL                                 Superintendent Murray


 Sector 1 (feound)                                Superintendent Greenwood
 Sector 1A                                        Chief Inspector Beal

 Serials 1-10

 Sector IB                                        Chief Inspector Crsaser

Serials 11-19

Reserve Serials 20/21


sector    TWD (LIVERPOOL)                         Superintendent Marshall
Sector 2A                                        Chief Inspector Waring

Serials 22-33 and 44, 46, 47 & 48

Sector 7b                                        Chief Inspector Purdy

Serials 34-51 excluding 44, 46, 47 & 48


SECTOR THRBE ( N O m w a t t M FOREST)           Superintendent Chaman

Sector 3A                                        Chief Inspector Sumer

Serials 52-56

Sector 3B                                        Chief Inspector Price

Serials 57-64




                                                                                 1 44
                                                                                   ]
                                                         Document No.   19 4     CONT’D

                                                               APPENDIX 'Adi)'



                                   INSPECTORS




 g g r o R 1A - CHIEF INSPECTOR BEAL

                                                                          Call Sicyi
 Sub Sector 1         (Serials 1-3)       Inspector Darling 'F'           India 1
 Sub Sector 2        (Serials 4-6)        Inspector Harvey 'H£>'          India 2
 Sub Sector 3        (Serials 7-8)        Inspector Calvert 'HD'          India 3
Sub Sector A         (Serials 9-10)       Inspector Booth 'E'             India A




SBCTOR K B ) - CHIEF INSPECTOR CREASER



Sub Sector 5         (Serials 11-12)      Inspector Woodward 'F'          India f
Sub Sector 6         (Serial 13)          Inspector Bullas 'H3 '          India c
Sub Sector 7        (Serials 14-15)      Inspector White 'F'              India 7
Sub Sector 8        (Serials 16-19)      Inspector   Sykes 'F'           India    EA
                                         Inspector   Purdy 'Trg'         India    £
Sub Sector 9        (Serials 20-21)      Inspector   Delaney 'F'         India    5A
                                         Inspector   Beresford           India    SS




                                                                               11 4 5
                                                              Document No.    194   CONT’D

                                                                         APPENDIX 'Adi)'




  INSPECTORS (POMT'D)


  SECTOR ^      - QiLfcJ PfcHaj-jyjK WARING ILIVERPOOL)

                                                                               Call Sign

 Sub Sector 10              (Serials 22-25)    Inspector Hinphries 'A'         India 10
 Sub Sector 11              (Serials 26-29)    Inspector Selwood 'E'           India 11
 Sub Sector 12             (Serials 30-33)     Inspector Millett 'A'           India 12




 SECTOR 2B - CHIEF INSPECTOR PURDT (LIVERPOOL)


Sub Sector 13              (Serials 34/35)    Inspector Townend 'A'            India 13
Sub Sector 14              (Serials 36-38)    Inspector Ellis 'C'              India 14
Sub Sector 15              (Serials 39/40)
                                                         ( W <          .
                                              Inspector Bponnaa «■€ '          India 15
Sub Sector 16              (Serials 41-43)    Inspector Broanhead 'C'          India 16




OJftCH I B C E P n O W   SEARCH SQUADS

Sub Sector 17              (Serial 44)        Inspector Wardle 'E'            India 17
                                                                 ^ ScjL
Sub Sector 18             (Serial 45)         Inspector th rtcn *6 *          India 18



H3BILE UNITS

Sub Sector 19             (Serials 46-48)     Inspector Walker 'Ops'          India 19

Sub Sector 20             (Serials 49-51)     Inspector Robinscr. 'HO'        India 20




                                                                                 1146
                                                                Document No.   J   94   CONT’D


                                                                   APPPCIX 1A( il)•



       DSPtU'llJRS (QCKT'D)



      SEglty. 3A - Q t m   PBHdu-mR S I M O (NOTTDOiAM FOREST)


                                                                                   Call Sicyi
      Sub Sector 21
                            (Serials 52/53)     Inspector Charles 'C'              India 21
      Sub Sector 22         (Serials 54-56)    Inspector Newey 'C'                 India 22




     SBCTOk a   - Qim      INSPECTOR PRICE - NOTTPCHAM FOREST



     Sub Sector 23         (Serials 57/58)     Inspector Batenan 'C'               India 23
     Sub Sector 24         (Serials 59/60)     Inspector Burgess 'C'               Indie 24




    M3BII£ H O T S




    Sub Sector 25          (Serials 61-64)    Inspector Wallace 'E'            India 25




    LIAISOK
                                              Inspector Sewell ’F'             Indie 26

    AEMINISTRATICrj                           Inspector Bennett *F'            Indie 27


    TRANSIT ALIflCflTION/RESERVE SERIALS/
    OQftOi SUPERVISION
                                              Inspector Scarfe 'Traffic'       India 28




#



                                                                                    1 147
                                                                        Document No. ] 9 4    CONT’D

                                                                               APPENDIX *B*
                                       SUB SECTOR 1
                                                                           Inspector   Darling
                                       PERPCTCR TRACK

           PS 454 Chapman  'F'         R a s e s 1 and 2 (Before and during natch)
       1) PC 1669 Walpole
       2) PC 3151 htersden             TVenty Police Constables - perimeter track (Equidistant
       3) PC 2988 Burkinshaw           spread around ground). The Sergeant will remair. in the
      4) PC 417 Illinghworth           vicinity of the player's tunnel throughout this duty and
      5) PC 1285 Smith                 the Officers on the track will follow- his exanple by
      6 ) PC 446 Groane                standing and facing the crowd at the following times
      7) PC 2348 Hanson               Before kick-off, half-time and full-tine and also during
      8 ) PC 700 Helliwell
                                      any stoppage of play or when there is any’ crowd unrest.
      9) PC 442 Cuckson               This will be indicated during the game and shortly before
    10) PC 2046 Holmes
                                      half and full-time by the sergeant leaving the player's
      11) PC 1247 Street              tunnel and standing near the touch line. Particular
    12) PC 1842 Brookes
                                      attention should be paid to prevent any person climbing
    13) PC 2801 Wilson                the fence to gain aooess to the ground. The gates
    14) PC 1402 Lamb
                                      nust remain bolted at all times except «hen in use.
    15) PC 2387 Collins               N3 ONE IS TO BE ALLOWED ACCESS TO THE TRACK FR O ' 7KF
^ U 6 ) PC 814 Finnegan               i*j<KACKS WITHOUT COtSENT OF A SENIOR OFFICER fFy-Kpr
^ 1 7 ) PC 3034 Richardson            TO RECEIVE MEDICAL A m N i i Q N ) -------------- '------
   18) PC 759 Bradshaw
   19) PC 1977 Farthing               R a s e 3 (After match)
   20) PC 1079 Croot (Tmg)
                                      As the ground clears. Officers of this serial will remain
                                      in location until instructed otherwise.
            Meal - staggered
            before match in gym.      Bnerqency Evacuation Procedure

            SEATING FOR BRIEFING     In the event of such a situation arisin- (indicc.ed at
            AS PER PLAN (ATTACHED)   item 3.16 in the Serial instruction). PC's at either end
            APPENDIX 'T'
                                     of the ground will take up positions at the fencE gates.
                                     These gates will only be opened if a specific nessage
                                     to evacuate is given on the public address systec.



                                     SOUTH STAND LOWER H X E L

9           Serial 2                 R a s e 1 (Before match)
           PS   2358 Cox      *F'
      1)   PC   2051 Jackson         A) 2 PC's will be located behind turnstiles 19-22 to
     2)    PC   1302 Pitt            ensure persons entering these premises do not possess
     3)    PC   1926 McGuinness      items prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc.,
     4)    PC   172 Sinpson          weapons or missiles) or alcohol.
     5)    PC   3235 Roberts         B) 2PC's will be situated behind turnstiles 33-3£ to
     6)    PC   341 Hall             ensure items shown above are not brought into the ground.
     7)    PC   157 West
     8)    PC   495 Pursley          C) Remaining PC's will patrol rear of terraces tc
     9)    PC   448 Turner           maintain order.
    10)    PC   2417 Rotchell        R a s e 2 (During match)

           PS 2425 Hemmingway        All officers will be located at the rear of terraces
                                     and maintain order.as. required.
           MEAL: Staggered           R a s e 3 (After match)
           during match in Gym .



•
                                     This serial will take ip a position in front of-these
           SEATING FOR BRIEFING      terraces on the perimeter track to prewect a pitch invasion/
           AS PER PLAN ATTACHED      or ensure the safety of the match officials and players.
           APPENDIX 'T'
                                                                Document No.   \ 94     CONT’ D



                               SOUTH STAND U P P E R L EVEL

       Serial 3                Phase 1 (Before Ma t c h )

      PS 577 Gez              A ) 2 P C 's will be situated at the rear zf turnstiles
  1)  PC 60 Gof               23-28 to ensure persons entering these prHnises
  2 ) PC 70 Whitelev          do not possess items prohibited by the arrund rules
   3) PC 591 Tuns             (Banners, etc., weapons or missiles) or aljohol.
  4) PC 1317 Bennert
  5) PC 1340 CtddRes          B) Tw d PC's will be -situated behind tumrdles 29-32
  6 ) PC 1584 Collier         to ensure items shown above are not brouart into the
  7) PC 1949 Strrev           ground.
  8 ) PC 1962 r>-'rc.
  9) PC 2817 H_d5 or          C) Remaining PC's will patrol the stand rmcourse to
 10) PC 3341                  maintain order.

                              Riase 2 (During match)
       rO -W 7   j_LLlS'_L_

        ft 2 ? ^ T L o        Officers will be located at the entrances to the stand
                              to maintain order as required.

                              Riase 3 (After watch)

                              Remain until stand clears of all supporters.


    MEAL - Stampered
    during rretrr.            EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURES
    In Gym
                              In the event of such a situation arising Indicated at
    Seating far briefing
as per plan arrazhec          3.16 in the serial instructions) PC's ir. the upper
Appendix 'T*                  level of the South Stand will take up positions at the
                              internal partition gates and ensure they sre open.
                              Those on duty on the lower level will ensue that exit
                              gates at either end of the stand are oper.

                              Further instructions will be as directed ry control
                              or passed over the public address system.

                              Officers will be nominated for individual points
                              at the start of this duty.




                                                                                      1 i 49
                                                                  Document No. |   94   CONT’D

                                SUB SECTOR 2
                                                                  Inspector Harvey
W               4               scum STAND CAR PARK (Penistone Road end)
      PS 266 Jakes     •£•      ftaase 1 (Before match)
    1) PC 302 Skidmore
   2) PC 723 Whittaker-        A) 2 PC's will be located at the players entrance to
  3) PC 385 Walker             maintain order, ensure the safe entry of the teams and
   4) PC 203 Baines            officials and prevent access by unauthorised persons in
   5) PC 2679 Astin            conjunction with the Club's staff.
   6 ) PC 1200 Woodward
                               B) 2 PC’s will supervise queues at turnstiles 29-36 and
   7) PC 2621 Wood
                               prevent items prohibited by the ground rules (Barriers,
   8 ) PC 1412 McCloucrilin
                               etc., weapons or missiles) or alcohol being carried into
   9) PC 3334 Dudley"          the ground.
 10) PC 242 Childs
                               C) 4 PC's to patrol in the area between the gates and the
                               players entrance (in pairs) to maintain order.
                               D) 2 PC's will assist club staff between the gates at
                               Penis tone Road to prevent unauthorised access by vehicles.
                               These gates will close for vehicle access from 2.D0txn to
                               3.3Djxn.
                               Raase 2 (During match)

                               Remain on patrol in car park as above and prevent entry
                               into this area by supporters without tickets. Cover whole
                                  car park after half time when Serial 5 are mealing.
     MEAL
                               R a s e 3 (After match)
     & tf§mkick- ° «
                               Remain in this area until crowd clears, prevent movehent by
    Seating for brieiing as    vehicles until all spectators on foot have left the area.
    per plan attached
    (Appendix 'T*)
     Serial 5
                              SOUIH STAND CAR PARK (Leppings   Lane end)
     PS 1084 Hodgett   'E     Rjase 1 (Before match)
 1 ) PC 596 Smith
 2 ) PC 933 Botley            A) 3 PC's will supervise queues at turnsti l e 23-28 to
  3) PC 499 Cartwricnt        ensure persons entering these premises do not possess items
      PC 769 Mutch            as above.
*     PC 3131 Lewis
                              B) 3 PC's supervise queues at turnstiles 19-22 to prevent
  6 ) PC 851 Wicken
                              items shown above being carried onto the ground.
  7) PC 1535 Fairela_»gh
  8 ) PC 2512 Craigey         C) 4 PC's to patrol in the vicinity of the television
  9) PC 1564 Mace             control vehicles to ensure their security.
1 0 ) PC 1177 Davis
                              R a s e 2 (During match)

                              Renain cm patrol in the car park as above and prevent entry
                              into this area of supporters without tickets. Prior to half
                              time this serial has responsibility for the «hole of the
                              car park whilst Serial 4 are mealing.
    Seating for brie*ing
    as per plan attached      Ehase 3 (After match)
    (Appendix 'T*)            This serial will be located in the area between the official
                              car park and the exit from the enclosure at the rear of the
    MEAL
                              West Stand to prevent Liverpool supporters entering the
    After half time           Official car park and supporters who are leaving the South
    in gym.                   Stand from exiting other than via Penistone Road. This w i n
                              be in conjunction with other serials and Haunted Dept.




                                                                                   1 1 50
                                                                          Document No. 1 9 4   CONT’D




                                        SOirm STAND CAR PARK (Barriers)

       PS 729 NcrDurn            'E'   Fhase 1 (Before matcfa)
 1 ) PC 28 Dre»~_tt
 2 ) PC 2818 tershall                  ITiis serial will supervise the barriers to be erected
 3)   PC   861 W a l w o r t h         at either end of the roadway between turnstiles A-G
 4)   PC   3217 Allen                  at Leppings Lane and the start of the South Stand car
 5)   PC   3162 Fe=srs                 park.
 6)   PC   1159 Lcnr
 D    PC   142 Larxr                   They will prevent access to this area by all Liverpool
 8)   PC   99 Coe                      supporters and any other persons without legit irate
 9)   PC   515 Caa«cwp l1              reasons (i.e. with tickets) from entering.
10)   PC   1828 Me-calfe
                                       Vehicles will be prevented from entering the car park
                                       from Leppings Lane.

                                       Fhase 2 (During match)

                                       4 PC's vail remain in this area throughout the natch
                                       to supervise barriers and prevent access.

                                       Riase 3 (After match)

      Seating frrr briefing            Ensure barriers remain in position and opposing fans
      as per plan attached             do not come into contact.Renain until area clears of
      (Appendix ’T')                   all supporters.

      MEAL
      Meal stanpsred                   B nerqency E vacuation Procedure
      during gams
      in gym                           In the event of such a situation arising (indicated
                                       at 3.16 of the serial instructions) Officers on duty ir.
                                       the car park will ensure that access gates at Leppings
                                       Lane and Penistone Road are clear and unobstructed and
                                       no vehicles - except emergency services - move.




                                                                                          1 151
                                                                          Document No.    ]   94   CONT’D


                                     SUB SECTOR 3

          Serial 7                                                    Inspector Calvert
                                     SPIGN KGP TERRACES

                                     Fhase 1 and 2 (Before and during matr-h)
      PS 752 Batty 'E'
   1) PC 815 fiogJioi                PC's will be located at the entrances to the Spion Kop
  2) PC 1103 Edwards                 terraces in pairs to maintain order and ensure that these
  3) PC 1782 Tenple                  entrances remain clear at all times.
  A) PC 264 Hirst
  5) PC 2748 Abrahams               In the event of Liverpool Supporters gaining entry into
  6 ) PC 734 Thornton               this end of the ground they will be contained at the
  7) PC 1183 West                   extreme southern part of the terraces at the rear of Gate
  B) PC 2080 Nettlesiiip            1 to await transference under escort to their own area
  9) PC 841 Gillett                 « C E R HD CIRCUMSTANCES will any supporters be transferred
 10) PC 2321 Williamson             fran these terraces to other parts of the grand via the
                                    perimeter track.

         MEAL: After kick off       R a s e 3 (A fte r m atch)
         in gym.
                                    Remain in ground until these terraces are c l**-*- of all
                                    supporters.
^ e a t i n g for briefing
  as per plan attached
   (Appendix'T1)
         Serial 8                   REAR OF SPION KOP TERRACES
          PS    1203 Marples *E'    Fhase 1 (B efo re m atch)
 1)      PC    411 Bellamy
 2   )   PC    41 Warms ley        A ) 2 PC's vail     be located behind turnstiles 37-42 (Located
  3)     PC    2975 Woodcock       in official car     park) to ensure persons entering these
 4)      PC    1123 Thornhill      premises do not     possess items prohibited by tte ground
 5)      PC    145 Tew             rules (Banners,     etc., weapons, missiles) or alcohol.
 ■6 )    PC    3122 Andrews        B) Regaining officers will be at rear of turnstiles
 7)      PC    265 Fletcher        situated on Penistone Road 43-76 to ensure that items as
 B)      PC    1267 Lougher        shown above are not brought into the ground.
 B)      PC    3200 Grey
 D)      PC    2656 Yardy          Fhase 2 (D uring m atch)

                                   This serial will remain on patrol in the rear cf the
         ting for briefing         Spion Kop terraces to prevent unauthorised access and


r        per plan attached
         (Appendix 'T')
                                   ensure security of kiosks, etc.

                                   Itaase 3 (A fte r m atch)

                                   This serial will take up a position in front of the Spior.
                                   Kop on the perimeter track to prevent a pitch invasion/
     MEAL: After half time         ensure the safety of match officials and players.
     in gym.
                                   Bnerqency E vacu ation Procedure

                                   In the event of such a situation arising     (indicated at
                                   3.16 in the serial instruction) PC's on       Serial 8 will
                                   ensure all exit gates are open. Further      instructions
                                   will be as directed by control either by     radio or the put lie
                                   address system.




                                                                                                            I

                                                                                              1152          I
                                                                    Document No,   ] 94     CONT’D

                                   SUB SECTOR 4
                                                                      Inspector Booth
£         Ser^al 9                 PSGSTONE ROAD TURNSTILES

           PS    767 Jessop 'E'    Fhase 1 (B efore match)
      1)    PC   2016 liasides
     2)    PC    2768 Goddard     This serial will be responsible for turnstiles 43-54.
     3)    PC    1478 Capes       They will ensure persons entering these prerises do not
     4)    PC    3303 Slack       possess items prohibited by the ground rules (Banners,
     5)    PC    3289 Sutcliffe   etc., weapons, missiles) or alcohol. They will also
     6)    PC    173 Holland      maintain order and ensure orderly queues are formed. This
     7)    PC    338 McKay        will be done in conjunction with Mounted Officers
     8)    PC    2785 Lowe        are on duty at this location.
     9)    PC    190 Firth
    10)    PC    884 Welsh        Fhase 2 (D uring match)

                                  This serial will be located at Entrance 'Z' to the Spion
                                  Kop.

 Seating for briefing             Fhase 3 (A fte r match)
 as per plan attached (Anp T)
^}MEAL: After                     At the ccrmencement of Phase 3 this serial vill leave the
   half time                      ground and supervise loading of SYT buses ir. Penistone
   in gym                         Road.




         S e r ia l 10            PENISTONE ROAD TORNSTHJES

          PS   1080 Hoyland       Fhase 1 (B efore match)
    1)    PC   3142 Webb
    2)    PC   2197 Laverack      This serial will be responsible for turnstiles 55-64.
    3)    PC   892 Stokes         They will ensure persons entering these prerises do not
    4)    PC   1644 Gagg          possess items as shown above. They will also maintain
A         PC   2190 Harris        order and ensure orderly queues are formed. This will
    6)    PC   227 West           be done in conjunction with Mounted Officers who are
    7)    PC   949 Dowling        on duty in this location.
    8)    PC   2097 Cousins
 9)       PC   328 F’roggatt      Fhase 2 (D uring match)
10)       PC   588 Thompson
                                  This serial will be located at Entrance 'Y' to the Spion
                                  Kop.
Seating for briefing
as per plan attached              Fhase 3 (A fte r match)
(Appendix 'T')
                                  At the coranencement of Phase 3, this serial will leave
     MEAL: After                  the ground and supervise loading of SYT buses in
     kick off                     Penistone Road.
     in gym.




                                                                                          1 i 53
                                                              Document No.   j 94    CONT’D



•
                                SUB SECTOR 5
                                                              Inspector fcnAarf
      Serial 11                 HPKIH SPtfO - UPPER LEVEL
     PS 2279 Edwards     *E'    Phase 1 (B efore match)
 1 ■ ®C
        1074 Tickett
 2 :    2857 Turner            A) Six PC's will be located in the area a: the rear of
 -  ; PC   873 Oakes           turnstiles 1-8 (Leppings Lane end) to ens_r= tret the
 a : PC    1529 Frienc
 c ■ PC                        fans entering the ground are not in possession cf items
           2571 Titters an     prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, ezz., weapons,
 £ PC      2409 Larkir.        missiles) or alcohol.
  4 , PC   2209 Brohpy
 E PC      1847 Bungay
 C ; PC
                               B) 4 PC's and 1 Sergeant will patrol on tre irper
           1479 Wroe           level concourse to maintain order, paying particular
1C 1 PC    1506 Marsh          attention to refreshment bars.
j*   PC 3116 Ellis
                               Fhase 2 (During match)

                               All Officers will be located on the upper ronccr_znse
                               to maintain order, paying special attentio: tc
                               refreshment bars as trouble wan experience; hers last
                               year.

                               Fhase 3 (A fter m atch)

                               At the oarrmencement of Phase 3 (Ten minutes befcxe
                               end of game) All the serial will take up position at
     MEAL: After               the upper concourse exit gate (Top of rant tc
     kick off                  Penistone Road to prevent supporters leavna enf
     in gym.                   entering Penistone Road.    ALL SUPPORTERS H3ST BE
                               DIRECTED TO I£PPINGS LAN? EXIT.




                                                                                    1 154
                                                         Document No. j   94   CONT’D


                                NORTH STAND - LOWER LEVEL
        Serial 12
                                Fhase 1 (Before match)
       PS 455 McCall *F2'
       PC 463 Miller •£'        A) 2 PC's will be located at the rear of Gate 'O'
   1)
  2)   PC 1615 Griffiths *      (Penistone Road) to assist the stewards and prevent
                                unauthorised access.
  3)  PC 414 Lodge 'FI'
  4)  PC 2554 Hague 'FI'
  5)  PC 2683 Nield •FI'       B) 2 PC's will be located at the gate to the car
  6)  PC 384 Roach 'FI 1       park at the rear of the gyrmasiun (Penistone Road)
  7)  PC 3292 White *F1'       to assist the stewards and prevent ur-vjthorised
                               access.
  8 ) PC 688 Sheerier.1F2 1
  9) PC 1054 Haywooc *D'
1 0 ) PC 3102 Thonas *D'       C) 2 PC's will be located at the rear of turnstiles
                               73-88 in Penistone Road to ensure persons entering
                               are not in possession of articles prohibited by the
                               ground rules i.e. banners, weapons, missiles or
                               alcohol.

                               D) 4 Remaining PC's will patrol lower level
^ e a ting for briefing as     concourse of North Stand paying particular attention
                               to refreshment bars.
 per plan attached (See
 Appendix 'T')
                               Phase 2 (During match)

                               A) 2 PC's to remain at Gate 'O' for duties outlined
                               above.

                               B) 2 PC's to remain at car park for duties outlined
                               above.

                               C) 6 Remaining PC's will patrol concourse in pairs,
                               paying particular attention to refreshment bars.

                               fhase 3 (After match)

                              At the ccrrmencement of Phase 3 (10 minutes before end of
                              game) all the serial will take up position at lower
                              concourse exit gates to Penistone Road to prevent
                              supporters leaving and entering Penistone Road.

                              ALL SUPPORTERS MUST BE DIRECTED TO 1£PPINGS LANE EXIT
 JEAL: After
 half time
 111 ^ Tn‘                    Bnengency Evacuation Pimwrhires

                              In the event of such a situation arising, PC's located
                              at the gates at the end of each level giving access
                              to ramps leading to Penistone Road will ensure these
                              are open.

                              Officers will also take up positions at exit gates in
                              Penistone Road and Leppings Lane to ensure these are
                              open.
                              Further instructions will be as directed by control
                              or passed over the public address system.
                              Officers will be nominated for individual points
                              at the start of this duty.



                                                                               1 155
                                                           Document No.   j   94   CONT’D


                                  SUB SECTOR 6
                                                             Inspector Builas
         Serial 13                WEST STAND

       ?S 2001 Burner. 'E '       Fhase 1 (Before match)
 1   } PC 2592 Shimwell
   ->> PT 3088 Coupland
                                  A) 2 PC's will be located at the North entrance
  3;      1494 Naylor             gates to this stand to assist stewards in
  4 ’ PC 298 Scholey
                                  supervising entry and virere necessary preventing
  5: PC 2167 Frost
                                  entry of unauthorised persons.
  6: PC 360 Schofield
  7)      3170 Fairclough         B) 2 PC's will be located at the South entrance
  8 ) PC 1618 Shearwood
                                  gates to this stand to assist stewards in
  9; ?C 10 Mercer
                                  supervising entry and where necessary preventing
10} PC 2717 Savoury               entry of unauthorised persons.
11) PC 928 Parkin
1 2 ; PC 1423 Newbolc
                                  C) 2 PC's will patrol the concourse/bar area
                                  to maintain order.

                                 D) 6 PC's will be located at the front of the
                                 Stare to prevent missiles being thrown/Stand tickets
                                 being dropped to the terraces below or persons
                                 clirrbing from the terraces to the stand arc to
Seeting for briefing             maintain order.
as per plan attached
(Appendix 'T')                   Fhase 2 (During natch)

                                 PC's vill be located at the entrances to the stand
                                 to maintain order.

                                 Fhase 3 (After match)

                                 Remain in stand until clear.

  H=al: After kick off in gym
  » s n relieved b y Serial 16   EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURE

                                 In the event of such a situation arising indicated
                                 at 3.16 in the serial order. PC's will take up
                                 positions at the emergency exits at the extreme
                                 front co m e r s of the stand and ensure the gates
                                 are unlocked. Other officers will take u? positions
                                 at the entrance steps to the stand and agair.
                                 ensure the gates are open.

                                 Further instructions will be as directed by control
                                 or passed over the public address systeir.

                                 Officer's will be nominated for individual prints
                                 at the start of this duty.




                                                                                   1 I 56
                                                                   Document No. ] 9 4    CONT’D

                                        SUB SECTOR 7
                                                                     Inspector Itiite

                                        ISPPINGS LANE TERRACE AH) REAR ENCLCSOre (SOMH)
      PS 1341 Crawford 'B'              R a s e 1 (Before match)
   1) PC 2887 Grant
   2) PC 2819 McManus
                                       This serial will ensure that supporters entering
   3) PC 136 SnallirBrt
                                       through turnstiles A-G do not enter in possession of
   4) PC 1777 Brans tar.
                                       items prohibited by the ground rules (banners, etc.,
  5) PC 2806 Butler
                                       weapons, missiles) or alcohol.
  6 ) PC 75 Coy
  7) PC 1002 Wild
                                       They will also ensure order is neintained on the
  8 ) PC 975 Washington                terraces.
  9) PC 1964 Sewell
 10) PC 3232 Burton
                                       Fhase 2 (During match)

                                       This serial will be located in the central tunnel
    Seating for briefing as
                                       to the Leppings Lane terraces to maintain order as
    Per plsn attached (Appendix'T')    required.
£     MEAL:
                                       Fhase 3 (After natch)
      After kick off
      in gym
                                       Supervise exit of supporters into Leppings Lane.




      Serial 15
                                       LEPPINGS XAtC TERRACE *H) REAR BCLOSDRE (NORTH)
    PS 1757 B u m s *B*                Fhase 1 (Before   match)
 1) PC 2342 Beard
 2) PC 1543 Aitkin                    This serial will ensure that supporters enterina
 3) PC 107 Carling                    through turnstiles 9-16 do not enter in possession of
 4) PC 853 Burke                      items prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc.,
 5) PC 2191 Llewellyn                 weapons, missiles or alcohol). They will also ensure
 6) PC 2654 Richardscxi               order is maintained on the terraces.
 7) PC 78 Booth
J)  PC 1675 Rich                      Fhase 2 (During match)
    PC2364 Ford
                                      This serial will be located in the tunnel to the
10) PC 2605 Webster
                                      North Pen in the Leppings Lane terraces, to maintain
                                      order as required.
                                      Fhase 3 (After match)
     MEAL:
                                      Supervise exit of supporters into Leppings Lane.
     In gym
     after half-tire
                                      EMERGENCY EVACUATION FpnrarffRE
     Seating for briefinc
     as per plan attached             In the event of such a situation arising indicated
     (Appendix 'TV)                   at 3.16 in the serial order, PC's will take up
                                      positions at the exit gates and ensure they are open.

                                      Further instructions will be as directed by control
                                      or passed over the public address system.

                                      Officers will be nominated for individual points at
                                      the start of this duty.




                                                                                        1 157
                                                           Document No.   1 94   CONT’D

                               SUB SECTOR 8
                                                           Inspector Sykes/Inspector Purdy
       Serial 16              IgPPINGS IANE TURWBTTrg:
         PS 1288 Payne ’E'
                              Fhase 1 (Before natch)
     1) ?: 3066 Huckstep
     2 ) p i 2980 Wright
    3) PZ 1715 Best           This serial will   be responsible for turnstiles A-G.
    4) PZ 115 Huckstep        They will ensure   that persons entering do not possess
    5) PZ 259 Coney           items prohibited   by the ground rules (banners, etc.,
    6)                        weapons missiles   or alcohol). They will maintain
             607 Taylor
    7) PZ 963 Evans           order and ensure   orderly queues are formed.
    8) PZ 620 Yates
                              Riase 2 (During natch)
    9) PZ 2496 West
  1 0 ) PZ 2076 Cerrone
                              This serial will be located in the fcest Stard and
                              relieve Serial 13.

                              Phase 3 (After natch)
     ^£AL: In gyrr.
                              At the oannencement of Phase 3, this serial will
     ci-er half tine
                              leave the ground and take up a position in leppings
                              lane opposite the turnstiles to aweit exit cf
     Seating for briefing
                              supporters and prevent disorder.
     ®= per plan attached
     *
     ,Jopendix 'T')




     Serial 17               L EPP P G S IANE TURNSTILES
    PS 468 Whitlarr 'F 2 '
                             Phase 1 (Before natch)
   1) FC •2913 Qaklanc
  2 ) PZ 2933 Wadsworth
                             This serial will be responsible for turnstiles 1-8.
      PZ 3027 Tagg           They will ensure that persons entering do net possess
      PZ 393 Pulfrey         items prohibited by the ground rules (as abcve).
  5) PZ 809 Elson
                             They will maintain order and ensure that orderly
. 6 ) PZ 880 Whit ton
                             queues are formed.
  7) PZ 16 Wilson
  8 ) PZ ■43 Kirkby          Phase 2 (During natch)
  9) PZ €02 Moore
1 0 ) PZ 346 Thorpsor.
                             This serial will be located in the central tunnel
                             to the Leppings Lane terraces.

Seating for briefing         Phase 3 (After natch)
as per plan attached
(See Appendix 'T' }          At the commencement of Phase 3, this serial vill
                             leave the ground and take up a position in Leppings
                             Lane opposite the turnstiles to await exit cf
          In Gym             supporters and prevent disorder.
    after half time




                                                                                             i


                                                                                 I 158       i
                                                                 Document No.   1 94   CONT’D



        Serial 18                     U5PPJNGS LANE TURNSTILES

         PS    758 Morgan. *F'        Fhase 1 (Before match)
    1)   PC   2961 Jenkinson 'F2'
    2)   PC   3118 Crookes            This serial will be responsible for turnstiles 9-16.
    3)   PC   1639 McIntosh           They will ensure that persons entering do not possess
   4)    PC   1171 Horsfield          items prohibited by the ground rules (banners, etc.,
   5)    PC   513 Francis             weapons, missiles or alcohol). They will maintain
   6)    PC   159 Marsh               order and ensure orderly queues are formed.
   7)    PC   1834 Scholev
   8)    PC   2172 Prince             Fhase 2 (During match)
   9)    PC   2960 Alexander
  10)    PC   3342 Blount 'F I '     This serial will be located in the tunnel to the
                                     North pen.

                                     Fhase 3 (After match)

                                     At the camencement of Phase 3, this Serial will
                                     leave the ground and take up a position in Leppings
                                     lane opposite the turnstiles to await exit of
       MEAL: In gym                  supporters and prevent disorder.
       after kick off

  Seating for briefing as
  per plan attachec (Appendix *T')



   Serial 19                         LEPPINGS LAW! TURNSTILES

        PS   323 Proctor ’F'         R a s e 1 (Before match)
 1)     PC   611 Booth
 2)     PC   2963 Singh              This serial will be located at Leppings Lane and
 3)     PC   1124 Pratt              ensure that orderly queues form. They will assist
 4)     PC   2902 Roberts            other serials at this location as required and in
 5)     PC   3249 Jackson            the event of vehicles, coaches, arriving, supervise
        PC   2333 English            their unloading.
^P)     PC   276 Robinson
  8)    PC   2530 Lockley            Fhase 2 (During match)
  9)    PC   3135 B u m l e s s
 10)    PC   776 Glaves              This serial will remain outside the turnstiles until
                                     half time before taking refreshments.

                                     Riase 3 (After match)

                                     At the cormencement of Phase 3 this serial will leave
   MEAL: In gym                      the ground and take up a position at Leppings Lane
   after half time                   roundabout and assist serials 30 and 31 in naintaining
                                     segregation of supporters at that location.
 Seating for briefing as
 per plan attachec (Appendix •T’)




                                                                                   1 159
                                                                   Document No.   ]   94   CONT’D
                                          SIB SECTOR 9
                                                                Inspector Delaney 'F C4V ’
                                                                Inspector Beresford 'E C4V’

     Serial 2C                        GROUND RESERVES
          PS   10££ Higgins
     1)   PC   2O'-1 Brayfore         Riase 1 (Before match)
    2)    PC   139z C^odwill
    3)    PC   2551 Billings          This serial will act as a Reserve Serial and remair.
    4)    PC   2E~2 Whitelar          within the gymnasium unless directed otherwise.
    5)    PC   56T Sal way
    6)    PC   2492 Webster           Fhase 2 (During match)
    7)    PC   22EI Barker
    8)    PC   6&4 !orton             As above
    9)    PC   722 Gee
   10)    PC   276c Jtoore            R a s e 3 (After natch)

   To have Transit available          This serial will take up a position in front of the
                                      North stand on the perimeter track to prevent a
    MEAL: After kick cff in           pitch invasion/ensure the safety of natch officials
                                      and players.
  } Seating f — briefing
    as per pL^~ attached (Appendix •T’)




    Serial 21                         GROUND RESERVES

                                      Riase 1 (Before match)
    PS    2607 Ea±ison 'E C&V'
 1) PC    1141 Scnth                  This serial will act as a reserve serial and
 2) PC    2064 Fe^Lxclough            remain in the area adjacent to the Police
 3) PC    2130 Frrst                  control box between the South stand and
 4) PC    2304 C n o k e s            Leppings Lane terraces.
 5) PC    2507 fclkes
 6) PC    2577 Tewdck                 Riase 2 (During match)
 J^PC     2330 K~l.lsmer
 ^PPC     2372 J-«st;ice              As above
 9) PC    2435 Griffiths
10) PC    1040 Duffy                  R a s e 3 (After match)

To have Trans - 1 available          This serial will take up a position in front of
                                     the West Stand on the perimeter track to
                                     prevent a pitch invasion/ensure the safety of
   MEAL: Aftsr half t±me             match officials and players.
   in gym.

   Seating fcr briefing
   as per pLsr attached
   (Appendix *T')




                                                                                           1 160
                                                                    Document No. * 9 4    CONT’D

                                                                           APFQCDC »c»
                                        SUB SECTOR IQ
                                                                   Inspector   Hurphries
    Serial 22
                                        PIBLIC ORDER - MD3QUEHOQO HCftD

         PS    1544 Hodgitts   'A1'     Fhase 1 (Before watch)
   1)    PC   354 Clarke
   2)   PC    2966 Cosgrove
                                        PC’s will patrol in pairs in Middlewood Road from
  3)    PC    1390 Mussett
                                        Wads ley Lane to Croft on Avenue to maintain order and
  4)    PC    2667 Finnerty
  5)    PC    3194 Beech                prevent any clash of supporters. Direct supporters
                                        to side street parking and maintain security of
  6)    PC    3160 Johnson
  7)    PC    2739 Long                 business premises, paying special attention to
                                        local public houses and shops.
  8)    PC    3337 ttxupson
                                       Fhase 2 (During watch)

                                       Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Clayviieels Lane
                                       once authorised by match control.

                                       Fhase 3 (After match)

                                       tti camencement of Phase 3, this serial will resune
                                       patrol in location as above. Paying particular
 Seating for briefing as
                                       attention to shops and supermarkets and prevent
 per plan attachec (See
                                       any clash of supporters.
 Appendix "I" )

                                       »muinnnnai»tt




 Serial 23
                                      PIBLIC ORDER - MTBOLEHOOD RQAD

    PS 2305 Lanas *A1'                R a s e 1 (Before watch)
 1) PC 1698 Martin
2) PC 703 Thornton
                                      PC's will patrol in pairs in Middlewood Road fran
3) PC 2862 Tlaylor
                                      Wads ley Lane to Minto Road to maintain order anc
    PC 2158 Cran
#   PC 1889 Brant
6) PC 2993 Nugent
7) PC 4 69 Shaw
                                      prevent any clash of supporters. Direct supporters
                                      to side street parking and maintain security of
                                      business premises, paying special attention to
                                      local public houses and shops.
8) PC 1758 Winfield
                                      Fhase 2 (During watch)

                                      Refreshments at Claywheels Lane, onoe authorised by
Seating for briefing as               match control.
per plan attached (See
Appendix 'T')                         Riase 3 (After watch)

                                      On canrmencement of Phase 3, this serial will resjre
                                      patrol in location as above, payinc particular
                                      attention to shops and prevent any clash of
                                      supporters.




                                                                                         1 161
                                                                     Document No.   ^ ^^   CONT’D




         Serial 24
                                       PIBLIC CREER - MEDOLEHOOD ROAD

     PS    1628 Dclar 'A1'             Fhase 1 (Before watch)
  1) PC    2508 K i i r ^ l l
  2) PC    1837 Brronsbew              PC's will patrol in pairs in Middlewood Road fror
  3) PC    905 Butl=r                  Minto Road to Hillsborough Precinct to naintain crder
  4) PC    2205 Vfcr-f                 and prevent any clash of supporters, peying special
  5 ) PC 1741 S&^-tr.                  attention to shops and in particular licensed
  6) PC 3011 Clift or.                 premises.
  7) PC 1760 Smri-r
  8) PC 552 Harrs.-ome                 R a s e 2 (During natch)

                                      Refreshments in gymnasium when authorised by
  Seating for t r ^ f i n g as per    match control.
       attachec See Appendix
                                      R a s e 3 (After watch)

                                      Oi ccmnencement of Phase 3, this serial will res\re
                                      patrol in location as above, paying special attention
                                      to shops and lioensed premises and prevent any
                                      clash of supporters.




    Serial 25
                                     PIBLIC ORDER - MLLSBOROUOi PRECINCT

    PS   2640   Perry 'Ai'           Riase 1 (Before natch)
 1) PC   2800   Sims
2) PC    2225   Purris               PC's will patrol in pairs in Middlewood Road iron,
3) PC    3216   S~ ~                 Hillsborough Precinct to Bradfield Road and from
4 )£-    2909   Kilr                 Bradfield Road to the Old Blue Ball Public House.
5 )^R    1351   Rrr-— - g ^          Patrols will also be required in the Hillsborough
6) PC    2537   Girsoi "             Precinct, paying special attention to the
7) PC    3077   Weec=                supermarkets where looting could take place.
8) PC    1091   Foster
                                     Riase 2 (During watch)

                                     Refreshments at gymnasium when authorised by
Seating for h— =fing as per          match control.
plan attachec See Appendix 'T')
                                     R a s e 3 (After watch)

                                     fti cormencement of Phase 3, this serial will resire
                                     patrol in location as above, paying particular
                                     attention to shops and to prevent any clash of
                                     supporters.




                                                                                      1 162
                                                            Document No.   1 9 4 CONT’D

                                SUB SECTOR 11
                                                         Inspector Sp.lwood   'E'
      Serial 26                 PUBLIC ORDER - PARKSIEE RCftD/CATCHBAR UtfC
      PS   2620 Cropley 'A1'    Fhase 1 (Before natch)
 1)   PC   1442 Charters
 2)   PC   1431 Jackscr.        PC's will patrol in pairs in Parkside Road and
 3)   PC   1882 Rirmer          Catchbar Lane to maintain order and prevent any clash
 4)   PC   1734 Foster          of rival supporters, paying special attention to
 5)   PC   1789 Flatmar.        shops and licensed premises. It is essential that
 6)   PC   184 Geeson           vigilance is naintained on this road as it is the
 7)   PC   2872 Harriett        main route between either end of the ground.
 8)   PC   2354 Plunridae
                 idVL           Fhase 2 (During match)

                                Join the S.Y. Police coach in Leppings Lane near to
                                Catchbar Lane for standby duties until half time when
                                you will be taken to Claywheels Lane for meal.

                                Fhase 3 (After match)
^Seating for briefing as per
"plan attached (See Appendix   fti cormsncement of Phase 3. this serial will resume
 •T')
                               patrol in location as above, paying special attention
                               to prevent any clash of rival supporters, bearing in
                               mind that Hillsboroucft Park (Parks ide Road end) will
                               be used as a car park.




     Serial 27                 PUBLIC ORDER - PENISTONE RCftD/IEPPIMS IANE

     PS   1684 Mozley *A1      Fhase 1 (Before match)
1)   PC   2054 Wilkes
2)   PC   2752 Jowitt          This serial will be responsible for manning the barriers
3)   PC   2584 Musk            to be placed at the mouths of the following roads to
4)   PC   1432 Wright          prevent access by supporters. It is essential that
5)   PC   2526 Ayres           access be prevented to all but residents. At similar
6)   PC   2042 Drury           events in the past considerable damage has been caused
 )   PC   598 Stubbins         by groups of supporters, both before, during and after
 )   PC   2711 Pattison        the game:-
                               1)   Penistone Road North/Vere Road
Seating for briefing as per    2)   Penistone Road North/Fielding Road
plan attached (See Appendix    3)   Leppings Lane/Vere Road
'T')                           4)   Leppings Lane/Fielding Road
                               ihase 2 (During match)

                               Remain at locations given above to prevent supporters
                               who are unable to enter the ground gaining access to
                               these roads.

                               Fhase 3 (After match)

MEALS: IXiring match           Remain until all crowds have cleared and consent to
staggered at ClaytAeels        remove the barriers is given by Sector Inspector. It
Lane to ensure cover for       is essential that no vehicles be allowed into Leppings
points in Phase 2.             Lane until all supporters have cleared the area.




                                                                              I 163
                                                                 Document No,   j 94   CONT’D


^ ^erial 28                       PIBLIC OREER - PENISTONE IPftD/LEPPDCS LffC
                                  Riase 1   (Before match')
       PS   2400 Wilson rA I '
  1)   PC   2127 Smart            This serial will be responsible for marring the barriers
 2)    PC   2846 Smith            to be placed at the mouths of the following roads to
 3)    PC   761 Richards          prevent any supporters gaining access. It is essential
 4)    PC   1620 Pattiscc         that access be prevented to all but residents. At
 5)    PC   40 Tomlinson          similar events in the past, considerable damage has been
 6)    PC   373 Harbon            caused by groups of supporters before before, during
 7)    PC   2399 Wren             and after the game:-
 8)    PC   2644 Roberts         1)   Penistone Road North/Bickerton Road
                                 2)   Leppings Lane/Bickerton Road
                                 3)   Leppings Lane/Leake Road
                                 4)   Leppings Lane/Famdale Road

                                 Riase 2 (During natch)

 Seating for brief irir as per   Remain at locations given to prevent supporters who
      attached (See appendix     are unable to enter the ground gaining access to these
                                 roads.

                                 Riase 3 (After match)

 MEALS: Staggered during         Remain until all crowds have cleared anc consent to
 match at Claywhee_L= Lane       remove barriers is given by the Sector Inspector. It
 to ensure cover frr points      is essential that no vehicles be allowec into Leppings
 in Riase 2.                     Lane until all supporters have cleared tie area.




 Serial 29                       PIBLIC DRIER - LEPPINGS LANE

   PS   1561 Reynolds 'A 2 '     Riase 1 (Before match)
1) PC   3145 Puntor.
2) PC   1169 Kerr                This serial will be responsible for iranring the barriers
^LPC    114 Bradley              to be placed at the mouths of the following roads to
<9PC    2668 Fletcher-           prevent access by supporters
5) PC   214 Coulsor.
6) PC   2915 Severn              1)   Leppings Lane/Shenstone Road
7) PC   2840 Pearson             2)   Leppings Lane /Eskdale Road
8) PC   1280 Hedridoe
                                 2 PC's on each road.
                                 The reiraining PC's will patrol Leppings lane in pairs
Seating for briefing as          to maintain order and prevent persons arriving at the
per plan attachec See            ground in coaches unloading.
Appendix 'T')
                                 Riase 2 (During natch)

                                 Remain at locations given above to prevent supporters
                                 who are unable to enter the ground gaining access to
                                 the roads and to maintain order.

                                 Riase 3 (After natch)

tfi|LS: During nerrh             Remain until all crowds have cleared anc consent to
SRggered at Claywaeels           remove barriers is given by Sector Inspector. It is
Lane to ensure can=r             essential that no vehicles be allowed i n o Leppings
for points in Phsse 2            Lane until all supporters have cleared the area.


                                                                                 1 164
                                                                   Document No.   I 94    CONT’D

                                 SUB SECTOR 12
    'Serial 30                                               Inspector Millett 'A'
                                 FIBLIC ORLKk - IEFPDCS LANE KUCftBOlff
        PS 2627 Ashton *A2'      Phase 1 (Before match)
        PC 1417 McDonald
       PC 2967 Frost
                                 Hiis serial will be located at the roundabout at the
       K 900 Dawson
                                 junction of Leppings Lane/Penis tone Road North/He rries
       PC 243 Landers
                                Roan. They will ensure that Liverpool supporters who
       PC 631 Kitson
                                travel down Halifax Road/Penis tone Road North from the
       PC 174 Welch             motorway do not gain access to Herries Road or that
       PC 2804 MeFar Ians
                                part of Penistone Road leading to the Spier. Kpp. They
       PC 2905 Greatorex
                                will a lso ensure that Nottingham Forest supoorters
                                whose vehicles will be parked in Herries Road and
                                Fenistone Road do not gain access to Leppings Lane
                                or Penistone Road North.

                                Fhase 2 (During match)

                                Joir. the S.Y. Police coach in Leppings Lane near to
                                Catchbar lane for standby duties until half-time when
                                you will be taken to Claywheels Lane for meal.

                                Fhase 3 (After match)

 seating for briefing as per    location as in Phase 1 to ensure that supporters leaving
      attached (See Appendix    the ground do not come into contact.


                                ******



Serial 31
                                PIBLIC ORCER - UEPPINGS L M C BOUtCftBOUT

    PS 2881 Pears or. 'A 2 '   Fhase 1 (Before match)
- ) PC 235 Blackhar
-) PC 919 Evans                This serial will have similar responsibilities as
2 ) PC 2735 Wcide
                               outlined in the serial above in relation tc segregation
    PC 1900 Kent
f   PC 139 Iangley
- ) PC 1239 RaybouLs
  ) PC 1934 Smith
                               of supporters before the match but will al^-. have
                               responsibility for ensuring that the traffic island
                               remains clear of traffic to allow convoys cf Liverpool
                               supporters coaches to round it to gain access to their
: ) PC 2359 Woodcock           designated unloading/parking places. Unless directed
                               otherwise, they will prevent such coaches aeining access
                               to Leppings Lane.
Seating for briefing as
per plan attached (See         Fhase 2 (During match)
Appendix 'T')
                               Joir. the S.Y. Police coach in Leppings Lane near to
                               Catchbar Lane for standby duties until half-time
                               vrtier. you will be taken to Claywheels Lane for meal.

                               Fhase 3 (After match)

                               At the end of the match they will prevent *~l traffic
                               travelling into Leppings Lane and that pert of Penistone
                               Road leading from the ground until directed to allow
                               traffic to flow again by control.




                                                                                  1 165
                                                                Document No. j   94    CONT’D


     Serial 32                 HJBLIC   ORDER PATROL   - PEHLSTONE ROM) NDKPi

      PS   1295 Potts *A3'     Phase 1 (Before match)
1)    PC   2895 Thcras
2)    PC   2103 Frost          This serial will be responsible for part of Penistone
3)    PC   831 Wright          Road North from the traffic island at the junctionwith
4)    PC   2298 Cooper         Leppings Lane to the Travellers Rest Public House.
5)    PC   3110 Edwards        This road will be extensively used by Liverpool
6)    PC   201 Olney           supporters en route from Wads ley Bridge Station and
7)    PC   1968 Tams           coach parking areas in Claywheels Lane and Penistone
8)    PC   3087 Kennan         Road North/Halifax Road. They will maintain order
                               and ensure that supporters do not possess items prohibite
                               by the ground rules (Banners, etc., missiles, weapons
Seating for briefing as        or alcohol).
per plan attached (See
Appendix *T')                  A) 2 PC's will be located at the top of Niagara Road
                               to prevent access into this road by football supporters
                               or any other unauthorised persons who tries to gain
                               access to the Niagara Sports Ground.

                               B) Remaining officers will be located on static points
                               at the kerb edge or, if necessary, on the central
                               reservation (dependant on the volure of traffic) to
                               ensure public order.

                               Fhase 2 (During match)

                               Join the S.Y. Police coach in Leppings Lane near to
                               Catchbar Lane for standby duties until half-time when
                               you will be taken to Clayvteels Lane for meal.

                               Riase   3 (After match)

                               Officers will be situated in locations as given for
                               Phase 1.




^feerial 33                    PUBLIC ORDER PATROL - FBCSICHB HOAD I Q O H

                               Riase 1 (Before match)
     PS    2228   Atkin *A3'
1)   PC    2576   McEwan       This serial will be responsible for the part of
2)   PC    1858   Griffin      Penistone Road North from the Travellers Rest Public
3)   PC    3282   Peacock      House to Wardsend Road North. This road will be
4)   PC    2922   Denton       extensively used by Liverpool supporters en route from
5)   PC    2689   Lacey        Wads ley Bridge Station and coach parking areas in
6)   PC    2063   Stevenson    Halifax Road. They will maintain order and ensure that
7)   PC    2091   Highton.     supporters do not possess items prohibited by the ground
8)   PC    2749   Allen        rules (banners, etc., weapons, missiles or alcohol).
                               Officers will be located on static points at the kerb
                               edge or on the central reservation (dependant on volume
Seating for briefing as        of traffic) to ensure public order.
per plan attached ' See        Fhase 2 (During match)
Appendix 'T')
                               Officers will join the S.Y. Police coach in Leppings Lane
                               near to Catchbar Lane for standby duties until half time
                               when you will be taken to Claywheels Lane for meal.
                               Phase 3 (After match)                                  1i66

                               Officers will be situated in the locations as given for
                               Phase 1.
                                                          Document No. 1 9 4           CONT’D
                                                          —              '»>in Mw—a—




                               SOB SECTOR 13

                                                                Inspector i b n e n d *A
     Serial 34                 OQftCB RECEPTION - CLAYWH^LS IjtfE
     P2   2248 Sherratt 'A3'   R a s e 1 (Before Match)
1)   PC   506 Gant
2)   PC   1232 Hood            This serial will supervise the unloading cf
3)   PC   2718 Ward            Liverpool coaches in Claywheels Lane. PC's
4)   PC   2055 Dorrtison       will ensure that supporters leaving the
5)   P2   2375 Turner          coaches do not possess items prohibited by the
6)   PC   2586 Bra--           ground rules (banners, etc, weapons, missiles
7)   PC   779 Wheatley         or alcohol). Once Claywheels Lane is full,
8)   PC   3234 Cobt            this Serial will be re-located and assist
                               Serials 39 and 40 in Halifax Road.

                               R a s e 2 (During match)

                               Refreshments at Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept.
                               At half time will be picked up by South
   :ting for briefing as       Yor.cshire Itolice coach and taken to Leppirsgs
per plan attached (See         Lane near to Catchbar Lane for standby caries.
Appendix 'T')
                               R a s e 3 (After match)

                               Supervise loading of supporters onto ooaches.




                                                                           1 I 67
                                                         Document No.   19 4   CONT’D




     Serial 35                      OQftCB RECEPTION - CLAYWBEELS UtfC

                                    Fhase 1 (Before natch)
     PS   2936 Lindtop 'A3'
1)   PC   2527 Dewey               This serial will supervise ihe unloading of
2)   PC   106 Goss                 Liverpool coaches in Clayvreels lane. PC's
3)   PC   1130 Binns               will ensure that supporters leaving the
4)   PC   130 Parkir.              coaches do not possess iters prohibited by the
5)   PC   1320 Wilson              ground rules (banners, weapons, missiles or
6)   PC   1923 Stanifbrth          alcohol). Once Claywheels lane is full, this
7)   PC   2848 Robinson            Serial will be re-located ana assist Serials
8)   PC   796 Muir                 39 and 40 in Halifax Road.

                                   Fhase 2 (During match)

                                   Refreshments at Claywheels lane. At half tire
                                   will be picked up by the Sorrh Yorkshire
                                   Police coach and taken tc Leppir.gs lane near
Seating for briefing as per plan   to Catchbar Lane for standry duties.
attached (See Appendix 'T')
                                   Fhase 3 (After match)

                                   At the ocrmencement of Phase 3, this Serial
                                   will take up a position az leppings Lane
                                   roundabout and assist Serials 3Z and 31 in
                                   maintaining segregation of supporters at that
                                   location. Once the bulk cf supporters have
                                   passed this Serial will jcir. Serial 34 in
                                   Claywheels Lane to assist Kith coach loading
                                   duties.




                                   NOTE:

                                   Claywheels Lane will be sjr^ect to "No
                                   Parking" cones for its full length to allow
                                   Liverpool's coaches to par* - *i w « k m u s t BE
                                   ENFORCED. Barriers will a',sc be available to
                                   prevent access fran Penis*:cne Road.

                                   Access must be allowed for persons working at
                                   the various premises inclixvng the brewery and
                                   bakery which will be open on this day.
                                                                      Document No, 1   94    CONT’D


                                        SUB SECTOR 14
                                                              Inspector   Ellis *C*


     Serial 36                          PUBLIC ORDER - TRAIN RBCEFTICN/WADSIBr STATION
          PS   182? Tzsnoe 'C           Phase -I (Before watch)
     1)   PC   2402 ?fcrtar.
     2)   PC   13 fcse                  This serial will vrork in conjunction with Mounted
     3)   PC   72 L:                    Officers to supervise Liverpool supporters leaving
     4)   PC   3185 Uroek               the trains at feds ley Station. They will marshall
     5)   PC   3044 lannell             the supporters and only allow then to leave when all
     6)   PC   1429 Beshfarth           have left the station premises. Where necessary,
     7)   PC   2910 lanmock             searches will be carried out to ensure that items
     8)   PC   1266 A s h e a d         prohibited by the ground rules i.e. banners, missiles.
                                        weapons or aloohol, are not in their possession.

                                        Fhase 2 (During watch)

                                        Refreshments at Claywheels Lane.
#                                       At half-time will be picked up by the Police coach
    Seating for m e f i n g             and taken to Leppings Lane near to Catchbar Lane
    as per plsc 5^ tached               for standby duties.
    (See Appeniix ’T* )
                                        Fhase 3 (After ■etch)

                                        Resune location at Wads ley Station to ensure order
                                        is maintained and queues form in a proper manner.




    Serial 37                           PUBLIC ORDER - W D S L E Y STATION/TRAIN RECEPTION

          PS   2407 -*enables     •C'   Riase 1 (Before Match)
•     >   PC   451 Crepe r
    2)    PC   2969 Iixin               This serial will work in conjunction with Mounted
    3)    PC   1675 Ixfiey              Officers to supervise Liverpool supporters leaving
    4)    PC   3291 Schofield           the trains at fcadsley Station. They will marshall
    5)    PC   2547 iamsden             the supporters and only allow them to leave when
    6)    PC   2929 Eennett             all have left the station premises, there necessary,
    7)    PC   260 «5rr;.nman           searches will be carried out to ensure that supporters
    8)    PC   211 s----kley            are not in possession of items prohibited by the
                                        ground rules i.e. banners, wsapons, missiles or alccrnJ.

                                        This serial will WOT escort supporters to the ground
                                        but remain static at this location.
    Seating far briefing as
    per plan a reached (See             Fhase 2 (During retch)
    Appendix '7
                                        Refreshments at Claywheels Lane.
                                        At half time will be picked up by the Police coach
                                        and taken to Leppings Lane near to Catchbar Lane
                                        for standby duties.

                                        Fhase 3 (After watch)

                                        Resume location at Wads ley Station to ensure order is
                                        maintained and queues are formed in a proper^ nja
                                                             Document No. j 9 4 CONT’D




 Serial 38                      MINI BUS RECEPTION -r H A R D T O P ROM) I C R M

     PS   182 'rissington 'C'   R a s e 1 (Before match)
1)   PC   3136 Sher b u m
2)   PC   3212 Nesbit           This serial will supervise the unloading of Liverpool
3)   PC   1779 Williamson       mini buses in Wardsend Road North. PC's will ensure
4)   PC   1981 Butler           that supporters leaving the coaches dc not possess
5)   PC   2790 Yarrov           items prohibited by the ground rules (banners, etc.,
6)   PC   1917 Cooke            weapons, missiles or alcohol).
7)   PC   1477 Hill
8)   PC   1723 Bishop           Fhase 2 (During natch)

                                Refreshments at Claywheels lane.
                                At half-time will be picked up by the SY Police
                                coach and taken to Leppings Lane near to Catchbar
                                lane for standby duties.

                                Fhase 3 (After match)

Seating for briefing as         Take up a position with Serial 20 infront of the
per plan attachec (See          North Stand on the perimeter track to prevent a
Appendix 'T')                   pitch invasion/ensure the safety of match officials
                                and players .


                                NCHE;-

                                Uiis road will be subject to 'No Pdrking' cones
                                and only mini buses, etc. will be allowed to
                                park. Barriers will also be available for
                                erection at the entrance to this road to control
                                entry.
                                                   Document No.   1 9 4 CONT’D




                               SIB SECTOR 15
                                                                     OW c     HQ
                                                         Inspector   Mammon
       Serial 3S               OQftJB RBCCTTIOW - HALIFAX ROftD

       PS   2332 Z>?vle 'C'    Fhase 1 (Before match)
  1)   PC   2662 S-:p 1
 2)    PC   2560 =s='1        This serial vill supervise the unloading of
 3)    PC   1927 Tsylor       Liverpool coaches in Halifax Road/Penistone
 4)    PC   2775 irvsr        Road North. PC's will ensure that supporters
 5)    PC   126     '         leaving the coaches do not possess items
 6)    PC   578 fovley        prohibited by the ground rules le banners,
 7)    PC   14                missiles, weapons or alcohol.
 8)    PC   535 fc-i
                              Fhase 2 (Daring match)

                              Refreshments at Claywheels Lane.
 Seating far briefing as
 per plan er3.-eied (See      Riase 3 (After match)
 Appendix '7'
                              Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches.


                              ************


     Serial 4:                COftCH RECEPTION - HALIFAX RQAD

                              Riase 1 and 2 (Before match and during match)
     PS   965 Cl~>ke 'C'
1)   PC   2056 lz_ster        Duties will be identical to and worked in
2)   PC   3311 Eaker          conjunction with Serial 39 above.
3)   PC   1961 Zawzence
4)   PC   1149 ?*ash          Riase 3 (After match)
5)   PC   282 Eevis
6)   PC   3150 fersh          At the cannencement of Phase 3, this Serial
7)   PC   233E fessell        will take up a position at Leppings Lane
8)   PC   903 Pearson         roundabout and assist Serials 30 and 31 in
                              maintaining segregation of supporters at that
                              location. Once the bulk of supporters have
                              passed this Serial will join Serial 39 and
                              assist with coach loading duties.

Seating for briefing as
per plan attached (See
Appendix *7* 1
                                                     Document No.   |   94   CONT’ D


                            SUB SECTOR 16
                                                Inspector     Brocahead 'C'

Serial 41                   PUBLIC ORDER - HALIFAX HQftD

     PS   842 Hudson 'C     Fhase 1 (Before match)
1)   PC   2153 Ekw_±>iri
2)   PC   2763 Ley          This serial will patrol Halifax Road from Wadsley
3)   PC   635 Gathercole    Station to Southey Greer. Road. Officers will work
4)   PC   3176 Gilrour      in pairs to neintain order, etc.
5)   PC   443 Stillings
6)   PC   1779 Wats-on      Fhase 2 (During match)
7)   PC   864 Stonarh
8)   PC   3128 Devlin       Join SY Police coach in Penistone Foad North
                            near to SWPC Gate ’O' for standby Cities until
                            half-time when will be taken to Claywheels Lane
                            for meal.

Seating for briefing as     Riase 3 (After match)
per plan attacned (See
Appendix 'T' )              Patrol location outlined above.



Serial 42                   PUBLIC ORDER - HALIFAX BOM)

     PS   2171 Keeran 'C'   Riase 1 (Before match)
1)   PC   2466 Cared ine
2)   PC   1348 Breeze       This serial will patrol Halifax Road from Southey
3)   PC   1925 Suter        Green Road to Browning Road. Offerers will work
4)   PC   104 Bovill        in pairs to maintain order, etc.
5)   PC   2458 Mour.tford
6)   PC   179 Sykes         Riase 2 (During match)
7)   PC   3149 Wilkinson
8)   PC   3020 Osbourne     Refreshments at Traffic Dept., CLeywiieels I^ne.

                            Riase 3 (After match)

Seating for briefing        Patrol location outlined above.
as per plan attached (See
Appendix 'T'

S p -r ia l 43              PUBLIC ORDER - HALIFAX BOM)

     PS   1253 Graven 'C'   This serial will patrol Halifax Road fran Browning
1)   PC   2940 House        Road to Deerlands Avenue. Officers will work in
2)   PC   2626 Harris       pairs to maintain order, etc.
3)   PC   3101 Hirst
4)   PC   2515 Smith        Riase 2 (During match)
5)   PC   314 McCoy
6)   PC   725 Whittingham   Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Clsywheels Lane.
7)   PC   1170 Dransfield
8)   PC   80 Collar         Fhase 3 (After match)

Seating for briefing as     Patrol location outlined above.
per plan attached (See
Appendix 'T')

                            NOHE: These officers will ensure that Liverpool
                            supporters travelling in private cars are directed
                            to park in side roads on adjoining estates.

                                                                         1 172
                                                             Document No.   1 94    CONT’D


                                    SUB SECTOR 17
                                                        Inspector   Hardle *E'


 Serial 44                          PUBLIC ORCER - O Q M H RECEPTION/SEARCH SQUAD

       PS    1515 Hu<£*== 'F2'     Riase 1 (Before match)
  1)   PC   1042 Braacork 'A11
  2)   PC   710 Adans     'Al1     This serial will work in conjunction vith Road
  3)   PC   2371 Bairr^jw Al       Traffic Officers on the A616 at Oughtiiridge on
 4)    PC   2216 Hii:--- Al        the one-way system to check at randar coaches and
 5)    PC   2932 Brac__ey Al       mini buses carrying Liverpool supporters.
 6)    PC   3323 Ducter- Al
 7)    PC   1484 Coll—     Al      Vehicles stopped will be checked to ersure
 8)    PC   1845 Zutrt- TieId Al   passengers are in possession of tickets, are not
 9)    PC   1729 Sudcvr-th Al      under the influence of alcohol or in possession
10)    PC   2778 Price Al          of alcohol and are considered fit to attend this
                                   event.

                                   Where this is not the case, or where they are
                                   in possession of alcohol or under it’s influence
                                   cons* deration should be taken regarding action
                                   under the appropriate legislation or returning
                                   them to the motorway.
Seating for briefing as
per plan attache! (SEE             All coaches /mini buses checked will teve a
Appendix 'T')                      label,issued to sector comranders, affixed to
                                   the windscreen prior to than being allowed to
                                   leave.

                                   Fhase 2 (During natch)

                                   Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Clayv*eels Lane.

                                   Fhase 3 (After natch)

                                   At the end of the match this serial will join
                                   Serials 19, 30 and 31 at Leppings Lane traffic
                                   island to assist vith the segregation of
                                   supporters.




                                                                                    1 173
                                                             Document No.   |   94   CONT’D


                               SUB SECTOR 18
                                                         Inspector Mwfcan *E*


 Serial 45                     PUBLIC ORDER - OOftCH RECEPTION/SEARCH S J R D - Tinkers Le>

       PS   960 Murray 'F2'    Fhase 1 (Before match)
  1)   PC   2431 Jones A2
 2)    PC   2500 Redgard A2    T^iis serial will work in conjunction       Road Traffic
  3)   PC   1218 Glover A2     Officers on the A61 on the Sheffield si3= of the
 4)    PC   2520 Hicking       Tankers ley rrotorway junction (Exit 36) zz check at
 5)    PC   3203 Crapper A2    random coaches and mini buses carrying Liverpool
 6)    PC   1629 Rogan A2      sxcporters.
 7)    PC   811 Holmes A2
 8)    PC   2350 Peckover A2   Vehicles stopped will be checked to ensure passengers
 9)    PC   297 Barnes A2      are in possession of tickets, not under the influence
10)    PC   571 Hare A2        of alcohol or in possession of alcohol 2 nd are
                               considered fit to attend this event.

                               Where this is not the case, or where trey are in
                               possession of alcohol or under it's influence,
                               consideration should be taken regarding art ion
                               under the appropriate legislation or returning
                               them to the rrotorway.
Seating foe briefing as
per plan attached (See         All coaches/mini buses checked will have a label
Appendix 'T')                  (issued to sector contenders) affixed ~ the
                               windscreen prior to than being allowed tr leave.

                               R a s e 2 (During match)

                               Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Clayvrtie=ls Lane
                               end then return to Tankers ley for stanfry duties
                               with a view to deployment as a mobile m i t .

                               R a s e 3 (After match)

                               Rerain in Tankers ley as a mobile unit.




                                                                                     1 1 74
                                                                  Document No.    j ^      CONT’D


                                       SIB SECTOR 19
                                                          Inspector Walter       'Ops'

     Serial 46                        K E I 1 £ PATROL - CALL SIGN "TANGO d T

          PS   1347 Hunt 'F2 ’        Riase 1 (Before match)
     1)   PC   1363 Smyk
     2)   PC   3089 Warrt_l£*»-       This serial will patrol the Stockstndge area
     3)   PC   3168 Trior             paying particular attention to licensed premises
     4)   PC   2041 Hone              and to maintain order.
     5)   PC   782 Hems**zrth
                                      Riase 2 (During match)

                                      Refreshments at Claywbeels Lane 3.1zEn-3.45pm.
                                      Resune patrol 3.45pr..

                                      Riase 3 (After match)

    Seating for brisfing as per       Patrol in area as outlined in Phase I.
    plan attached (See Appendix
•   'T*)


    Serial 47                         M3BILE PATROL - CALL SIGN "TANGO TIC*

          PS   681 Hill 'F2 1         Riase 1 (Before match)
    1)    PC   583 Davis
    2)    PC   2378 Webster           This serial will patrol the Deepcar Ought ibridge
    3)    PC   844 Rees               area, paying particular attention tz licensed
    4)    PC   300 Hays               premises and to maintain order.
    5)    PC   2628 Churrs
                                      Riase 2 (During match)

                                      Refreshments at ClayiAeels Lane, Traffic Dept.
                                      Meal 4pm-4.30pm, Patrol prior to 4jr..

                                      Riase 3 (After match)

^ S e a t i n g for briefing as per   Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.
^Pplan attached (See Appendix
    •T .j

    Serial 48                         MOBILE PATROL - CALL SIGN "TANGO TEBEZ"

         PS    1948 Miller ,F2'       Riase 1 (Before match)
    1)   PC    1301 Cherry
    2)   PC    320 Bradsrev           This serial will patrol the Wadsley Middlewood
    3)   PC    3278 Stage             area, paying particular attention t: licensed
    4)   PC    3144 Robinsan-Powell   premises to maintain order.
    5)   PC    893 Hague
                                      Riase 2 (During match)

                                      Refreshments at Clayhfteels Lane at 2.15pm.
                                      Resune patrol at 3.45pm in above ana.

   Seating for briefing as per        Riase 3 (After match)
   plan attached (See Appendix
0 T M .                               Patrol in area as outlined above.




                                                                                         1 175
                                                                    Document No.   ]   94   CONT’D


                                        SIB SECTOR 20
                                                                  Inspector   Rabinscn *HQ Ccnpe*

 Serial 49                              M 3 B H E PATHOL - CALL SIGN "TANGO POUR*

     PS 2207 Shaw 'F2'                  Phase 1 (Before natch)
 1 ’ PC 837 Carol
     PC 2976 Williams                   Patrol Foxhill area, paying special attention to
 3 PC 333 Ogilvie                       licensed premises.
 1 PC 1822 Hutchinson Dr Sch
 : PC 407 Johnscr. Ops                  Phase 2 (During natch)

                                        Meal at 3.15pm at Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept.
                                        Resume patrol at 3.45pm Foxhill/Parser. Craes area.
3=ating for briefing as
per plan attached (See                  Phase 3 (After natch)
appendix 'T')
                                        Patrcl in area as outlined in Phase 1.




S f» r -ia l    5Q                      U B I L E PATROL - CALL SIGN "TANGO FIVE*

      PS 1075 Halit:rook       Dr Sch   R a s e 1 (Before watch)
1     PC 1614 Lund             Pros
      PC 3052 Wilkes           Pros     Patrcl Parson Cross area, paying special ertention
-     PC 1140 Buckley          Pros     to licensed premises to maintain order.
•4    PC 315 Roberts           Dr Sch
-     PC 1106 Tat low          Dr Sch   R a s e 2 (During watch)

                                        3.0C’pm patrol Parson Cross/Foxhill area.
                                        4.00cm meal Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept.
Seating for briefing as                 Resice patrol 4.30pm.
per plan attached (See
=npendix 'T')                           R a s e 3 (After watch)

                                        Resune patrol as outlined in Phase 1.




Serial 51                               M B I L E PATHOL - CALL SIGN "TANGO SIX*

      PS       760 CreFsey Corps        R a s e 1 (Before match)
1     PC       2327 Hinchcliffe T m g
-     PC       2387 Wilsor.     Ops     Patrcl Grenoside area, paying special at ter t ion to
2     PC       2521 Clarke      Ops     licensed premises and to maintain order.
4     PC       599 Makin Dr Sch
5     PC       2609 Morgan Dr Sch       R a s e 2 (During watch)

                                        3.15am meal - Claywheels lane, Traffic Dec..
Seating for briefing as                 3.45am resume patrol Grenoside.
per plan attached (See
Appendix 'T' )                          R a s e 3 (After watch)

                                        Resuae patrol as outlined in Riase 1.




                                                                                            1 1 76
                                                       Document No.   194     CONT’D

                                                                 Appendix 'D'
                           SUB SECTOR 21
                                                     Inspector Cteurles 'C'


 Serial 52                 OQftCH RECEPTION - HERRIES ROAD BUS GARAGE/HERRIES HOAD

       PS                  Phase 1 (Before match)
 1)    PC
 2)    PC                  This serial will supervise the unloading of Nottingham
 3)    PC                  Forest coaches at Herries Road Bus Garage. PC's will
 4)    PC                  ensure that supporters leaving the coaches do not
 5)    PC                  possess items prohibited by the ground rules i.e.
 6)    PC                  banners, veapons, missiles or alcohol.
 7)    PC         Hirst
 8)    PC                  Any over-flow will be directed to park on the South
                           side of Herries Road South and Rawson Spring Road.

                           Riase 2 (During match)
 Seating for briefinc es
 per plan attached (See    Refreshments at Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept. At
 Appendix 'T')             half-time will be picked up by SY Police coach and
                           taken to Penis tone Road North near to Gate 'O' SWPC
                           for standby duties.

                           R a s e 3 (After match)

                           Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches.




Serial 53                  OQftCH RECEPTION - HERRIES ROM) BUS GARAGE/HERRIES HOAD

    PS 1073 Bounds  'C*    Riase 1 (Before match)
 1) PC 953 Mugglestone
 2) PC 947 uttjgy          This serial will supervise the unloading of Nottingham
                           Forest coaches at Herries Road Bus Garage. PC's will
 3)    PC   389 Lawrence   ensure that supporters leaving the coaches do not
^4)    PC   243 Lythall    possess items prohibited by the ground rules i.e.
  >)   PC   1851 Spurr     Banners, wsapons, missiles or alcohol. Any overflow
 6)    PC   200 Hoyland    will be directed to park on the south side of Herries
 7)    PC   270 Imres      Road South and Rawson Spring Road.
 8)    PC   520 Hogg
                           Riase 2 (During natch)

Seating for briefing as    Refreshments at Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept.
per plan attached          At half-time will be picked up by SY Police coach and
(See Appendix 'T')         taken to Penis tone Roac North near to Gate 'O' SWFC
                           for standby duties.

                           Riase 3 (After match)

                           Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches.



                           NOTE;- Herries Road and Wardsend Road will be
                           subject to "No Parking” restrictions which will be
                           strictly enforced in relation to private cars.

                           SYT buses will park on Herries Road on the opposite
                           side to their garage.
                                                          Document No. 1   94   CONT’D

                               SUB SECTOR 22
                                                      Inspector   Newey 'C*
      Serial 54                BUS/OQftffl RECEPTION - HERRIES ROM? SOLfTH

      PS   2?34    Doyle       Ftiase 1 (Before match)
1)    PC   1177    Kelly
2)    PC   3?97    Allen       This serial will ensure that Herries foad Sorjth
3)    PC   1573    Moran       remains clear of all parked cars to allow the
4)    PC   1243    Riley       unloading of SYT buses carrying Nottingham supporters.
5)    PC   1216    Mangles     Coaches will unload on the North side of this roai,
6)    PC   r:>43   Glenieki    having travelled along Penis tone Road from the
7)    PC   2146    Norton      Midland Station.
8)    PC   1104    Taylor
                              They will supervise unloading and ensure that
                              supporters are not in possession of items prohibited
Seatinr for briefing          by the cround rules i.e. banners, weapons, ct-ssiles
as per plan attached          or alcohol.
(see .^cpendix 'T' )
                              They will also supervise the unloading of arr.*
                              Nottingham coaches who may be directed to ur_oad and
                              park or. the hard shoulder in this road (soutr. side'
                              as an cr.’erflow from other parking locations.
                              Riase 2 (During match)
                              Refreshments    at Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept.
                              At half-time    will be picked up by SY Police coach
                              and taken to    Penistone Road North near to SK7T
                              Gate ’O ’ for   standby duties.
                              Phase 3 (After match)
                              Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches "buses




    Serial 55                 OQftCH RECEPTION - HERRIES ROM) SOUTH
                              Riase 1 (Before match)
      PS   1-467 Carter *C'   This serial will be located at the junction cf
  )   PC   1511 Barren
f
3)
4)
  )   PC
      PC
      PC
           1332 Tyler
           3D51 Westwood
           503 Gough
                              Herries Road and Herries Road South to ensure that
                              NottiiK^am coaches arriving at this location ere
                              directed to the car parking areas at SYT bus cerage
                              in Herries Road. Any overflow will be directed to
5)    PC   LI 98 Washington   parking on the South side of Herries Road Scxrtr: anc
6)    PC   1738 Moran         Raws on Spring Road.
7)    PC   137 Baldwin
8)    PC   ~32 Yates          Mini buses, vans, etc., will be directed to t±e
                              parking area in Rawson Spring Road.
                              They will ensure that passengers do not unloaf until
                              they are in the appropriate parking area.
Seat ire for briefing
as per plan attached          Riase 2 (During match)
(See Jcpendix 'T' )           Refreshments    at Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept.
                              At half-time    will be picked up by SY Police coach
                              and taken to    Penistone Road North near-to SK?C
                              Gate ’O* for    standby duties.
                              Riase 3 (After match)
                              Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches.          ^


                              NOTE;- Herries Road South will be subject to "HD
                              PARKING* cones to allow Nottingham coaches tc park.
                              THE RESTRICTIONS WILL BE ENFORCED. Coaches will be
                                                       Document No.   1 9 4 CONT’D




      Serial 56              MINI BUS RECEPTION - RAW90W S P K P C RCftD

      PS    2140 Taylor V    Riase 1 (Before match)
 1)   PC   660 Dexter
 2)   PC   84 Hunt          This serial will supervise the unloading of
 3)   PC   2155 Edwards     Nottingham Forest mini buses in Rawson Spring
 4)   PC   340 Waldron      Road.
 5)   PC   877 Hubbard
 6)   PC   1775 Hurphries   PC's will ensure that supporters leaving
 7)   PC   951 Winter       the buses do not possess items prohibited by
 8)   PC   2523 Burrows     the ground rules i.e. banners, weapons, missiles
                            or alcohol.

                            R a s e 2 (During match)

 Seating for briefing as    Refreshments   at Claywheels lane. Traffic Dept.
 per plan attached          At half-time   will be picked by SY Police coach
^ f e e Appendix 'T')       and taken to   Penistone Roaf North near to SWPC
                            Gate 'O' for   standby duties.

                            Riase 3 (After match)

                            Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches.




                            NOTE;-    This road will be subject to
                            •No Parking' cones and only mini buses, vans,
                            etc., will be allored to perk. Barriers will
                            also be available for erection at the entrance
                            to this road to control entry.




                                                                           1 179
                                                           Document No.   ^94    CONT’D


                                  SUB SECTOR 23
                                                      Inspector Batenac 'C'


 Serial 57                        PUBLIC GREEK - HERRIES ROM)

     PS   1~71 Johns tcne ’C'     Phase 1 (Before natch)
1)   PC   1143 Rockett
2)   PC   2“1 England             Uiis serial will be responsible for patrolling
3)   PC   1*13 Reeves             Herries Road (PC's in pairs) from th= railway
4)   PC   3:i5 Parks              viaduct to the Five Arches Public Hase, to
5)   PC   2-94 Pellegrine         maintain order and ensure that any perking
6)   PC   2'Ad Fams-«*rrth        restrictions are enforced. Direct Nrttingharn
7)   PC   i5:s Lathar             Forest supporters in private vehicle; to
8)   PC   1539 West               park in locations in side roads.

                                  Phase 2 (During match)

                                  Join SY Police coach in Penistone Roai North
                                  near to SKTC Gate 'O' for standby duties until
                                  half-time when will be taken to Claytfieels Ians
                                  for meal.

                                  Phase 3 (After match)
     Seating for briefing
     as p e t attached plan       Patrol in the area outlined above tc maintain
     (See Appendix T ' )          order.




 Serial 58                        PUBLIC GREER - HERRIES BOM)

     PS   1-28 Willianson Pros.   Phase 1 (Before match)
1)   PC   1566 Mitt or. Trg
2)   PC   1539 Powell Trg         This serial will be responsible for satrollinc
3)   PC   ~.~39 Spooner- Trg      Herries Road (PC's in pairs) from tie Five Arcres
4)   PC   1237 Hislop Dps         Public House to the traffic island sz the junction
5)   PC   ^    Palmer C           with Moonshine Iane/Shirecliffe Roac to maintain
6)   PC   2323 Mitt or. C         order and ensure that any parking restrict ions
7)   PC   5““ Gilbertnorpe C      are enforced.
8)   PC   1*47 Longford C
9)   PC   1514 Royale             Direct Nottingham Forest supporters in private
                                  cars to park in locations in side roads.

                                  Phase 2 (During match)

                                  Join SY Police coach in Penistone Raed North
                                  near to SKFC Gate 'O' for standby duties until
                                  half-time when will be taken to Clay»i)eels lane for
  Seating for briefing            meal.
as per plan attached
  (See Appendix •T’ )             Phase 3 (After match)

                                  Patrol in the area outlined above tc maintain
                                  order.




                                                                                1 180
                                                                              -   ......     |             —
                                                                            Document No.               CONT’D


                                              SUB SECTOR 24
                                                                      Inspector    Burgess       'C'

      Serial 59                               PUBLIC ORDER - PEXtSTOTC ROAD

                                             Phase 1 (Before match)
                                  , E   ,                         —
            PS 2037 Venables
       1)   PC 2343 Gardiner       ^        PC's will patrol in pairs in Penistone Road from
      2)    PC 8 McDonnell         A3       Parks ide Road to Borough Road to maintain order
      3)    PC 3325 Gregsor:      A3        and prevent any clash of supporters. Direct
      4)    PC 675 Ley
                                  A3        supporters to side street parking and maintain
      5)    PC 1952 Wain
                                  A3        security of business premises. Special attention
      6)    PC 2917 Bateman       A3        to be given to the enforcement of parking
      7)    PC 2783 Val lance     A3        restrictions on Banistone Road.
      8)    PC 2169 Lowry
                                  A3
                                             Phase 2 (During match)

                                             Join SY Police coach in Penistone Road North
                                             near to SWPC Gate 'O' for standby duties
 #                                           until half-time when will be taken to Claywheels
                                             Lane for meal.

      Seating for briefing                   Phase 3 (After match)
      as per plan attached
      (See Appendix 'T' )                   Oi commencement of Phase 3, this serial will resune
                                            patrol in location as above and prevent any clash
                                            of supporters.




                                            * * * * * * * * * *




  Serial 60                                 PUBLIC ORDER - PENISTONE ROM)

                                            Phase 1 (Before match)
             2019 Thonpsar. 'E'
             76 IXirham A3                  PC's will patrol in pairs in Penistone Road from
 2)   PC    2828 Lighton A3                 Borough -Road to Burton Street to maintain order
 3)   PC    2292 langfield A3               and prevent any clash of supporters. Direct
4)    PC    1891 Staniforth A3              supporters to side street parking. Maintain
5)    PC    2593 Russon A3                  security of business premises.
6)    PC    682 Love B1
7)    PC    1278 Lang B1                    Phase 2 (During match)
8)    PC    2012 Eustace B1
                                            Join SY Police coach in Penistone Road North
                                            near to SWPC Gate 'O' for standby duties until
                                            half time when will be taken to Claywheels Lane
                                            for meal.

                                            Phase 3 (After match)

 Seating for briefing                          commencement of Phase 3. this serial will resume
 as per plan attached                       patrol in location as above and prevent any clash


 •
 (See Appendix 'T'                          of supporters.




                                                                                                   1 181
                                                                      Document No.   ] M C O N T’D

                                            SIB SECTOR 25
                                                                   Inspector Hall/ve *E'

          Serial 62
                                            M3BI1E PATROL - CALL SICK "TANQD   SEVPT

          PS   87 C Chapman Txg             Phase 1 (Before match)
     1)   PC   904 i m e r Ops - Driver
     2)   PC   3261      Lett Ops
                                           Patrol Firvale area, paying special attention
     3)   PC   292j lalryrrple     A1      to licensed premises.
     4)   PC   249“ Serhatlic     A1
     5)   PC   294~ <Ci,ll ierspn  A1      Biase 2 (During match)

                                           3.15pm meal - Claywheels Lane
                                           3.45pm resume patrol Firvale/Southey Green area.

                                           B a s e 3 (After match)
  Seating for briefing as
                                           Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.
 J»r^plan areached (See Appendix



      Serial €Z
                                           M0BII£ PATROL - CALL SIGN "TANGO EIOfT
      PS    894 Er-^wn Trg                 Phase 1 (Before match)
 1)   PC    93 " _ m e r Cfos- Driver
 2)   PC    123f Smith
                                           Patrol Southey Green area, paying special attention
 3)   PC    236? >4artin A2                to licensed premises.
 4)   PC    80 >tervin AZ
 5)   PC    1414 Gordon A2                Phase 2 (During match)
 6)   PC    264r Sashforth A2
                                          3.00pm Patrol Firvale/Southey Green area.
                                          4.00pm-4.30jir. Meal - Claywheels Lane.
Seating fcr briefing                      Phase 3 (After match)
as per plat attacted
(See Appendix 'T')
                                          Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.




     Serial €3
                                          MOBIIE PATROL - CALL SIGN "TANGO N P C *

     PS- 901] Iii-allie-Ctos              Phase 1 (Before match)
1)   PC 74 C jowbothar-      Dr-Sch
2)   PC 3172 T±rk Pros
                                          Patrol Hillsborough/Langsett Road paying special
3)   PC 390 I=ach Pros                    attention to licensed premises.
4)   PC 194 T Pattisar. Ops
5)   PC 1691 SidnBek H 2                  Phase 2 (During match)

                                          3.15pm meal - Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept.
Seating for ±>riefing                     3.45pm resune patrol Hillsborough
as per plat attached
(See Appen±_x 'T')                        Phase 3 (After match)

                                          Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.




                                                                                        1 132
Serial 64
                             HJBILE PATROL - CALL SIGN "TAN30 TEX*
     PS   2737 Hallett Ops   Phase 1 (Before natch)
1)   PC   56 Firth    Trg
2)   PC   718 Pont Ops
                             Patrol Orflerton/Neepsend area, paying special
3)   PC   808 Rosevear Ops
                             attention to licensed premises.
4)   PC   162 Gillett
5)   PC   3197 Dearden Trg
                             Phase 2 (During natch)

                             3.00pm patrol CWlerton/Neepsend areas.
                             4 .00pm-4.30pm meal - Claywheels Lane, Traffic dept.
Seating for briefing
as per plan attached
                             Phase 3 (After natch)
(See Appendix 'T* )
                             Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.




                                                                         1 183
     “                           . . . . . .       .......................   . Document No.'"}   9’4   ’CONt’O'


                                                                                             Appendix 'E'




                                F A CUP SEMI FINAL

                                SPECIMEN TICKET




                                 THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION:
                                 CHALLENGE CUP SEMI-FINAL^



                                    SATURDAY 1 5 th APRIL 1 9 8 9 • K IC K -O ff 3 .0 0 PM




                 GIVEN UP                    THIS PORTION TO BE RETAINED




    COLOUR cncn?c - LIVERPOOL

£   BROWN   -   NORTH STAND

    RED     - WEST STAND

    PURPUS -    LEPPINGS LANE TERRACES
                (also overprinted "LIVERPOOL AREA")

    COLOUR C E I C - NOTTINGHAM FOREST

    ORANGE -    SPION KQP
                (also overprinted "NOTTINGHAM AREA")

    BLUE    -   SOUTH STAND

    GREEK   -   SOUTH STAND (UNCOVERED)




                                                                                                        1 I 84
                                              Document No.   1   94   CONT'D


                                                        APPOCrX ’F’



                      CED DUTIES


P E IDE THE GROUND    Detective Inspector Tcwell - I/C

Gymnasium             DS 727 Lindley
                      DC 2968 Hall
                      TDC 570 Stoker
                      DC 2569 Blake

Pickpocket            DS   517 Snith
                      DC   2540 Lindsay
                      DC   458 Hallam
                      DC   491 Lilley

                      DS   457 McSloy
                      DC   1108 Locking
                      DC   1209 Askew
                      DC   2812 Lawrence

OOTSIDE THE GROOM)    Detective Inspector Scaife - I/C

Mobile Response Car   DS 805 Buxton
                      DC 1788 Hirst

Motor cyclists        PC 420 Davies        ) Motor cycles to be collected
                      PC 525 Bevington     ) from 'FI* Garage

Foot Patrols          DC 1600 Jones        Herries Road/Halifax Road
                      DC 735 Tuke

                      PC 2302 Powell       Middlewood Road
                      DC 146 O ’Brien

                      DC 2405 Dynes        Penistone Road to include
                      DC 3119 Bagguley     Owlerton Stadiurr. car park

                      DC 366 Stevenson     Neepsend
                      PC 1826 Walton

                      TOC 1181 Drajling Hillsborough Car Park
                      PC 1651 Moulding
            CID GENERAL SUB DIVISIOMftL DOTIES




                     'FI' SUB DIVISION

 DS 829 Oughton - I/C                        8.00 am - 8.00 pm

 DS 1094 Ellis                               8.00 am - 8.00 pm
 DC 2202 Walker                              8.00 am - 8.00 pm
 PC 2619 Mottram                             8.00 am - 8.00 pm


DS   1745   Sturgess                        Noon   to   midnight
DC   2088   Brown                           Noon   to   midnight
DC   3206   Levon                           Noon   to   midnight
PC   1980   Nottingham                      Noon   to   midnight

DC 358 Hydes                                6.00 pm - 6.00 am



                    'F21 SOB DIVISION

DS 846 Williamson - I/C                     8.00 am - 8.00 pm

DC 649 Fox                                  8.00 am - 8.00 pm

DC 2270 Perkins                             10.00 am - 10.00 pm
PC 3231 Harwood                             10.00 am - 10.00 pm

DS 1578 Holdemess                           Noon to midnight
DC 1161 Staniforth                          Noon to midnight

DC 1152 McManus                             6.00 pm - 6.00 am
                                                  Document No.    194   CONT'D


                                                            APPEXEX 'G'



                            DOG SECTION


 Menfcers of the Dog Section will be deployed as follows:-


 DOG VAN                         AREA



   2                             Wadsley Bridge Railway Statin:

   1                             Leppings Lane Traffic Island

                                 Herries Road Coach Park

                                 Leppings Lane Tumoti1- 5

                                 Penistone Road/Parkside Roaf

                                 Penistone Road/BradfieId Roaf

                                Hillfoot Bridge

                                Penistone Road to City Centra

                                MiddlewDod Road/Hillsboruu<£. ~— npr

                                Middlevood Road/Wads ley Lane

                                MiddlewDod Road/Deepcar

                                Stocksbridge/Oughtibridge

                                Tankersley



In addition to the above, two handlers together with 'explosnes' dogs

will parade at Sheffield Wednesday Football Stadium at 8arr. m    Saturday

15th April 1989 to searrii the interior of the ground.




                                                                        1 1 87
                                              Docum ent No.

                                                 APPENDIX 'H*
                                                              1 9 4 CONT
                                                                           3
                  HDUMIED SECTION




Menfcers of the Mounted Section will be deployed as follows:-



HORSES                    AREA



   6                      Leppings Lane

  10                      Penistone Road North turnstiles

   6                      Wadsley Bridge Railway Station

  4                       Halifax Road*

  4                       Herries Road*



 30




 * At Phase 3, two members of the Mounted Section will
 be deployed in Hillsborough Park. The remaining two
 will take up a position at Leppings Lane traffic island.




                                                                  1 188
                                                                 Document No.   194   CONT’D

                                                                    APPENDIX *1'

                        MMXtSlRATIOK, CONTROL AH) CUSTODY STAFF

  APMDgSTRancW

 Inspector Bennett
 PS 467 S e w B U
 PC 3018 Shelton
 PC 3082 Fletcher

 PROPERT* LJVH^POCL                                         PROPERTY MJlTltUflK FOREST
 PS 1153 Booth
                                                            PC 3063 Marshall
 PC 3253 Campbell
                                                            Mrs Drabble



 PS 102 Fidier      )   Cones, barri=zrs, )                  SECTOR DRIVERS
 PC 538 Horr.       )   meals             )
                                                            Chief Supt:     PS 4;r Hodgkinson
                                                            Sector 3:       PC 1:63 Buxton
 Inspector levson
                        |   logistics Claywheels Lane
 PS 2264 Hewitt

 QK3UND OOKPgg.
                                                            CELL BOSES G ROCE 9.00 AM
PS   616 Goddard                                            1.    PS 2514 Naylcr
PC   1035 Ryaz                                                    PC 1467 Glov*=r
PC   1370 Bichard
PC   1421 Guest                                             2.    PS 526 Lancdale
                                                                  PC 701 White
CUSTODY (GROOM))                                            TRANSIT ALLOCATOR
                                                            RESERVE SERIAIfi
Inspector Barker                                            OQBCH SUPERVISKK fiaOCMD
PS 1164 Colley
PS 838 Lone                                                 Inspector Scarfe
PS 1127 Hardy                                               PS 2450 Hickie
PC 1910 Hulley
PC 1403 Jones                                              PRISONER TRANSIT TOWS **
PC 1577 Barasn
PC 766 Marshall                                         (1 ) Ground - PC 2914 Morledge
                                                        (2) Leppings Lane rarnabout -
                                                                       PC 751 Simons
                                                        (3) Bradfield Road - ?Z «31 Greenway
Directors Ritrarry
                                                           ** At Riase III Jos 1 and 2 to
PC 3071 Stepnens                                              take up posit zzr. at Leppings La
PC 3038 Cruttenden                                            roundabout anf No.3 in Catchbar
                                                              lane adjacent -3 park to provid
                                                              forward holding areas in case
                                                              of arrests.




                                                                                      1 189
                                                          Docum ent No.   1 94    CONT’D




  Process Supervision - Inspector B u m s

  PRISCKEF p r o c e s s                           PRISONER PROCESS
  ( H AWERTCK ROAD POLICE STATION                  HTCTJSFIEIf)


 Njtrtinc^-g^ Pbrest                             LIVERPOOL

 Inspector Aicheson                              Inspector Wilson
 DS 952 Cbarlesworth                             D6 510 Homer
 PC 744 E^rsr                                    PC 428 Hutchins or.
 PC 621                                          PC 1784 Donohue
 PC 2524 .V'.'ers                                PC 253 Hiles
 PC 1776 = r o n                                 PC 2031 Codling


 CEUj bee                                        O U , BOS
 HA»MERTJC ROAD POLICE STATION                   KXlfHSFIEEJ)
 10.00 ML                                        1 0 .0 0 am

 PS 1579                                         PS 804 Webster
 PC 1404 Ackers                                  PC 1185 Krajuski




                       OCMPIAOOS AGAINST THE POLICE


Inspector C Riley - Sheffield Wednesday Football Club (gymnasium)




 all   ST*TF SUBJECT TO APPBPIX 'I' WILL TAKE P E R HOT ICAL AT W E DIRECTION

 OF INSPECTOR BE2tdT




                                                                                 1 190
                                                      Document No.   ] 9 4 CONT’ D



                                                            APPQCIX 'J'




TRAFFIC POINTS



Hie following list denotes traffic points within 'F* Divisior.
which require coverage by uniform personnel:

1.     A61 - Grenoside traffic lights

2.     Halifax Road/Kilner Way TL

3.     Halifax Road/Foxhill Road TL

4.     Halifax Road/Claywheels Lane TL

5.     Penistone Road North /Herries Road South TL

6.     Penistone Road/Parkside Road TL

7.     Penistone Road /Bra±fieId Road

8.     Penistone Road/Neepsend Lane

Personnel deputed to man these points will parade at 10.00 acr. cr 15
April 1989 at the South Yorkshire Police Driving School, B r ic r iz E id e Lane,
Sheffield, for briefing by Inspector Walker prior to deployrrer:-.         Road
Traffic Division will be responsible for mealing and transportation to
and from traffic points.




                                                                         1 191
                                                                                             Docum ent

                                                                                                APPENDIX *K*


       TRAINS

    1•    MJrilJOaw K3REST


   Station^ the                                                                                  arrive at Midland
   theref o k ^ l f S T ^              T       &       X   ?    *    *         *** " *    °f ° * SOTi-£inil " «

   Each train has a cmacity of 550.

   The fare for these special trains is inclusive of the bus fare to the ground.


   Sd                                             t°h! f S ™ * * V f f 9 a     alon9 teiistone Road
                   g a., m m e s       Road South; these buses will be usrier notor cycle escort.


                                           ^                     ^       tate P i f * to rctur” **tingta, Forest
  g-ound ^      using a, i d j i c a l rout; J S * 2                        £ / ! £ £ £        N °rth ‘W " lt* **“

  Departure times .will be given at the briefing.

  There is the fac._lity.to delay the trains in the event of extra time being played.




  2.     LIVERPOOL


 S t a t i ^ Cat1t ? S r 1L ^ f ryi!9 Liverp°°1 suPPorters will arrive at Wadsley Bridge
                          ye, to be arranged; these will be made available at briefing.
 Each train has e          capacity of 550.

 Departure tunes vill also be given at the briefing.

^ played**161^ ^     **    fa=ility to                         the trains in the event of extra time being


 travel                   x-j-VErP°o1          is widespread, it is anticipated thatsupporters                 will
 A r r a n g e             m   e   n       t       s       pa^ tS,of t^ COUntry to Midland Railway Station,
 transported by                    S                          L ^          arriving at Midland Station to be
 Forest supporters                                                 Y * r°Ute Separate fran that used by Nottingham
 leppings                                          S S * " 9*6" B°ad-                         *** and arriving at

thi«: manno °k    ^ ^   ^   >uses will be available to return any person arriving in
S n i s Z T ^ r ^ - the                 «■«»•     Ihese buses w i L ' ^ S c S S S ®
                     00 the to city carriageway outside Beeley Wood Special School.




                                                                                                                  1 192
                                                          Docum ent No.   1 94   CONT’D

                                                              APPENDIX 'L'


                                      COACHES


 LIVERPOOL


        1    All Liverpool coaches should leave the Ml Motorway at Exit 36
              (Tankers ley) and travel vie the A61 to designated parking areas.

        2    The geographical location cf Liverpool, coupled with the countrywide
              support enjoyed by the Clue, suggests that coaches could well encroach
              the stadium by other routes. particularly the A616. If this is" tte
              case, then they mist be bnxight to the designated coach parking area.

       3     The serials engaged on duty at Tankersley and Ought ibridge will
             operate selective stop and search procedures to ensure (a) passenoers
             have tickets, (b) they are not in possession of alcohol and (c)
             they are not drunk. When this has been done, each coach will h=ve
             an adi^sivs sticker placed on the nearside of the windscreen anf it
             will be allowed to proceed to the designated parking area.

    4        All coaches will be allofaec to travel to the ground without specific
              escort, although menfaers of the Road Traffic Motor Cycle King vr_l
              be providing overall mobile supervision. All coaches will be directed
              to the traffic island at Leppings lane where in the first instance,
              they will park in Claywheels Lane. Once this area is full ther.
             coaches will be directed tc park on the 'out lane' of the
             carriageway in Halifax Roaz. parking to commence at the top of the
             dual carriageway and then work towards the stadiun.

    5        All coaches will park befcrs being permitted to set down passengers
             thereby ensuring that the occupants know exactly where to returr. to
             on conpletion of the football match.

    6       Vfrere it is discovered that passengers on a coach are not in possession
             of tickets, or are in breach of legislation concerning alcohol at
             Sporting Events, then Gnxrsci Control will be informed for consideration
             as to returning such vehicles out of the Force area under escort.

   7        Where individual passengers only are involved who have consunec alcohol
             in such amounts that they are drunk, or are in possession of alrctol,
             then they should be arrested and detained pending transport.

NOrriNCMM FOREST

   ®        Nottingham Forest supporters who travel by coach will be encouraged to
             use the Ml motorway leaving at Exit 34 (Tinsley). This aspect csf the
             operation will be dealt with by 'D' Division Officers and is th=
             subject of a separate order.

   9        TJiese coaches will be parted in the South Yorkshire Transport C^rage,
             Herries Road South and, if necessary, Rawson Spring Road.




                                                                                 1 I 93
                                       Docum ent No. i 9 4    CONT’D



                                               APPENDIX ’M'



        TRANSIT VANS   -   LIVERPOOL




 Transit vans, etc. carrying Liverpool supporters will
 be encouraged to travel via the M62 and K1 motorweys
 leaving the latter at Junction 36 (Tankersley).
 forever, it is envisaged that such vehicles will also
 approach the stadiur. from the Flouch (A616).


 Such vehicles will be stopped and thoroughly
 searched to ensure that they are not carrying
 alcohol and the passengers have not cxnsumed the
 sane to an extent where they are drunk.


All passengers will be checked to ensure that they
are in possession of tickets.


1^2 vehicles will then proceed to the designated
parking area in Wardsend Road North where passengers
will alight and walk to the ground.


It is not feasible to attenpt to channel such
ve-hicles through one 'checkpoint' and therefore
i- will be the duty of all serials on duties outside
the stadium to monitor and check such vehicles an-
their occupants.


Sfcould any vehicle arrive, without having been
checked on the outskirts, which is found to be
carrying passengers without tickets or in breach of
the legislation relating to the carriage and
acnsunption of alcohol en route to sporting events,
then Ground Control will be informed fcr consideration
a= to returning the vehicle to the motorway for escort.
If necessary, the driver and passengers will be dealt
v t t h for breach of the relevant legislation by wet
of surmons or arrest, dependant on their individual
condition.




                                                               1 I 94
                                         Document No.     j 94   CONT’D

                                             APPQCDC *V




     TRANSIT VANS - N 3 I T O O W M FOREST




Transit vans, etc. carrying Nottingham Forest supporters
will be encouraged to travel via the Ml motorvey
leaving the latter at Junction 34 (Tinsley).


Such vehicles will be stopped and thoroughly searched
to ensure that they are not carrying alcohol and the
passengers have not oans-.med the sane to an extent
where they are drunk.


All passengers will be checked to ensure that they
are in possession of tickets.


The vehicles will then proceed to the designated
parking area in Rawson Spring Road where passengers
will alight and walk tc the ground.


It is not feasible to attempt to channel such vehicles
through one 'checkpoint* and therefore it will be the
duty of all serials on duties outside the stadium to
monitor and check such vehicles and their occupants.


Should any vehicle arrive, without having been
checked on the outskirts, which is found to be carrying
passengers without tickets or in breach of the
legislation relating to the carriage and consurpticr.
of alcohol en route to sporting events, then Ground
Control will be informed for consideration as to
returning the vehicle tc the motorway for escort.
If necessary, the driver and passengers will be dealt
with for breach of the relevant legislation by %ray of
sunmons or arrest, dependant on their individual
condition.
                                                  Document No.   1 9 4 CONT’D


                                                    A PPPPIX *0* (i)


          SPORTDC EVENTS (CONTROL OF ALOOHOL) ACT 1985

             AS AMENDED BY THE PUBLIC OREER AT 1986


 VEHing;

 (A) It is an offence for an operator to knowingly carry alcohol
      or allow it to be carried on a public service vehicle or mini     bus/
      van or train, etc. travelling to or from a football match.

 (B)   It is an offence to possess alcohol on a public service vehicle
       or minibus ^van or train, etc. when travelling to or from a football
       match or to be drunk on such a vehicle.

 (C) A Constable may stop and search a public service vehicle, or mini
      bus/van cr train etc . where he has reasonable grounds to suspect
      alcohol is being carried.


ENTRY n n o GROUND

(A)    It is an offence to possess alcohol when entering or atterrpting to
       enter a football ground.

(B)    It is ar. offence to enter or atterrpt to enter a football ground when
       in possession of bottles, cans, etc. (or part of) which are capable
       of causing injury. This includes drinking glasses but not thermos
       flasks.

(C)    A Constable may search any person he suspects is attenpting to enter
       the ground with articles mentioned.


OCMXJCT IN Q D K )

It is an offeree to enter, attempt to enter or be in a football ground
when drunk.


SAU5 OF A U H PL IN POUND

(A)    Alcoholic drink may only be sold in those parts of the ground
       designated which will be out of view of the pitch. Alcohol rrey
       not be taken out of the designated areas.

(B)    A Constable in uniform may cause a bar in a football ground to
       close if he believes the continued sale of alcohol is detrimental
       to good order or public safety.

PYROTECHNICS

It is an offeree to possess fireworks, smoke bentos, etc. when in or
entering/leaving a football ground.

FOCRS

In addition tc the powers of search, a Constable may arrest any person
oorardtting or *ho has cormitted an offence under the Act          i i<
                                            Document No.     i94   CONT’D


                                              APPENDIX 'O' (ii)




                  GROUND REGULATIONS



            Unauthorised persons are not permitted to enter
            upon the field of play.

            The clintoing of floodlight pylons, stands and
            other buildings in the ground is forbidden.

            The cons nipt ion of intoxicating liquors is
            permitted only in authorised places and in
            accordance with the Sporting Events (Control of
            Alcohol) Act 1985.

           Firevorks, smoke canisters, bottles, glasses,
           cans, flags, banners, poles and other similar
           articles or containers including anything
           which could or might be used as a weapon, are
           not permitted within the ground, and any person
           in possession of such an article or container
           may be refused entry or ejected from the ground.

           Under no circunstanoes is it permitted to throw any
           object onto the pitch.

           Any person who fails to conply with instructions
           from a steward may be ejected from the ground.

           Any persons who remains in a gangway nay be ejected from
           the ground.

           The Club reserves the right to refuse admission
           to or eject any persons who refuses to be searched
           by a Police Officer.

           The Club reserves the right for its servants and agents
           to remove from this around any person who does not
           conply with Ground Regulations and with the Rules
           and Regulations of the Football Association and The Football
           League or whose presence on the Ground is or could
           reasonably be construed as constituting a source of
           danger, nuisance or annoyance to other spectators.


•OEE:     Item 8 above outlines the contractual agreement between the
football supporter and the Club. It does not create a power to search
and any search must be with the consent of the individual supporter.
Refusal is merely a bar to entering the ground and not a criminal offence.
Wbere a search is conducted with consent, it is a search within the
meaning of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984. Section 3 (i ) cf the
Acrt requires an officerto make a record of the search in writing unless
ir is not practicable to do so and large scale searches such as those at
football matches fall within this section. There is not therefore a
requirement to complete a Form PACE/ 1.



                                                                   1 197
                                                  Document No.   194   CONT’D


                                                    APPEJODC 'P'


                        PARKING RESTRICTIONS



 ND PARKING C U C S

 'No parking' cones vlll be placed in the following locations prior to 7am
 on Saturday 15th April 1989 by civilian staff under the direction of Police
 Sergeant 102 Fidler:-

 1)       Halifax Road - out of city lane from Parson Cross Road
          to Cowper Avenue.

 2)       Foxhill Road - out of city lane from Halifax Road to
           Parson Cross Road.

 3)       Wards end fcad North - both sides.

 4)       Penistone road North - from Claywheels Lane to Railvey
           Bridge - bcth sides

 5)       Claywheels Lane (including one way system) frorr Penistone
          Road North to Limestone Cottage Lane (Both sides)

 6)       Niagara Road - both sides.

 7)       Leppings Lane - both sides.

 8)       Herries Read - from Penistone Road North to Wordsworth
           Avenue - brth sides.

 9)        Herries Road - Wordsworth Avenue to Galsworthy Road (Away
           from ground side only).
10)       Wardsend Rsad - Both sides.

11)       Herries Road South - both sides.

12)       Galsworthy Road.

13)       Rawson Spring Road - both .sides.

14 )      Parkside Foad - from Penistone Road to Catchbar lane
           one side crJLy - alongside park.

15)       Catchbar Lane from Parks ide Road to Leppings Lane - one
           side only - alongside school.

16)       Middlewooc Road - one side only (alongside park) from
           Parks ide Rsad to Hawks ley Avenue.

17)       Penistone Road North/Penistone Road - both sides from
           Leppings I^sne island to Neepsend Lane.

18)       Liversey Street — one side from Penistone Road car park entrance.

19)       Penistone road North - from Winster Road to Vere Road - inside
           lane to be coned with 'Junto Cones'.



                                                                       1 198
                                                                Docum ent No. 1   j 4 CONT’D



                                                                      A P P E W n *Q»


                                         ROUTE SIQtENG


   LIVERPOOL Q » C H M O CAR ROtfres

   1.    PruiEry route signed by AA in consultation with Operations and Traffic


  t 2.   A5 /-Af     Hayfields crossroad - Derbyshire, to indicate route foctball
                     traffic is to follow. A628 to be placed out by Road Traffic during
                     night of 14 April 1989

         A62r Ar _€ to be placed in location by Deepear officers                  ,

^ 'jOETjiKjaaK POKKST OQftCH AtP CAR ROOIES

   All Nottiri3r«=rr. Forest vehicles will use a route fran the motorway, arriving at
   Brights liie I^ne. At this point, cars will be directed along Saville Street East,
   Sutherlsrd Street, Gower street, Bumgreave Road, Mina Road, Rutland Road to
   Neepseni larj=.

  Coaches          v=ns will travel via Upwell Street, Firvale and Herries *oad to the
  ground.

  Primary- m_rt= will again be signed by AA in consultation with Operations and Traffic
  Divisior..

  Additional signs indicating car parking areas will be in position by £.00 am and
  will be tlacec: out by civilian staff responsible for parking cones.




                                                                                        1 1 99
                                                                Document No.   1 9 4 C 0 N T ’D

                                                                APPENDIX 'R'




                   SFK j LAL   o q n st a b u ia r y   DUTIES




Special Constables vill be on duty in connection with this event to
supplement the Regular Officers. They will in particular be involved
in connection with the control of traffic away from the immediate
vicinity of the grourn.

They will parade at 5.45am in the Gymnasium for briefing and take up
their duties as soar, as possible.

Refreshments will be available in the gymnasium during the match.

Radios will NOT be issued to mentoers of the Special Constabulary
except supervisory rarJcs.



                                   DOTIES

(a)             Hennas Road - encourage and supervise parking in
                side roads on Longley, Norvrood and Shirecliffe
                Estates by Nottingham Forest supporters.

(b)             Lang&ett Road - encourage and supervise parking in
                the area between Langsett Road and Infirmary Road
                by Icttinc^iam Forest supporters.

(c)             Neepsand Lane - encourage and supervise parking in
                the erea around old gas works by Nottingham Forest
                supporters.

(d)             Halifax Road - encourage and supervise parking in
                side roads on Parson Cross/Foxhill estates by
                Liverpool supporters.

(e)             Middlewood Road - encourage and supervise parking in
                side roads on Marlcliffe and Wisevrood estates by
                Liverpool supporters.

(f)             Herries Road South - patrol length of road from
                Penis tone Road North to Five Arches to prevent
                parking of vehicles on hard shoulders (Both sides).
                This duty to ccnmence at 10.30am.
                         Document No. 1 9 4   CONT’D



                           APPENDIX ’S '




  M A P S




 Division of stadiur.



 Liverpool routes and parking areas



Sector 2




Nottingham Forest routes and parking areas



Sector 3




Overall parking areas (Sectors 2 & 3)



location of mobile units (T1-T10)
Sheffeld Wednesday F. f t                                         Po lice
                                                                  Room
       Hillsborough Ground                                 Room



                                                OmNIMkMI                    V V 'X,Q. '**
                                                                                            77-88
                                                                                             7 3-76
                                                                                             55-72




                                          nim

way Fans Entrance
 and Enclosures


         Police Control



 rv>
 o     MT
 rv>   TunNXTU F S .... m m   Dlrmetort C n trticm


            ■WjM.)■
                             Crown Inn* P.H




                     M.1. MOTORWAY JUNCTION 36   TANKERSLEY
SHEFFELD WEDNESDAY

ro   Football Club
o
                      te■»«•»L
                                 Docum ent No.     T 4 * CONT’p |
r
                                                 Appendix siiil)




                                                     HALIFAX ROAD




                                 jQBQS




i




    VADSLEY BRIDGE

            British Roil
           Wadsley Bridge




             a                                              1204    I
                                                    -               SEMI FINAL 1 9 8 9

                                                 MOTTS FOREST ROUTES AND PARKING A R R A S



                                                                                             NORTH
       NIAGARA
        Ground
                                                                                                    NSLEY
                                                                                                 V IA D U C T


                                                                             a                       SOUTH
                                  HBFFtU D   W CD Nt SOA i   £ C.




                                                                              Firv al *
                                P arking
                                Garage and
                                   Road South




To Manchester                                   parkiap
     A57

                Car p arkin g
                O wlerton


 r\j
o
U l
                                                   '* c,f' c,nf,
                                                                                                        P’STicc
                                                                                    •Dtjcamerrt N o ;- -1
                                                      SEMI FTNAL 1989                                       Appendix S(v)
                                                 SECTOR 3 - NOTTINGHAM FOREST


                                                 v /
                                                                                               Notts Forest
                                                                                                     Park


o


                                                                                                         Notts Forest
                                                                                                         Coach and Mini     I
                                                                                               ^         park


    p0 c * m       *0 * ° -
        c   ^o l T O n   »»o


r       iaNE
                                                parks


            LCNNOX »OAD                                                                         R. Don
                                                                         U

                                                ilsborough
                                                                                              Owlerton
                                                                                               Stodium
                                   3
    ***'**!> » O A „ ^




    *
                               3                                                W- I \
                                                              < * C     A / 1   ,                    \      -   Z
                                                                                    Gar parking




                                       ^   9®
'Cl,        't-j, ^ *o                                                          Car parking
  <%>         \       0O           v


 • v>
PP\ \v           >
                                                                                                                  Docir m u n thfo. ~

                                                           FA CUP SEMI FINAL - PARKING AREAS                                              Appendix S(vl)
                                                                                                                                           •jO-rtrN^v ">»«




' m m m r~
oitr*a
     a*.:..,.
vV                                                                        tf
                                       \
      v» / x \ r                                     U*
                  I                                                                               v«<
                 •i
                                                     \                                            I
     V\      ,— 1

                                                                                                                                     LS5




             fj K >
S'               :K V
                                                              wV a
     4*                                                           v»*«                                                                            [ X v \ /* “           |T
       v.
             /          *   V \.       •                  vr-j
                                                                                                                                          ,   A M JT ^ —
                                                            1 iian ’ •*                                       r.»

                                                                              I
                                                                                          ,       *totts F s t. Car Parking T ~ l.'

                                                                          V
                                                                                  •t      %   $       r r —                           "    '*       *    *           ~
                                                                                                                                     Sa»^M |
                                                                                                                                                   iTTorxi
                                                                                                                                                                     X' •
                                                                                    V                   /               Ni
                                                                                                                                              I|m <ii 4 i w ' ,. -/1"
                                                                                  r> ,        u         L     _     V        f   *                    i4>*ao»i. *■»•
                                                                                                                                                                 --




                                                                                                              rS)
                                                   S6.
                                                         Wj*Or>
                                                                                              r-                                              ,              (LyrfA.

                                                                                              LN
                                           /^!                            &S1
                                                                                  volCi
%            0      f                                                                 a                                              w        m         m  s ;   .
     ~ € /n
                                   A       0+mj*
                                                                                                                                                        nW " !


                                                                                                                                                    nfl*
                                                                                                                                                    T        ‘2 0 7 i
         r ~ ~ ?             - - 4 ^                    ■B scum enttlo.           "‘CONrDpV
                       'S i m   r   *   /                             Appendix S(vil)         j




                                                                              &




                         M      u   t




           5




m
                   T
                   MIDOX
5f

                                                         Tango 8


                                            m




                                                                                  Tango 7




                                                I




                                                    m

     %


                                                                          m
                                        m




                                                                                    208u-'5
         • Ur
                                                                              ^Document No,     | 9 4 CQNT’D |


                                                                                                 arbdhx t

                                              S B m i C RAN K F BRIEFDC
   Seats 167-178
                                                                            Seats 183-19*;
    Raw 38 - Specials
    Rc* 37 - CID
   Row 36 - CID                                                            CID
   Row 33                                                                  CID
               Insp. 2 ?5 10 PC’s (serials 61, 6 -
   Raw 34                                                                  2 PS 10 PC’s (ser^l 63 & 64)
               Insp 1 PE 8 PC’s (serial 59)
   Row’33                                                                  1 PS 8 PC’s If A 60)
               Insp 1 PE 8 PC’s (serial 57)
   Raw 32 - PS 8 PC's (serial 55)                                          1 PS 8 PC’s (aer-s- 58)
   Row 31 - PS 8 PC's (serial 53)                                            PS 8 PC’s ( s 56)
  Raw 30 - PS’s 1C PC's (serials 50 4 51)                                    Insp 1 PS 6 r. 5 (serial 54)
  Raw 29 - Insp 2 FS’s 10 PC’s (serial 46 & ~~)                              Insp 1 PS 6 ~ = (serial 52)
  Row 28 - Insp 1 PE 10 PC’s (serial 44)                                     Insp 2 PS's i: PC’s (serials 4£ 4 49)
  Row 27 - PS 8 PC's (serial 42)                                             Insp 1 PS 1C ~ s (serial 45)
  rxLM 26 - PS 8 PC's (serial 40)
  Row                                                                       PS 8 PC's (se=v 43)
       25 -                                                                 Insp 1 PS 6 ~ = (serial 41)
               PC’s (serial 38)
 §!ow 24 - Insp 1 PE 10 PC’s (serial 36)                                    Insp 1 PS 6 771 (serial 39)
  Raw 23 - Insp 1 PE 8 PC’s (serial 3^)                                     PS 10 PC’s lazzsl 37)
 Row 22 - PS 8 PC s (serial 32)                                             PS 8 PC’s (s       35)
                                                                            PS 8 PC’s (s       33)

  Raw 21     Insp 1 PE 8 PC’s (serial 30)
  Row 20                                                                   J PS 8 PC’s (se^i 3D
              PS 8 PC s (serial 28)
  Row 19                                                                   1 PS 8 PC’s (se=^ 29)
             Insp 1 PE 8 PC’s (serial 26)                                  1 PS 8 PC’s (
  Raw 18                                                                                      27)
              F5 8 PC's (serial 24)
  Row 17                                                                   1 PS 8 PC’s (      25)
             Insp 1 FE 8 PC’s (serial 22)                                  1 PS 8 PC’s (
  Row 16                                                                                      23)
             Insp 1 PE 10 PC’s (serial 20)                                 1 PS 10 PC's
  Row 15                                                                                       21)
             PS 10 RT's (serial 18)                                       1 PS 10 PC’s      -n 19)
  Raw 14      tnsp 1 PE 10 PC’s (serial 16)
 Row 13                                                                   1 PS 10 PC’s         17)
             Insp 1 PE 10 PC’s (serial 14)                                1 PS 10 PC’s >ssr
 Row 12                                                                                        15)
              5 10 PC's (serial 12)                                       1 Insp 1 PS 11~ (serial 13)
 Row 11 •    5 10 PC's (serial 10)                                        1 Insp 1 PS i:7: (serial 11)
 Row 10 • PS 10 PC’s (serial 8)
                                                                          1 Insp 1 PS II77 (serial 9)
 Row 9 - PS 8 PC's (serial 6)
                                                                          1 Insp 1 PS i:?7 (serial 7)
      8    PS 10 PC’s 1 insp (serial 4)                                   1 PS 10 PC’s is: VI 5)
W ; 7      PS 10 PC’s (serial 2)                                          1 PS 10 PC’s         3)
 Row 6 - 1 Insp 1 PE 20 PC’s (serial 1)
                                                                          as Row 6
 Row 5
 Row 4 - Senior Officers
                                                                          Senior Officers
 Raw 3




                                                HUHING AREA

 Seats 167-178
                                                                          Seats 183-19*
 Rows 22-38 to use entrance R & Q
                                                                          Rows 22-38 tc is entrance Q & P
 Rows 3-21 to use errrance N & M
                                                                          Rows 3-21 to i£ entrance M & L




                                                                                                    1209
                                                               Document No.   1 9 4 CONT’D

                                                                        APPENDIX 'U'




                       SQffiEMLE OF TOTAL M M O T r o


                  Ch Supt     Sipt       Ch Insp        Insp    PS      PC
GROUND             1              1        2             9      19     200
CONTROL ETC
                               1                         8      16      30
hjblic    OREER
                               2           4            13      33    274
K£U£S
                                                         3      10     50
CID
                               1                         2       4     22
RESERVE
                                                         2       2     20



                              5           6             37     84     596




                                                                                 1210
     FA CUP SEM I FINAL

  SATURDAY 1$ APRIL 1999



LIVERPOOL v NOTTS FOREST




& D ivision OPERATIONAL ORDER
                                                                 Document No. j ; 4   AC0NT’D


                              S O U T H YORKSHIRE   POLICE
                                                              'D ' D I V I S I O N
                                                               N E S T B A R POL I C E STATIOB
                                                               5 A P R I L 1989

D D I V I S I O R OP E R A T I O N O R D E R 3/89
F .A. C U P SEMI FINAL
S A T U R D A Y 15 APRIL 1989
D O P E R A T I O N S FROM 7PM O N F R I D A Y 14 APRIL TO
3AM ON S U N D A Y 16 A P R I L 1989


1.0        INFORMATION

1.1        On     S a t urday 15 April      1989 Liverpool will  play  Nottingham
           Fo r e s t in the F.A. Cup semi final at Hillsborough. This is ar
            all ticket m a t c h and a capacity crowd of 54,281 is expected.
           Co p i e s of t i c k e t s and stand allocation is at Appendix " C " .

1.1.1       In the event of a d raw at full time 30 m i n u t e s of e xtra time
            will be played.

1.2        F Division w ill be policing the m atch itself                and the environs
            of Hillsborough. D Division r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s are limited to
            the  additional      demands      placed upon     the      Division   by  the
            arrival  and d e p a r t u r e of supporters of b o t h clubs       who  wil-
            use the city centre. Both have similar red/white colours.

1.3        T r a f f i c D i v i s i o n are assuming r e s p o n s i b i l i t y for all match
            traffic w h i c h will enter and leave the S o u t h Yorkshire Police
            area. To that end each affected D i v i s i o n is supplying a number
            of      officers          to Traffic. 35 D officers wil l             be   seconded to
            Traffic         on      15 April 1989. Traffic O rder being produced.

1.3.1      The seconded o f f i c e r s    will work from 0 800         to 2000 and will be
           brie f e d at the D r i v i n g School, B r i g h t s i d e Lane at 0900 on 15
            April 1989. They, under the control of Traffic, will police
            the traffic   routes           in D Division. D1            control room   will
            maintain a close liaison with the traffic controllers.

1.3.2      T r a f f i c Div have undertaken the task of p u b l i cising the
            traffic routes and parking areas via the Press Liaison
            D epartment

1.4        The   major d e m a n d on D policing resources will occur   on   15
            April 1989, h o w e v e r past experience has shown that problems do
            occur   on  the evenings which precede and        follow the   match
            hence the   long time span of the operation.

1.5        The    m a j o r i t y of supporters will travel to  Hillsborough  by
            vari o u s     m eans    on 15 April 1989, however it is  likely that
            some will travel to Sheffield on the the previous day and that
            some will remain in the city centre on the evening following
            the match.




                                                                                      1210B
                                                              Document Na 1 9 4 A C 0 N T ’D




1.6     C e r t a i n areas have been set aside for coach               and car parking
         d e s i g n e d to maximise segregation. D1 Control root have naps
         and will be able to advise. Private cars from Liverpool will
         be e n c o u r a g e d to park        in the Parson C r o s s area and those from
         N o t t i n g h a m in the N e e p s e n d area.

1.7     RAIL TRAVEL

        T he L i v e r p o o l Special T r a i n will arrive     and depart from
        W & d s l e y Bridge. T h e - S p e c i a l Trains from N o t t i n g h a m will arrive
        and d e p a r t from She f f i e l d Midland. F o r timings and platforms
        see A p p e n d i x "D” .

1.7.1   T h e r e are 4 Special T r a i n s laid on to t r ansport s u pporters to
         and from Nottingham. T h e combined c a p acity of the trains is
         2 , 1 4 0 in e a c h direction. Additionally t here are a number of
         s e r v i c e trains from Nottingham.

1.7.2   T h e r e is 1 Special T r a i n laid on to t r a n s p o r t s upporters to
         and from Liverpool (into Wadsley Brid g e ) w i t h a c a p a c i t y of
         350. M a n y Liverpool supp o r t e r s will travel by scheduled
         s e r v i c e s into and out of Sheffield Midland.

1.7.3   L i v e r p o o l enjoys w i d e s p r e a d support and suppo r t e r s from
         all over the UR can be expected to travel into Sheffield
         M i d l a n d on service trains. The train t imes from d e s t i nations
         w h e r e L i v e r p o o l are known to have a strong following
         are shown at Appendix "D".

1.7.4   S u p p o r t e r s traveling to and from S h e f f i e l d on the N ottingham
         S p e c i a l T r a i n s will be u s i n g the N o r t h End Gat e . All other
         v i s i t o r s will be using the normal ticket barr i e r gates. See
         A p p e n d i x ”E ” for plan of Sheffield Midland. Skill and tact
         w ill be required to hive the Liverpool and N otts supporters
         f r o m the travelling public.

1.7.5   S h e f f i e l d United are p l a y i n g at N o r t h a m p t o n on 15 April 1989
         and, a l t h o u g h there are n o special trains, it is p r o b a b l e that
         a n u m b e r will travel to and from N o r t h a m p t o n by rail.

1.8     T h e m ajor threat will be from the L i v e r p o o l suppo r t e r s whose
         har d core are well known for causing d i s o r d e r and             committing
         c r i m e (e s p e c i a l l y s h o p t h e f t ) on such occasions.

1.9     PSV ARRANGEMENTS

1.9.1   S u p p o r t e r s arriving at Sheffield Midl a n d will be       transported
         to and fro m the ground on a dedicated fleet of SYT buses. To
         maintain           segregation d i f f e r e n t routes will be used for  eac
         g r o u p as follows;

         N O T T I N G H A M FAN S Depart fro m North End G a t e then          SYT
         b u s e s in Sheaf Street. Travel to SWFC via ; SHEAF SQUARE,
         P O N D S T R E E T , F L A T STREET, HIGH STREET, A N G E L STREET, WEST BAR
         SH A L E S M O O R , G I B RALTAR STREET, PENISTONE ROAD .




                                                                                12 1 0 C
                                                                  DocumentN$. i 9 4 A C O N T ’ D




        L I V E R P O O L F A N S Depart from ticket b a r riers then board SYT
        bu ses p a r k e d outside South Lu ggage Exit and facing CROSS
        TURNER STREET.             Trav el to SWFC via.gates, C R O S S TURNER
        STREET, SUFF O L K ROAD, GRAN VILLE SQUARE, ST M A R Y ' S ROAD, ST
        M A P Y 'S GATE, H A N O V E R WAY, NETH E R T H O R P E ROAD, MEADOW STREET,
        UP P E R T H O R P E , ALBERT TERR A C E R O A D , M I D D L E W O O D ROAD AND LEPPINGS
        LANE .

1.9.2   A ' t o t a l of 35 PSVs are available for the day. From 0930 on
         15.4.89         6 will be pa r k e d at eac h exit. The renainder will
        be s t a c k e d on East B a n k Road and will be ca l l e d up by the SYT
        I n s p e c t o r on d uty at the Midland Station w hen required.

1.9.3   The      far e is lOOp return and fans will know of        this  before
        arriving        at  Sheffield. They will receive a yellow return
        ticket on b o a r d i n g w h i c h will speed the return loading. E a c h
        v e h i c l e will hold   80 passengers.

1.9.4   2   officers       will a c c o m p a n y each PSV   and, once they   have
        dropped     their      pass engers,        the   officers will return     to
         Sheffield      Mi dland for another load. O f f i c e r s arriving at SWFC
        after    2: 4 5 p m will not return but will report to the          Gy m  at
        SWFC and re form into serials to act as a reserve.

1.9.5   After      the    match  the same p r o c e d u r e will   be   adopted   to
        re t u r n   the   fans  to Sheffield        Midland.    Th e  serials   will
        accompany        the same gr o u p s as the inward journey.       Once   fans
        are      inside     the stat i o n then of ficers ma y      be  required    to
        re t u r n on the empty PSV s for return loads.

1.9.6   A fter the m a t c h Liv e r p o o l fans will load            in Penistone Road
        North          f r o m W a r d s e n d Road North to L e p pings L a n e roundabout.
         N o t t i n g h a m fans will load in P e n s i t o n e Road N o r t h outside the
        g r o u n d fa c i n g city.

1.10    B u s e s r e t u r n i n g w ith Liverpool fans will re t u r n via St M a r y s
         Road,        enter        the one w a y system and then F o r n h a m Street.
         S e r i a l s 1 - 2 will be deployed to line the pa rking area               to
         e n s u r e that        no    one dis embarks. The buses will unload        one
         at a time. SYT d r i v e r s have been briefed.

1.11    Buses         r e t u r n i n g w i t h N o t t i n g h a m fans   will  approach     the
         Sheffield             Midland         from      Sheaf       Street. Seri a l s 3 - 4 will be
         d e p l o y e d to line the arrival area to ensure that only one FSV
         at a time di s embarks. The fans will enter through the N o r t h
         End Gate.

1 12    It is i m p e r a t i v e that buses do not travel in convoy and that
         on l y one bus at a tine (the lead bus) either loads or unloads.
         T h i s w i l l assist the searching se rials at the ground and will
         a s s i s t w i t h s e g r e g a t i o n at the Sheffield Midland.

1.13    S u p p o r t e r s (mainly f rom N o t t i n g h a m ) will be arriving and
         d e p a r t i n g on service coaches at Pond Street. Serials




                                                                                      12 1 OD
                                                                  -*-<>. . .


                                                       Document


            will be deployed in the area to instruct both groups to
            use the SYT PSV services departing for SWFC from outside
            Sheffield Midland.

 1.13.0    Opposing group's returning PSVs clash at Boyle Street and
           Penistone  Road.  Serial 19 will patrol the trea after the
           natch until all PSVs have passed that point.

 1.13.1    The bus station is new and the serials deployed there will
           familiarise themselves with the layout and relevant platforms.

 1-14      Mounted and dog section officers will be available   at the
            Midland Station for the arrivals and departures. Their
            supervisors will liaise with A/Supt. Ring for deployment on
            15 April 1989 but will be at the Midland by 0830.

2          IHTEHTION

           T° anticipate and deal effectively with the additional threat
           of disorder and crime posed by the influx of visitors.

           To ensure that the supporters arriving and departing                  from
           Sheffield Midland are segregated and contained at all                 times
           so as to prevent them entering the city centre.

2-3        To minimise disruption to those not involved

           i0 carry out operations with smartness and professionalism.
3 .0      METHOD

           Officers involved in the operation are shown e. Appendix
             A ". Serials and phases are shown at Appendix " B

3.2       The operation is divided     into 5 phases asfollcws:

          Phase 1       1900 on Friday 14 April 1989 to
                       0800 on Saturday 15 April 1989.

          Phase 2      0800 to   1500 on Saturday 15 April   19E9

          Phase 3      During the match

          Phase 4      From end of match until complete dispersal
                       of supporters - approximately 1900

          Phase 5      From 1900 to 0300 on Sunday 16 April 1989

3.3       Phase   details are    shown at Appendix “ B "

3-4       From 0600 to 1800 on 15 April C Group will provide cover at
           El and D2. From 1800 on Saturday 15 April 1989 to 0600 on
           Sunday 16 April 1989 cover will be provided by A Group at D1
           &nd D 2 .( B and D Groups (D1 and D2) will be osed    on this
           operation along with other D staff.)




                                                                               121QE
3.5       Similarly f r o m 0600 to 1800 C Group - C harge Off i c e - will
           pr ovide cover. T h e y will be relieved by    A G r o u p wh o will
           cover from 1800 to 0600 on S u n d a y 16 April 1989. B Group w l l J
           wo r k as an e x t r a process team from 1200 to 2400. D Group will
           take we e k l y leave.

3.5.1     T h e r e is a p o s s i b i l i t y that Saturday ev enings p r o b l e m s may be
           compo unded b y S h e ff ield U n i t e d / W e d n e s d a y inspired disorder in
           the City C e n t r e w h i c h has been simmering for several weeks.

3 .5. 2   Th e usual c r i t e r i a will be applied as to w h e r e p r isoners are
           taken in the first instance.

3.5.3     Pr is o n e r I d e n t i f i c a t i o n :

           Liverpool:            MERCR0         051 709    1763

           Not tingham:          F O R C E CONT R O L    0602 670111

3.6       12 dogs and handlers and 6 mounted officers will & e
           av ailable in D Division f rom 1000 on Saturday 15 April
           1989. I n s p e c t o r s H a n d - D a v i s and Phenix will ensure that
           their dut i e s are s t r u c t u r e d so that c o v e r is maintained.
           Su p e r visors w i l l attend the briefing in the Gym at D1 at
           0900 on 15 A p r i l 1989.

4.0       ADMINISTRATION

4.1       S u p e r i n t e n d e n t Bates wil l        have overall command of
           the D D i v i s i o n operation

4 .2      A / S u p e r i n t e n d e n t King w i l l    have overall command of the Midland
           Station ar rangements.

4. 3      C h i e f I n s p e c t o r D o n n e l l y w ill have re s p o n s i b i l i t y for the City
            Centre a r r a n g e m e n t s

4 4       Inspector   Harper         will  be      responsible       for  the  Nottingham
           supp orters a r r i v i n g and d e p a r t i n g from Mi dland Station.

4. 5      Inspector    Dew s      will be      responsible for                ^ Y ^ p0<)1
           su pp orters a r r i v i n g and d e p a r t i n g from Mi dland Station

4 6        Ins pectors M a r t i n and B e e d e n will have re s p o n s i b i l i t y for the
           p u b l i c o r d e r / c r i m e p a t r o l s w hich will be made throughout the
            time span of the o p e r a t i o n .

 4.7       BRIEFINGS

 4.7.1    O f f icers i n v olved in P h a s e 1 W l l j b ® n ^ g g h i r ^ t h e ^ y ^
            B eeden   at 190 0 hours on F r i d a y 14 April 1983 m tne uym
            at West Bar P o l i c e Station.




                                                                                          121 OF
                                      Document No. i 9 4 A C 0 N T ’D



Officers involved in Phases 2,3 and 4 will be briefed by
A/ Superintendent  King at 0900 hours on Saturday
15 April 1989 in the Gym at West Bar Police Station

Officers involved in Phase 5 may be briefed by Chief
Inspector Donnelly and Inspectors Martin   and Beeden
at 1900 hours on Saturday 15 April 1989 in the Gyr at
West Bar Police Station. This briefing will only take place
in the light of a vastly different situation unfolding from
that envisaged. Officers involved will be advisei by control.

Normal uniform will be worn with helmet chinstraps down. If
the weather is bad then anoraks and waterproof leggings will
be worn.

At 0400 on Saturday 15 April 1989 the duty Inspector will
ensure that the lower section of Scotland Street from Furnace
Hill down is coned on both sides.The area is required for
transits and horse boxes. Ho waiting patrols will be carried
out to ensure the area remains clear.


At 0400 on Saturday 15 April 1989 the duty Inspector at D1
will also ensure that both sides of Fornham Street and Turner
Street   are coned   to enable the SYT busses^      conveying
supporters have free access. Ho waiting patrols will be nade
to ensure these streets are clear.


Road Traffic Division will be making requests of the
Superintendents D1 and D2 to cone off certain road sections.
These requests will be made by message switch and are not yet
to h a n d .

At 2000 on Saturday 15 April 1989 duty Inspectors (D1 and D2)
will ensure that cones are collected.

MEALS

PACKED MEALS

The following will be provided with packed meals;

Charge Office staff providing shift cover and extra
processing team.

Officers engaged on public order patrols on Friday
14 April 1989, serials 1 - 4 , D C and V, and 2 dog handlers.

Officers engaged on public order patrols on Saturday
15 April 1989 serials 1 - 4 , dog handlers , D C and V,
and mounted officers.

Ail D staff providing shift cover at D1 and D2
except C Group at D1
                                                    Document No. | 9 4 /\C O N T ’D




              Serials 5 - 1 9 will be supplied with a packed meal and
              hot drink on reporting for duty at 0800 at Dl.

              COOKED MEALS

              Officers from C Group at Dl will take a cooked breakfast
              at West Bar between 0900 and 1000 on 15 April 1989

              Serials 5 - 1 6 engaged on PSV escorts will receive a cooked
              teal at SWFC in the Gym after half time .

              Senior officers, logistics staff, dog section, mounted
              officers and controllers will take a cooked meal at West
              Bar whilst the match is being played

              The D officers seconded to traffic will receive a cooked
              teal at the Driving School whilst the match is being
              played

              Serials 1 - 4 ,  D C and V,   17   - 19 will take a    cooked mea
              at Dl whilst the match is     being played. Their sittings
              are staggered thus:l - 4       1500 - 1535
                      D C and V 17 - 19      1540 - 1615

    4.13     Overtime claims should be endorsed with SEMI FINAL and handed
              tc supervisors before retiring from duty.

    4.14     D Division detective officers will maintain normal cover and
              have sufficient resources to cope with any additional demands.
              Detectives on     weekly leave will replace the    CID aideswho
              will work in     uniform on    15   April 1989 (see Appendix Afor
              duties). Detectives will also have to be deployed to augment
              the shoplifting team.

    4.14.1   Dl Garratt and PS Lavin will ensure that City Centre stores
              and  licensed premises are warned of the potential     threat
              posed to them by the influx on Saturday 15 April 1989.

    4.15     VEHICLES

    4.15.1   Hi Traffic Administration are supplying      two
             extra transits for D Division use between 1900 onFriday 14
             April 1989 and 0300 on Sunday 16 April 1989.

    4.15.2   The duty Inspector   "B" Group Dl will ensure thf.t these
             vehicles are collected from Claywheels Lane at 1700         on
             Friday 14 April 1989. He will also ensure that thefollowing
             vehicles are reserved for use for the operation;

             Personnel Carrier
             Dl Transit
             Dual purpose Dl Sherpa
             Staff Car for Superintendent Bates
             Panda car for A/Superintendent King.


•
             Community Liaison vehicle for Chief Inspector Donnelly




                                                                        1210 H
                                               Document No. ] 9 4 A ^ ° N T ’D




5       COMMUNICATIONS

5.1     HQ Communications are fitting a Panda attachment and radio
         in Dl Control Room. This operation will be using channel
         2S on 15 April 1989 from 0900 to 2000

5.2     PS 802 Pearson will be the controller for the event on 15
         April 1989. He will maintain a log and be assisted by PC 3263
         Wallace. The officers will work 0800 until stood down.

5.3     On Friday 14 April 1989 the duty Inspector "D" Group
         will arrange for 50 extra radios and 3 VHF sets to be
         collected from HQ Communications. They should be deposited
         in the Area office at Dl.

5.4     The logistics officers are Inspector Young,PS Thomas and PC
         Mabbott of D Community Liaison Department. The team will be
         responsible for all packed meals, radios and vehicles. Their
         duties will commence on Friday 14 April 1989 when they will
         ensure that all extra equipment and packed meals are to hand.

5.4.1   On Saturday 15 April 1989 they will issue the equipment and
         meals to Serials Sergeants/ Drivers. Each Sgt will receive
         radios at the ratio of 1:2 officers. It will be necessary
         to augment the radio stock with the "sppres“ from Dl/2.

5.4.2   Serials 1-3, and 18-19 are mainly E Group officers from
         Dl who have personal issue radios.

5.5     Officers providing shift cover at Dl and D2 will transmit or.
         their normal channels. Likewise those officers engaged on
         public order patrols on Friday 14 April and the evening of
         Saturday 15 April 1989 will use the normal Dl channel


5.6     Call signs:

        Superintendent Bates                    DH X Ray 1
        A/Superintendent King                   Dl X Ray 1
        Chief Inspector Donnelly                Victor 1
        Inspector                               Name/location
        Sergeants                               Serial number
        Cor.stables                             Collar number


5.7     Radio traffic will   be kept to a minimum. Inspectors and
         Serial sergeants will keep control informed of the movements
         of PSVs and groups of supporters.




                                                                  1210 1
                                                 Document No. |   9 4A C O N T’D




5.8      From 0900 until 2000 on 15 April 1989 officers engaged on
          the operation will use channel 29. Match Control at SWFC is
          using channel 25. PS 802 Pearson will make regular contact
          with the F Division controller as the day progresses.

5.9      No officer will stand down without authority of control,
          supervisors will ensure that their  staff are accounted for.




Chief Super>rtxendent




DISTRIBUTION

Chief Constable
Assistant Chief Constable (Ops)
Chief Superintendents D, F, Ops and Traffic
Superintendents D,D CID, F, Dl, D2, FI
Chief Inspectors D CID,D1,D2
Shift Inspectors Dl and D2
Inspector Sewell FI
Inspector Martin D C and V
Inspectors Hand-Davis and Phenix
Inspectors Charge Office
Inspector Mabbott, BTP
Sergeants listed
Force Operations Room
Control Rooms Dl and D2
SWFC Match Control Room




                                                                   1210 J
                                                                                              I
                                                                     Document No. | ? 4 A CONt’D


                                                                     APPENDIX A/1


NOMINAL ROLL - SENIOR OFFICERS

Superintendent Bates                          Staff officer - PS 1004 Jones
A/Superintendent King                         Staff Officer - PC 3327 Newbound
Chief Inspector Donnelly                      Staff Officer - PC 916 Bradley

Inspector           Beeden   Dl
Inspector           Martin   D
Inspector           Harper   Dl
Inspector           Dews     D2
Inspector           Taylor   COBS
Inspector           Young    D CLD

Logistics - PS Thonas, PC Mabbott
Controllers - PS 802 Pearson, PC 3260 Wallace

NOMINAL ROLL BY SERIAL

D C and V

SERIAL 1(Mobile)                      SERIAL 4(Mobile)                SERIAL 7PSV escort

PS    812       Dl                   PS 790 Dl                        PS 798 Dl
                                                                      PS 2477 (HQ CID)
PC 1354             “                 PC 2075 "                       PC 865 D
PC 576              “                 PC 326 "                        PC 560 “
PC 231              “                 PC 3078 "                       PC 223 "
PC1165                                PC 221 "                        PC 1713 Dl
P C 1672                                                              PC 1721 "
PC2430                                                                PC 2045 “
                                                                      PC 3121 *
SERIAL 2(nobile)                     SERIAL 5PSV Escort               SERIAL 8PSV Escort
PS 694 Dl                            PS 1379 Dl                       PS 2916 Dl

PC   2006    "                       PC    2674         "             PC 2618 "
PC    356    ”                       PC    2296         **            PC 1125 ”
PC   1202    ”                       PC      91         *•            PC   92 “
PC   2687    "                       PC    3106         ”             PC 2089 “
PC   412     M                       PC    624                        PC 586   “
PC   3258    "                                                        PC 2173 " ‘
                                                                      PC   53 "
SERIAL 3(nobile)                     SERIAL 6PSV Escort               SERIAL 9PSV Escort

PS 1137 Dl                            PS   353 Dl                     PS   795    Dl
                                      PS   1055 D2                    PS   993    “
PC   1733       ”                     PC    687 Dl                    PC   101    “
PC    977       ~                     PC   437 ”                      PC   3068   *
PC   2590       “                     PC   2695 "                     PC   3158   “
PC    813       “                     PC   2273 "                     PC   3329   ■
                                                                                  “
PC   1259       “                     PC   3117 ”                     PC   2632   -
PC   441 ,      “       ■             PC   2675    >5                 PC   1399   T
                                     ?PC   2661 *            ";•/.
                                                  ,vr



        ■"V-v

                                                                             * « a i2 1 0 K
                                                         APPENDIX A/2
      SERIAL 10 PSV Escort    SERIAL 13 PSVEscort    SERIAL 16 PSV Escort
      PS 815 Dl              PS   2235   HQ CID        PS 2378 B
                             PS   840    D2
     PC   22                 PC   2236   "
     PC   825 "                                       PC   1582     HQ
                             PC   1032   "            PC   3112      "
     PC   1785"              PC   1668   “
     PC     47"                                       PC      42    "
                             PC    122   "            PC    803     ”
     PC     85”              PC    482   "
     PC   269 "                                       PC   3198     *•
                             PC   3346   ”            PC   1453     "
     PC   1259"              PC   405    "
     PC   2278"                                       PC   2083     ”
                             PC   747    "            PC   2185     "
                                                      Pc   12
                                                      PC   1368     "
^    SERIAL 11 PSV Escort    SERIAL 14 PSV Escort     SERIAL 17 Pond Street
     PS   639 Mag Ct         PS   628 HQ CID          PS 2742        D2
     PS   447 HQ CID         PS   593 D2
     PC   409 "              PC   1096 C.Ct          PC    488 Dl
     PC   465 "              PC   594                PC    608 "           i         s
     PC   686 "              PC   2611               PC    433 "
     PC   777 "              PC   2035 "             PC    125 "
     PC   778 "              PC   2105 "             PC    2183"           '
     PC   899 ”              PC    381               PC    1115 D2
     PC   1100”              PC   1274 HQ
     PC   1587"

    SERIAL 12 PSV Escort     SERIAL 15 PSV Escort    SERIAL 18 Pond Street
    -PS   1415   D2          PS   225 HQ CID         PS 1875 Dl
     PS      7   "           PS   807 D2
     PC   3172   ”           PC   1212 HQ CID        PC 4 2 6 2 > ' J > l a & ^ & £ A r
     PC   3315   "           PC   2945               pc          *
     PC    773   "           PC   2245              .p c ' ^ « 4 ' 8 ^ f
     PC    832   "           PC   1180    " -       PC
     PC    272               PC   1531    " :       PC
    PC    .343   Hr          PC   2335   **
    PC     849   "           PC   1060              PC 255 ..
                                                    PC • 554
                                                    SERIAL 19 l i o b i i e ^ ^ l S

                                                    PS 2658 Dl                 ^
                                                            Docurrrent No.]   94   A C0NT’D

                                                       APPENDIX B/l

PHASE 1              1900 HOURS ON FRIDAY 14 APRIL 1889
                     TO 0800 SATURDAY 15 APRIL 1988



SERIALS INVOLVED:    1,2,3 and D C and V from 1900 with Serial 4 and
                     2 dog handlers from 2200


DUTIES

1900                 Report for duty at Gym,Dl. Briefed by Inspectors
                     Beeden and Martin then patrol as follows;


Serial 1             City Centre above Arundel Gate

Serial 2             London Road

Serial 3             City Centre below Arundel Gate

Serial 4             West Street area from 2200

D C and V            Back up Serials 1 - I* as necessary

Dog Handlers         Patrol City Centre


At 0300 Serials 1 - 4, D C and V will stand down in consultation
with Duty Inspector at Dl


PHASE 2             0800 - 1500 ON SATURDAY 15 APRIL 1889


SERIALS INVOLVED:   5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19.
                    From 1200 1,2,3,4 and D C and V will join them.
                    Mounted and Dog section officers.


DUTIES

0800                 Report for duty.    Sgts. collect equipment    from
                     logistics in Dl parade room. Serials take meal and
                     hot drink before briefing.

0900                Briefing in Gym by S u p e r i n t e n d e n t   King

0930                 Serials 5 - 1 6 make way to Midland Station. 5 - 1 0
                     report to Inspector Harper 11 - 16 report to InspectoT

                     Dews.
                                                       Document No. ] 9 4 A C 0 N T ’D



                                                         APPEHDIX B/2

0930                      Serials 17 and 18 patrol Pond Street area.Prepare for
                          arrival   of   service  coaches,   locate   platforms
                          concerned

0930                      Serial 19 to be mobile in Dl - constantly available
                          until 1200.

1200                      Serials 1 - 4 and D C and V return to duty. Patrol, as
                          for Phase 1 commanded by Inspectors Martin and Beeder



1500                      End of Phase 2. See paragraph 4.12 above for hot meal
                          arrangements.



PHASE 3                   FROM 1500 TO END OF MATCH


1500                      Serials 1 -4 and C and V to maintain patrols
                          at all times in vulnerable areas especially where
                          visitors have parked.

                          Officers to take meal as detailed in Paragraph
                          4 .12 of main order.

                          Controllers to monitor sutuation at SWFC and update
                          commanders at D Division.


PHASE 4                   END OF MATCH UNTIL DISPERSAL OF SUPPORTERS

SERIALS I N V OL VE D :   - 19

DUTIES

Full time                 Serials 5 - 1 6 will escort their respective groups
                          to Sheffield Midland and see then onto the platforms

                          Serial 19 to Hoyle Street /Penistone Road area where
                          returning PSVs clash. Remain until stood down.

                          Serials 17 and 18 will be in Pond Street to see the
                          supporters back onto service coaches

                          Serials 1 - 4 will initially report to Sheffield
                          Midland. 1 - 2 will line the PSV coach standing area
                          in Sheaf Street.  3 - 4 will line the PSV coach
                          standing area in Fornham Street.

                          D C and V will remain on mobile patrol. As soon as
                          sufficient officers have returned from SWFC on the
                          PSVs then serials 1 - 4 will resume mobile patrol
                                     Document No. j 9 4 A C 0 N T ’D




                               APPENDIX B/3

1900    Hobile serials and D C and V will patrcl areas as for
         Phase 1. Serial 19 will stand down.

        Serials 5 - 1 8 will be stood down at A/Superintendent
        King's discretion.


        Mounted and part of the Dog section to stand down at
        A/Superintendent King's discretion

 1900   Briefing for Serials 1 - 4 and D C and V by Chief
         Inspector Donnelly at D1 Gym - nay be cancelled
         see paragraph 4.7.3 above.

0300    Serials 1 -4 and D C and V will stand cown         at Duty
        Inspector's discretion.
                                                                                                                                            I)   l\
                                                                                                                                    iESfllx J



                                                                                                                   Document No. ] ) 4 A C°NT



                                                       F A CUP SEMI FINAL

                                                            SPECIMEN TICKET




  •j r**^r> r-V: =■                                      THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATIOKf
           T ^r: r-
                vi :
  '*- t > I j r i •':
                                                         CHALLENGE CUP SEMI-FINAtfi
  £» *;i fa.rX.•'i i
  j~ i ' : ± *         r                       8i • .« i      Ti*1JVERPOOirX
                                                            V♦ » <.    . ’* ;      .   ,.   _    .   r«:    .            i   *.   • *s:
       f lr'j?:; -                             i   ;    t 'fj.         >                    ? • V >"•* :          •' *        ' V ~ ‘-
  ROW- 7 •.7 ! ' I
  ■ * \ r j.ri.“V* ■                           r * ^
                                               * -- r-— ’ ■ ■ -
                                                                 -v.    NOTTINGHAM FOREST & -i
                                                                                -•         •   ■ < • , *-'»    ~
  .*I?'-? i < i                            VS - ; > 4 : ?■>     JIT KEJLSBOROUGH STADflJVt :         - ; -.j^ T
                                           i l l t L ' SATURDAY 1 5 th APRR. 1989 - K I C K W 3 .0 0 P M . ; •!> ;
                                               tj ’
                                                  *;j ri ' i; .i. •«v-*                              •v.%

    v ? - rA* - -i
  *- T-l T iV 1!.?: "
   GANGWAYr^i

           r'a 7.'-I i                 ,J. •           *4   v x I-i                         '   St;* r>k;       •r r* ^-1 ^
                 riT. i "          T                                                                              ± x<*r -
                'I D BE W E N UP                                                IM S POim ONTO BE RETAMED




QDU3JR CODING - LIVERPOOL

BROWN       -         NORTH STAND

RED         - 1EST STAND

PURPLE       -       LEPPINGS LANE TERRACES
                      (     overprinted "LIVERPOOL AREIA*)

COLOUR CODING - NOTTDOiAK FOREST

ORANGE       -       SFION KDP           _____
                      (also overprinted "NDTTOGiAM AREA")

BLUE        -         S C U M STAND

GREEN       -         SCUIH STAND (UNCOVERED)




                                                                                                                                           1 2 1 0    P
                                                                                                                                1210Q
                                                             15.4.89 - 0800 - 2400
    JMl MING
Q
X                                                                    (SPECIALS)

               MANCHESTER -#• SHEFFIELD   PLATFORM   NOTTS     -*•   SHEFFIELD    PLATFORM   DERBY    TO SHEFFIELD   PLATFORM
               Ob. 10        07.17        5A         11.15           12.31        1          06.23    07.14          8A
      o        06.55         08.10        2C         11.35           12.46
      o                                                                           1          07.48    08.27          5AB
     <
     'KJ-
               07.24         08.19        2A         11.55           13.02        1          Of. 04   09.42          2AB
               08.40         09.32        IB         12.15           13.12        1          09.29    10.05          5AB
               08.50         10.10        2C
      c                                                                                      09.45    10.23          2AB
     ■CD
      E        09.23         10.19        7B
      3                                                                                      10.40    11.27          5AB
      O
      o
     Q         09.50         11.10        7B                                                 10.50    11.27          5AB
    09.35      10.23         11.21        2A                                                 11.46    12.27          2AB
               10.50         12.10        2C                         (SERVICE)               12.28    13.05          5AB
               11.23         12.19        8A         NOTTS     -*■   SHEFFIELD    PLATFORM   12.49    13.25          1AB
    11.35      12.23         13.19        8B         08.23           09.21        BA         13.40    14.16          2AB
               12.50         14.10        2C         09.17           10.15        BA         14.05    14.42          5AB
               13.23        14.21         5A         10.17           11.14        8B         14.42    15.19          2AB
    13.35      14.23        15.23         5A         11.23           12.23        5AB

                                                     12.2'J          1J.14        2A

                                                     13.25           14.24        8A

                                                     14.21           15.14        8A



                                                                                        •                            •
                                                         15.4.89 - 0800 - 2400
OUTGOING                                                                                                                                     oc
                                                                                                                                             o
                                                                (SPECIALS)                                                                   r;

SHEFFIELD   PLATFORM   MANCHESTER   LIVERPOOL    SHEFFIELD      NOTTS        PLATFORM                   SHEFFIELD   TO DERBY      PLATFORM
            5A         ld.ia        19.12        17.50          19.05                                   17.15       17.54         6AB
1U.22       8B         19.18        -            18.00          19.15                                   18.15       18.51         5AB
li'.l'J     2C         20.08                     18.08          19.23                                   18.28       19.01         6AB
            8A         20.19        21.07        18.18          19.33                                   19.22       19.56         6AB
2U.28       2C         21.45                                                                           *19.34       20.16         8A
20.45       7B         21.39
                                                                              .......... —   —   ...    19.45       20.21         5AB
21*27       5A         22.18        23.27                                                               20.20       20.56         6AB
22.46       7B         23.52                                    (SERVICE)                               20.31       21.07         6AB

                                                 SHEFFIELD      NOTTS        PLATFORM                   20.50       21.07         5AB

                                                 17.22          18.31        8A                         21.13       21.49         6AB

                                                 18.31          19.29        2A                        *22.27       23.51         8A

                                                *19.34          20.38        8A                         23.24       00.15         8AB

                                                 20.24          21.19        2A

                                                 21.23          22.14        7B

                                                *22.2'/         23.24        UA

                                                23.40           00.50        2C

                                                ♦BOTH TRAINS CALL AT NOTTINGHAM                        ♦BOTH TRAINS CALL AT DERBY AND
                                                 AND DERBY                                              NOTTINGHAM


                                                                                     •                                           •
Document No.] 9 4   /\ CONT’D




         ■Y




              -ps>v ‘
                    a   Fo   r   uweefooc ^   m OS   1

               f^y %     Fbe U O m ^ G H P « n f*M8& I

              *40    U(VT>»»G                 10 S
               South Yorkshire Police
                           Regina *.


        r e f e r r e d t o j n ni, ;tis!ei!,-T

                  iSic;ndtjrc,rJ
                               f      . .




                                                  m m m


        EXHIBIT Nr
GEN/9
                                                                                     | Document No. i 9 4       B CONT’D


1. I nformation/1ntention.

1 .1
        The m a t c h will a t t r a c t        a     c a p acity c rowd         of    ap proximately
5 5 , 0 0 0 s p e c t a t o r s . A lar ge p e r c e n t a g e of the c r o w d will travel by
road, e i t h e r by c o a c h or priv              ate      car. Special tra in s will als o
convey L i v e r p o o l fans to          Wadsley          Bridge      station and Nottingham
Forrest supporters                 to  Sheffield           Midland       station .         A convoy of
buses will t r a n s p o r t fan s            arriving          at S h e f f i e l d M i d l a n d to the
ground. T h e g a t e s at the             g r o u n d will be o p e n fro m 11am.

1.2
          It is t h e i n t e n t i o n of the Roa d          Traf f i c        D i v i s i o n to as s i s t
the free m o v e m e n t of t r a f f i c         an d  the       s e g r e g a t i o n of su pp orters
both        before        and    after       the   game     so      as      to      cause       as little
i n c o n v e n i e n c e as p o s s i b l e bot h to p e r s o n s a t t e n d i n g the match an d
to the g e n e r a l public.



2. Method.

2. 1
       S u p e r i n t e n d e n t B r o u g h a m will be    in   over al l c o m m a n d a s s i s t e d
by Ins p e c t o r Scholey. C h i e f Inspe ct or                Sha w will be in com ma nd of
the sector n o r t h of the                     ground   i.e.     the   Liverpool         routes a n d
Ch i e f I n s p e c t o r Lax will be in c o m m a n d of the s e c t o r sou th of the
gr o u n d i.e. t h e N o t t i n g h a m F o r e s t routes.

2.2
          T r a f f i c D i v i s i o n nig ht s t a f f o n F r i d a y      14th April 1989 will
remain          on     dut y      unt il 8.00am. Unless i n s t r u c t e d o t h e r w i s e the b
- 2d s t a f f o n 15th Apr il an d                all o f f i c e r s i n v o l v e d o n duties re
the m a t c h w ill work f r o m 0 8 . 0 0              until       approximately            20.00. N o
o f f i c e r will ret i r e f r o m duty            un l e s s a u t h o r i s e d by as u p e r visory
officer.


          All i n t e r s e c t i o n s o n the m o t o r w a y an d all key tra ff ic points
will be m a n n e d fro m 10am. T h e r e              will      be car p a t r o l s detaile d to
s e c t i o n s of t h e m o t o r w a y an d       motorcycle         patrols           co vering other
routes.          All    officers          mus t     ensure      tha t      footb a l l       traffic   is
c o r r e c t l y d i rected. O f f i c e r s o n      static        points          m u s t en sure that
p r i o r i t y is     given        to    the      heaviest      traf f i c        flow      w hich  will
o b v i o u s l y be the        f o o tball      traffic.       All      officers           at locations
c o n t r o l e d by a u t o m a t i c t r a f f i c sign a l s    will be is s u e d wit h a key
to t u r n o f f th e lights as a n d                when     n e c e s s a r y .T h e r e are bound to
be l o c a t i o n s w h e r e t r a f f i c will      bui ld      up a n d de l a y s occur. This
c o u l d lead t o f r u s t r a t i o n       particularly           by     a n y o n e not attending
the match. O f f i c e r s            should       therefore        deal       f i r m l y but frien dl y
wi t h any c o m p l a i n t s re t r a f f i c movement.




                                                                                                                121 0 U
                                                                                             Document NoJ     94    [3 CONT’ D


    2. 4
              T h e r e are no car p a r k i n g      -facilities at      H i l l s b o r o -football
    g r o u n d a n d all       drivers        should   be   en co uraged     to      park up w h e n
    w i t h i n w a l k i n g d i s t a n c e of the ground. There will no doubt come a
    stage w h e n s u p p o r t e r s will mak e mor e progress by walking.



              E i g h t personnel        carriers      hav e been a q u i r e d and will be
    d r i v e n by o f f i c e r s s h o w n at     Appendix'B*.  T hese ve hicles will be
    us e d to t r a n s p o r t o f f i c e r s o n   static  points, delivery of pac e
    me a l s etc.


    2    •   6
           T h e r e is a      remote       possibility            tha t some      supp or te rs will
    travel o n the A57 f r o m H y d e                to S h e f f i e l d via the Sna ke Pass. To
    re d u c e th e p o s s i b i l i t y of this,         during         the   night of 14th April


•
     1989, B a r n s l e y T r a f f i c S e c t i o n will collect a div e r s i o n s l 9" ‘fro"'
    rl s u b - d i v i s i o n  a n d t r a n s p o r t it     to the jun ct io n of the A57 an d
    A62 8 at H y d e where it will be p o s i t i o n e d                   to divert traff ic awa y
    f rom the A 5 7 and a l o n g the               A628.      T h e officers detai le d for this
    task will inform the p o l i c e at G l o s s o p                    of th eir intention. After
    the k i c k - o f f , C h i e f Inspector           Shaw       will arrange for the s i g n to
    be r e - c o l l e c t e d a n d r e t u r n e d to FI.



             C o a c h e s will not be s e a r c h e d e n             route    but will     be s e a r c h e d
     o n a r r i v a l at the p a r k i n g area



     2 ‘8   A p u b l i c orde r detail will            be  prese nt at Woodhall S e r v i c e s
     to p r e v e n t an y d i s o r d e r at that      location. The detail will c o n s i s t
     of o f f i c e r s s h o w n at A p p e n d i x *B*.


     3.      Bri efi nas:


     3,1    A b r i e f i n g will be h eld at                 driving   school at
     t h ose o f f i c e r s o n s t a t i c po i n t s        an d all motor cy cl e wing


        3 ‘2 A b r i e f i n g will be hel d at      Woodhall       police     post at 8 . 3 0 a m
        for all o f f i c e r s  shown   on   A p p e n d i x ’B ’ wit h   the   exception o
        Inspector Walker and         the    Transit         drivers    who   will attend the
        dr i v i n g school        briefing.


        4. C o m m u n i c a t i o n s ;


        4 '‘     All     m o b i l e s e q u i p p e d * i t h VHF r a d i o   -iU   °P*^e     o n channel
        one.     Personal         radios will                        Except      at c e r t a i n s t r ategic
                                           cases p o r t a b l e VHF sets - i l l      be   issued.




                                                                                                                  12 i 0 V
                                                                                             Document No] 9 4       B   CONT’D

     5.          Routgg

^ 5 . 1     Liverpool

              S e g r e g a t i o n w i t h i n the g r o u n d dictates    that Live rp oo l -Fans
    will travel v i a the M62 - Ml - A61 and o n the A62B - Ml.                                  Those
    s u p p o r t e r s t r a v e l l i n g dow n the       Ml will    exi t at j u n c t i o n 36 and
    will be d i r e c t e d o n             the   A61     to    the  ground.    In the! eve nt of
    j u n c t i o n 36 b e c o m i n g h e a v i l y co nj ested, Liverpool tr affic will be
    r e d i r e c t e d to J u n c t i o n 35 a n d f o l l o w the em ergency route s h o w n in
    Appendix 'A'.This diversion                         will    not  be t aken into us e without
    i n s t r u c t i o n f r o m a s u p e r v i s o r y officer.

    5.2
       T h e L i v e r p o o l coac h e s will be p a r k e d             o n Clay w h e e l s La ne and
  Halifax Road         by beat pe rs onnel.

  5.3       N o t t i n g h a m Fo r e s t

            The Nottingham supporters are expected                         to      travel north o n
                m o t o r w a y w here they will be di rected to leave at junct io n
  34, T i n s l e y . F r o m there all t r a f f i c will travel along A t t e r c l i f f e
  C o m m o n - W e e d o n Str e e t      -    Brightside       L a n e . A t the j u n c t i o n w it h
  U p w e l l S t r e e t traf f i c will be        split.       Pr ivate cars               will cont in ue
  a l o n g B r i g h t s i d e L ane    —    Saville     Street      —     S u t h e r l a n d Street —
  Gower Street -                  Burngreave      Road    -      Rutl a n d Ro ad            - to N e e p s e n d
  Lane        where         the y   will     be   advised       to     find parking.             Coaches
  m i n i - b u s e s a n d va ns will        be   turned    rig ht       at Upwell S t r e e t and
  will t h e n travel via Owl er L a n e               to   He rries Road. T h e s e vehicle s
  will t h e n be p a r k e d at the H e r r i e s bus depot.


  5.4
            In      the      event   of     th e  primary      route  for      cars      becom in g
  o v e r - c o n j e s t e d the re are four s e c o n d a r y routes a v a i l a b l e s h o w n at
  a p p e n d i x *A*. S o m e traf f i c ma y       be   sent o n the coach route. Non e
  of t h e        alternative        ro u t e s  will   be     used  without consulting a
  s u p e r v i s o r y officer.


  5.5
            D e s p i t e the above    instructions           any    Nottingham        sup porter
  t r a v e l l i n g by car and p a r t i c u l a r l y  wish i n g to leave the mo torway
  at j u n c t i o n 33, Catcl if fe ,       an d      travel    via   the P a r k w a y will be
  a l l o w e d to do so.


  5. 6
           S u p e r v i s o r y officers must        en s u r e Opera t i o n s roo m ar e             kept
  i n f o r m e d of a n y traf f i c d i v e r s i o n s effected.


      5.7
            A r e s e r v e of e i g h t o f f i c e r s s h o w n   in ap pendix D will rem ai n
  on standby at              Driv i n g    school.       If      im pl ementing  the  em ergency
  routes necessitates                   further      manpower        these   officers  plus the


•
  m o t o r c y c l e w i n g s h o u l d be used.




                                                                                                              1?mw
                                                                                         Document No. 1 9 4        B CONT’ D




6.    Brimecs.

6.1
          T h e D o n c a s t e r Br i m e c c r e w e d by PC  706 Swinb o u r n e a n d PC 55 9
S a d l e r will b e o n st andby at W e s t               Bar -from 09.00. T hese o ^ i c e r s
will take a mea l at W e s t Bar.

6.2
          The S h e f f i e l d Br i m e c c r e w e d by PC    251 3             S mith a n d FC 1526
W a r r i l o w will be on s t a n d b y at C l a y w h e e l s L ane             -from 09.00. T h e s e
o f f i c e r s w i l l meal at C l a y w h e e l s Lane.

7. Wr;als

7. 1
          All o f f i c e r s will be      p r o v i d e d w i t h one          pac k e d meal to be
c o n s u m e d o n l o c a t i o n an d a hot       meal will be p r o v i d e d during the
match. O f f i c e r s on t r a f f i c     points          and       the M o t o r c y c l e Wing will
meal at D r i v i n g School. All o ther                  o f f i c e r s will meal as stiown in
A p p e n d i x ’B ’ .



8. F o r c e C o a c h e s .

8. 1                                                                              w
          Th e c o a c h based at          Claywheels          Lane      will      be d r i v e n by nr.
T u r t o n a n d w i l l t r a n s p o r t o f f i c e r s fr om C D i v i s i o n to the cround.
H e will be a t C2 s u b - d i v i s i o n            for    8.J5      am and at Cl for 9 . 0 0 a m
am T h i s c o a c h will later par k                 up    at L e p p i n g s L a n e / C a t c h b a r L a n e
b e t w e e n 2 . 4 5 pm and 4 . 3 0 p m a n d will             be use d to hol d officer s o n
standby.

8.2
          T h e d r i v i n g school coac h,       drive n by Mr. A r m i t a g e will a l s o
c o n v e y o f f i c e r s from C d i v i s i o n to the ground. Thi s c o a c h *ill be
at C 3 s u b - d i v i s i o n for 8 . 1 5 a m an d at Cl for 9am. O n c o m p l e t i o n o f
t h e s e d u t i e s this c o a c h will be parked at C l a y w h e e l s Lane.


        T h e c o a c h based at Ca r c r o f t will be     driven by Mr H u t c h i n s o n
 a n d will t r a n s p o r t A d i v i s i o n officers to the ground.   H e «ill be
 at A1 for 0 6 . 3 0 hours. T h i s c o a c h        will be parked up o n Peru s t o n e
 Road, near g a t e 0 b e t w e e n 2 . 4 5 pm and 4.3 0 pm to h old o f f i c e r s o n
 st andby.


 8 ‘4      T h e p e r s o n n e l c a r rier,    B90  CDA,   based    at Clay w h e e l s L a n e
 will be d r i v e n by Mr. S p i n k s . This           vehi c l e will a t t e n d at El for
 8 . 3 0 a m to t r a n s p o r t o f f i c e r s to the ground.
                                                                              Document No. 1 9 4 B C 0 N T ’D




  9. Cel 1 B u s e s .

  9.1
            S h e f f i e l d cell bus manned            by  PS804  Webster        and    PCI 185
  K r a j e w s k i is to be at t h e ground,            gate 0, by 9.00am.

  9. 2
        D o n c a s t e r cell bus m a n n e d by PS251 4 Naylor           a n d PC1467 Gover
   is to be at th e ground, g a t e 0, by 9.0 0 a m

  9.3
           T h e n e w S. Y orks cell bus will           be   m a n n e d by PS526 L a n g d a l e
   a n d P C701 W h i t e . T h e v e h i c l e mus t be at FI s u b - d i v i s i o n by 9.00am.

   9.4
              D e r b y s h i r e cell bu s will be pa r k e d  up at E c c l e s f i e l d polic e
^ ^ s t a t i o n by D e r b y s h i r e  officers  wh o     will  collect        it after the
    match. It w i l l be m a n n e d by PS1579 N u n n and P C 1 4 0 4 Ackers.




 ? S u p e r i n t e n d e n t , R o a d T r a f f i c Division.




                                                                                                      1210Y
                                                                                       Document No. 1 9 4 B C 0 N T ’D




                                           A P P E N D IX   ’ ft*

                                      A L T E R N A T I V E ROUTES


Liverpool:

          In the e v e n t o f Ml          junction  36    becomin<j     blocked   traffic
s h o u l d be r e - d i r e c t e d s o u t h to junct io n  35   w h e r e the fol lowing
e m e r g e n c y r o u t e wi ll be si gn posted:

          T u r n r i g h t at J 3 5 into C o w l e y Hill    - t u r n left into Nether
L a n e - Mill L a n e - t u r n       left     into Ch u r c h   St    - s t r a i g h t o n to


•
G r e n o s i d e - t u r n lef t back o n A61.



Nottingham Forest:

1.        In t h e e v e n t o f      Sheffield           Road,   Tinsley      b e c o m i n g blocked
t r a f f i c c a n b e t e m p o r a r i l y d i v e r t e d along th e f o l l o w i n g route:

        U n d e r t h e v i a d u c t — t u r n left into M e a d o w h a l l R oad — Barrow
Road — turn left Tyler Street —                    Holywell   R o a d — C a r l s i l e Street
E a s t — into G o w e r S t r e e t (back o n advised route).

2.       In the e v e n t o f W e e d o n S t r e e t           becom in g   b l o c k e d tr affic may
be d i v e r t e d a s f o l lows:

          Along Attercliffe Common                  -   Atterc l i f f e Road   - at Norfolk
B r i d g e t u r n r i g h t int o S u t h e r l a n d  Street — G o w e r Str e e t (back oh
a d v i s e d rout e) .



•
            In th e e v e n t o f M i n n a R o a d     becoming        b l o c k e d traf f i c ca n be
    i v e r t e d as -Follows:

       Up B a r n s l e y R o a d - t u r n le ft   into             N o r w o o d R o a d - t u r n left
at H e r r i e s R o a d o n t h e c o a c h route.

4.        A n y N o t t i n g h a m t r a f f i c l e a v i n g the m o t o r w a y at j u n c t i o n 33 -
S heffield Parkway,                 will        be    directed      to      lea ve        the Park w a y at
P r i n c e of W a l e s        Road      —     Staniforth        Roa d     —     A t t e r c l i f f e Road
S u t h e r l a n d S t r e e t - back o n t o a d v i s e d       route. T h i s route has been
s i g n e d by th e A.A.

5.        In th e e v e n t o f t r a f f i c t a i l i n g back o n t o th e m o t o r w a y at Ml
j u n c t i o n 34, t r a f f i c will be d i v e r t e d     north to leave at junc ti on
3 5 a n d p r o c e e d as foll ow s:

          T u r n l e f t i nto C o w l e y Hill - t urn left int o Nether L ane - at
traffic           lights      turn      left    onto        The  Common      -     Cross Hill
H i g h g r e a v e — B a r n s l e y R o a d — L o n g l e y Lane — H e r r i e s Road.




                                                                                                               12 i OZ
                                                                                      Docum ent No.   94B
                                                                                                      '       CONT’D




                                              A P P ENDIX   *B*

          T R A F F I C P A T R O L S B a m - Bo m S A T U R DAY       15th A P R I L 1 9 g g




Note    re m e a l s :   DS        D r i v n g School.
                         WE        W o o l e y E d g e Services(NB)
                         W         W o o d h a l l S e r v i c e s (SB)
                         CW L      C l a y w h e e l s Lane
                         Bu y      t h e s e o f f i c e r s s h o u l d p u r c h a s e a meal
                                   l oca ll y and c l a i m a p p r o p r i a t e all o w a n c e




Cal 1
                                                    Duty                                              Meal
sign          Officer(s)

                                                    Offic er      in overall       charge              DS
GHX1          Supt. Brougham
              Inspector Scholey                     As s i s t
              P C 2 3 4 6 Leek                      Driver

                                                    Officer i/c N o r t h e r n se c t o r             WE
GHV1           Chief      Insp.    Shaw
                                                    i.e. Li ve rpool rout es

                                                    Officer i/c S o u t h e r n sec to r               W
GHV2           Chief      Insp Lax
                                                    i.e. N o t t i n g h a m F o r e s t route

                                                    S u p e r v i s i o n Traf f i c S o u t h         DS
GCI1           Inspector Cawthorne

                                                    S u p e r v i s i o n Traf f i c N o r t h         WE
GBI1           Inspector         Brown

                                                     S u p e r v i s i o n tr affic p o i n t s        DS
GCI2           Inspector         Wa l k e r

                                                     Supervision Rotherham                             DS
GCS1           Sgt.      1 iy htfoot
                                                     Supervision Sheffield                             CWL
GFS1           Sgt.      Myers
                                                     S u p e r v i s i o n Don caster                  Buy
GAS 1          Sgt.      Dawson
                                                     S u p e r v i s i o n Barnsley                    WE
GBS1           Sgt.      Baxter

                                                     M o t o r w a y patrol                            W
MCI 1          P C 1 6 0 3 H o l d e r ness
                                                                                                       W
               PC 2 0 7 W i l l i a m s
                                                     Junction £ 0        - Barlborough                 W
 GC21           PC2637      Richardson

                                                     J u n c t i o n 31 - A s t o n                     W
 MC21           PCI019      Cartwright
                PC2548      Taylor
                                                     J u n c t i o n 33 - C a t c l i f f e             DS
 MC31           P C 2 B 6 4 M a r shall
                PC 1 7 0 S t e v e n s




                                                                  I
                                                                                                             I 21 OAA
                                                                             Docum ent No. 1 9 4 B C 0 N T ’ D




Cal 1
Sign       Oficer                      Duty                                             Mea 1



MCI2       P C 1^06 Edwards            J u n c t i o n 34   - Tinsley                    DS
            P C I 2 1 7 Hall

MB 12      PCI 167 W a t k i n s o n   J u n c t i o n 35   - Thorpe Hesley              WE
            P C 165 Hin ds

MB21       P C 9 0 6 Bagnall           J u n c t i o n 36   - Tankersley                 WE
            PC26.03 B r o w n

MB22       P C 1 3 6 7 Rowe            J u n c t i o n 37   - Dodworth                   WE
           P C 2 1 3 9 Rowett

fcJB21     P C 2 E 3 9 Scarg ill                 A616/A61                                 WE
W          P C 2 1 3 4 Brown
           PC2534 Stephenson

 MCI9      P C 2 S 7 6 Rodgers         Ml     Bari bor ou gh - T i n s l e y              W
           P C E 7 8 Scott

 GEU       P C 1 8 3 0 Webster                       as above                             W
            P C 2 7 1 6 Morrell

 MA21      P C 7 6 2 Sta c e y              Ml      Tinsley - Haigh                       WE
            PCI263 Shepherd

 GA31      P C 1 3 2 3 Axup                       Patrol    A1                            Buy
            PC2208 Watson

 MA31      P C 2 3 2 6 Rumble           Patrol     A1 A1(M)       S< M 1 8                Buy
            PC2585 Botfield

^MA19      PC2757      Quanborough                  as above                              Buy

 GF11      P C 2 0 8 6 Treek            Patrol      A61 6 S h e f f i e l d - Flou ch         CW L
            PC2fc96 Ra d l e y

                                                    as above                                  CWL
 GB11      PC2532       Wilson
            P C 1 9 3 7 Fa rrell

                                        Ml for es c o r t of t u r n e d back                 DS
 MC22      PC 7 7 2 Marples
                                        vehicles. E ffect s l o w lane                        DS
            P C 7 3 6 Radley
                                        clos u r e N. of T i n s l e y after                  DS
                                        m a t c h to f a c i l i t a t e e n t r y at         DS
    MC23   PC2724     Pi 1 ley
            P C 5 3 2 Roeb u c k        j u n c t i o n 34.

                                        Patrol Ml H a i g h - T a n k e r s l e y             WE
    MB11   P C 1 7 8 0 Rymer
             PC1B31 Grimshaw




                                                                                                     121 OAB
                                                                                  Document Ho. 1 9 4 0 CONT’D




Th e f o l l o w i n g o f f i c e r s will   form     a pub li c ord er patrol            to cover
W o o d h a l l S e rvices.


        Inspector       Steele                        All to work B a m x B p m and
           P S 1069     Wilkie       *                a t t e n d the brie fi ng at Woodhall
           P S 167      Milner       *                post at B.30am.
           PS2864       Mar sh al l *
           PC 375       Thomas       *                Don c a s t e r s e c t i o n to arrange
           PC2B39       Ba rker                       c o l l e c t i o n of their Tr ansit
           P C 1609     Webb                          f r o m C l a y w h e e l s L ane during
           P C 1006     Cartwright                    F r i d a y night 14/15 April B9
           P C 1767     Bell
           PC2406       R ud d                        Th e S h e f f i e l d c o n t i n g e n t will
           PC2841       W oo d                        travel by T r a n s i t from
           PC 194       R eed                         C l a y w h e e l s L a n e a n d will call
           PC2892       Smith                         at R o t h e r h a m o n rou te to
           P C 1651     Martin                        Woodh a l l to c o l l e c t these
           PC2705       Sanderson                     offic er s.
           PC2880       Sweet
           P C 1929     La w
            P C 68 6    A1 len                         All o f f i c e r s to meal at
            PC2344      H un t                         W o o dhall S o u t h b o u n d Servi c e s
            P C 1284     W a l 1 ace
            P C 344     Nicholson



T h e f o l l o w i n g o f f i c e r s will p a r a d e for bri ef in g at Dr iving School
at 9 a m a n d will dri ve p e r s o n n e l carri er s.                T h e s e will be u s e d to
deploy          officers          to   static    poin t s ,     distribute          packed     meals,
r e f r e s h m e n t v e h i c l e an d  an   incident         ba ck-up        vehicle      carrying
eme r g e n c y equipment. On stand— down                 t h e s e v e h i c l e s m u s t be par e
up a t D r i v i n g Sch oo l a n d t h e k e y s h a b d e d to Inspe ct or Walker.

                                                                    PC2267     Somerset
       Mr.
                                                                    PC 657     Logan
       Mr.
       P C 1 6 2 2 B a r r s (incident back- up )                   PC 116     Bell
                                                                    PC2128     C r answick
       PC2697 Rodgers


 All    a b o v e o f f i c e r s will meal    at    d r i v i n g school.




                                                                                                        12 i OAC
                                                                            Document No.     I94B CONT’ D




                                    APPENDIX    ’Cl

                            M O T O R C Y C L E MIN G DUTIES


Cal 1
sign     Officer                                  Duty


WHI1     I n s p e c t o r Cooper                 I/C M o t o r c y c l e P a t r o l s

WFSl     PS536         Walton                     S u p e r v i s i o n N o t t i n g h a m Fore st
WCS2     A P S 2 6 4 3 Li ndsay                   routes

WAS1     PS2730      Dilcock                      S u p e r v i s i o n of Liver po ol
WBS1     PS2397      Farnsworth                   ro u t e s

WB11     P C 1419    Marshal 1                    A6 1 6 S t o c k s b r i d g e -
         PC2090      Graham                       Oughtibridge - Hillsboro
WB22

WB21     P C 1585     Ch apman                    A61 T a n k e r s l e y to Niagra
WC12     PC1677       Wheat                       as above
WF21     PC1319       Hodg s o n                  as above

WB12     PC2733       Edge                         as above + duties                re
         PC2449       Mirfin                       Ba r n s l e y v B i r m i n g h a m
WA22

WA13     PC1487       Derbyshi re                  S t a n d b y j u n c t i o n 34
         P C 1869     B u i 1ivant                 re diversions
WE 11

         P C 1504     Cooper                       Catcl iffe - P a r k w a y         -
WA21
WA33     PC2555       Zalad                        Park Square

         P C 1796     Scothern                     P r i n c e of W a l e s Rd.       -
WA 1 2
                                                   S t a n i f o r t h Road

                      Thomas                       S h e f f i e l d R o a d - Atterc l i f f e
WA32      PC2459
                                                   C o m m o n / R o a d - N o r f o l k Bridge.

                      Cooper                       S h e f f i e l d R o a d - W e e d o n St. ■
 WA31     PC2457
                      Shel t o n                   Br i g h t s i d e Lane - Upwell St.-
 WF22     PC370
                                                   Fir Vale

                       Fenney                      Fir Vale - H e r r i e s Rd
 WE 12    PC2182
                                                   to g r o u n d

                                                    B r i g h t s i d e Lan e - S u therland
 WE21     PC1744       Pulfrey
                                                    G o w e r St. - (Brunswick Rd. -
                                                    N u r s e r y St. if necessary)

                                                    Go w e r St - B u r n g r e a v e Rd. -
 WF11     PC1B20       Bi ngham
                                                    R u t l a n d Rd - N e e p s e n d




                                                                                                      121OAD
                                                                              Document No. 1 9 4 { j CONT’D   J

Call
sign       Officer                                  Duty


WD22       PC2111 Wallace                           A61 West Bar to Hi l l s b o r o
W F 12     P C 2 1 1 4 Pash l e y                   as above

WD21       P C I 0 2 4 Howe                         Infirmary Rd. - La ngsett Rd.
                                                    M i d d l e w o o d Rd. - Park si de Rd.

WD11      PCI 7 7 3    Ro b s o n                   City   (Park Sq - Wes t Bar)
WD12      PC24fc3      Stevens                      As ab ove


WC21      PC2200       Whee l e r                   E s c o r t L i v erpool T eam
WA11      PC27          Copley                      Es c o r t N o t t s F o r e s t Team


* the a b o v e t w o o f f i c e r s wil l r e m a i n on stan d b y at drivi ng school
a v a i l a b l e f o r ot her d u t i e s until      s u c h time as r e q u i r e d far team
coach escort.


A f t e r the m a t c h it may       be  necessary     to      re-deploy   officer s to
other       locations.              Insp. C o o p e r will       be  r esponsible   for
re-deployment.




                                                                                                 121 OAE
                                                                                         Document No. i 9 4 B C 0 N T ’D




                                                 A P P E N D I X *D*

                               DUTIES        RE S T A T I C TRAFF IC PO INTS


N o t t i n g h a m F o r e s t - p r i m a r y route:


Location                                      Officer                       Pre-Match    Post-match

J u n c t i o n 34 I s l a n d                  PC737        Parfitt              yes            yes
o/s Plumpers Arms                               P C709       Jenkinson            yes            yes
                                                PCI475       Lath                 ye s           yes
                                                P C 1974     House                yes            yes

   ^■.S.     Vulcan Road                         PC24        E a r nshaw          ye s            no

S h e f f i e l d R d / W e e d o n St.          PC795       Roch                 yes            yes
AT S

Brightside Lane/Weedon                           PC63        K elly               yes             yes
St reet.

Brightside Lane/                                 PC2381      Burgess              yes             yes
Up w e l l S t r e e t AT S                      PC2432      Bunting              yes             yes


Up w e l l   St/Hollywell            St          PC786        Emmerson            yes             yes
AT S

Owler Lane road works                            PC237        Wastnage            yes             yes
                                                 PC533        Schofield           ye s            yes

O w l e r L a n e / R u s h b y St               PC609        Parke r             yes             yes
^^undabout

O w l e r L a n e / F i r t h P k . Rd.          PC632        Hawker              yes             yes
ATS

A.T.S.        Firvale                            P C 2 0 2 6 Mitch el l           ye s            yes
                                                 PC2382 Lewis                     ye s            yes

Herries Road/Moonshine                           PC745        Water h o u s e     yes             yes
Lane roundabout

 Newhall        Road/Brightside                  PC806        Bra y               yes             yes
 Lane           ATS

 S a v i l l e St. E a s t /                     P C I 03 2 C a m e r o n         yes             yes
 S u t h e r l a n d St. A T S

 S u t h e r l a n d S t . / G o w e r St.       P C 1 7 1 8 Howell               yes             yes
                                                 P C 2 1 1 8 B e aumnont          ye s            yes

^ w e r      S t . / E l l e s m e r e Rd        PC2156 A n s e l 1               yes             no



                                                                                                            12 ! OAF
                                                                                          Document No. »   9 4 B c O N T ’D



^ower      St/Burngreave              Rd         PC30B1       Martin               yes               yes
 ATS

 Burngreave Rd/Minna                  Rd         P C 3 3 4 6 Smith                 yes               yes

 Pitsmoor       Rd/Minna         Rd              P C 2 6 6 5 Pierpoint             yes               yes

 R u t l a n d R d / C o o k s w o o d Rd        P C 1697 Myne tt                  yes               yes
 ATS

 Rutland Rd/Neepsend Lane                        P C 39       Ship le y            yes               yes

 Parkway/Park Square                             PC662        Thur m a n           yes               no

 Exchange St/Park              Square            PC T h u r m a n to cover       this p o i n t
                                                 a fter the mat ch

^^'rk    S q u a r e / S h e a f St.             PC2421       Hill                 ye s               no

 Park     Square/Commercial                 St   a b o v e officer to cov er this p oint
                                                 a f t e r the matc h

 P e l i c a n crossing Blonk                    TW dl                             yes                no
 S t / E x c h a n g e St.                       T W dl

 Pe l i c a n crossing Blonk                     a b o v e 2 T W ’s to cov er       this p o i n t
 St/Wicker                                       a f t e r the mat ch

 L a d y ’s B r i d g e c r o s s r o a d s      PC2212        Wrag g              ye s               yes
 ATS?                                            P C 1662      Hol me s            ye s               no

 Nursery St/Wicker                               PC H o l m e s to cover         this p oint
                                                 a f t e r the m atch

 Snig Hill/West            Bar     island        PC 2 1 4 1    Boyle               yes                yes

   is t l e S q u a r e                          P C I 06 8    Cat c h p o l e     yes                yes
                                                 P C 1787      Goody ea r          yes                no

 Furnival        Rd/Blonk        St              PC G o o d y e a r to cover       this p o i n t
                                                 a f t e r the m atch

 West     Bar    island                          PC2179        Middleton           ye s               yes
                                                 PC290         Ainsworth           ye s               no

 Wicker/Spital            Hill                   PC A i n s w o r t h to cov er     this p o i n t
                                                 a f t e r the m atch

 Hoyle St/Gibralter                St            PC2418        Mc Co rmack         ye s               yes

 Penistone         Rd/Rutland Rd                 PC54          Ibb et so n         yes                yes

 N u r s e r y S t / C o r p o r a t i o n St    PC286         Benstead            ye s               yes




                                                                                                                12 1OAG
                                                                             Document No.1 9 4   B CONT’D




 Liverpool    - primary    route;


 Location                       Officer                    Pre-match         Post-match

 Wheel Lane                          PC3229 Price                yes                 yes

 Halifax Rd/Kilner Way               PC2979 Ward                  yes                yes
 ATS

 Halifax Rd/Foxhill Rd               PC2725 Plummer              yes                 yes
 ATS

     >lifax Rd/Claywheels            PC14B    Jarman              yes                yes
t , ane ATS

 Halifax Rd/Leppings Lane            PC1687 Mullins               yes                yes

 Penistone Rd North/                 PC17B3 Brougham              yes                yes
 Herries Rd South

 Penistone Rd/Bradfield Rd           PC1486 Walshaw               yes                yes

 Hi 1lfoot Bridge ATS                1564    Mace                 yes                yes



 The following  officers will    remain               on     standby    to     implement
 diversions, provide reliefs etc:

              PC 47      Battye                     PC 679   Hudson
              P C 1364   Ferneough                  PC 783   Bramham
              PC 460     Jenkins                    PC2322   Thompson
              PC 511     Fox                        PC2761   Crawley
              PC2970     Bullivant


 All officers sho wn in this          Appendix       will meal at Driving School
 at 3pm.




                                                                                             1210AH
                                                                               Document No. 1 9 4 B C 0 N T ’ D




    Distr i b u t i o n

    A.C.C Operations
    C h i e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t Nesbitt


•
    C h i e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t Duckenfield, * F ’ d i v i s i o n
    C h i e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t Broomhead,   ’D ’ d i v i s i o n
    S u p e r i n t e n d e n t Brougham
    Superintendent Marsh
    C h i e f Ins p e c t o r Edmundson, O p e r a t i o n s Room
    C h i e f In s p e c t o r Shaw
    C h i e f Ins p e c t o r Mall, Driving School
    C h i e f I n s p e c t o r Lax
    Du t y Inspect or, O p e r a t i o n s Room
    Inspector Steele
     Inspector Cawthornr
     Inspector Scholey
    I n s p e c t o r Co o p e r
     Inspector Brown
    R o t h e r h a m T r a f f i c Office
    S h e f f i e l d T r a f f i c Of fice
    D o n c a s t e r T r a f f i c Office
    Barnsley             T r a f f i c Of f i c e




                                                                                                 121 OAI
DPP DOC       A




          121 1
                                                               j Documefit No.   195   CONT’D




The total deployment        of officers of all ranks in

various roles for 1988 a nd 198 9 were as follows:

                    DISTRIBUTION OF MANPOWER


DUTIES                         1988       1989   Variation

Ground Sector                  286        266       -20

Liverpool Sector               376        301       -75

Nottingham Sector              144        125       -19

CID, Dogs, and Admin           134        120       -14
Support

TOTALS                         940        812       -128


                           manpower    LEVELS


GROUND SECTOR

                                1988      1989      Variation
DOTIES

Supervision and Control         20         20         -




Perimeter track                 19         21         +2

                                34         23         -11
North Stand

                                23         24         +1
South Stand

Kop                             22         22         -




South Stand car park

                                22         22             —
Penistcne Road turnstiles

                                13         13             -
West Stand           ___

                                23         22             -1
Leppings Lane terraces

                                44         44             —
 Leppings Lane turnstiles

                                33         22             -11
 Reserve
                                286        266            -20
 TOTALS




                                                                                   1212
                                                         Document No.   ]   95    CONT’D


                             manpower levels



    LIVERPOOL SECTOR

    DOTIES                       1988    1989    Variation

    Supervision                  17      14         -3

    Coach Reception              24      18         -6
    (Claywheels)

    Coach Reception              22      18         -4
    (Halifax Road)

    Train Reception              22      18         -4

    Mini Bus Reception            11         9      -2

    Public Order (static)        33      27         -6

    Public Order (mobile)        42      36         -6

    Search Squads                22      22

    Coach Reception              12      11         -1
    (Leppings Lane)

    Leppings Lane (static)       11      9          -2

    Leppings Lane roundabout     23      18         -5

    Penistone Road/              22      18         -4
    Leppings Lane

    Penistone Road North         22      18         -4

    Middlevood Road              44      27         -17

    Hillsborough Corner          18      9          -9

    Parkside Road                H       9          -2

    Mounted                      20      20

    TTTTCVT.fi                   376     301        -75




*


                                                                                 1213
                                                        Document No.   ]   95   CONT’D


                          MANPOWER I£VELS


NOTTINGHAMSHIRE SECTOR

DOTIES                        1988     1989   Variation

Supervision                   8        8

Coach Reception               44       36         -8
(Herries Road)

Mini Bus Reception            11       9          -2

Public Order                  22       19         -3
(Herries Road - static)

Public Order                  22       18         -4
(Penistone Road - static)

Public Order (mobile)         27       25         -2

Mounted                       10       10

TOTALS                        144      125        -19


                          MANPOWER I1IVELS


CID, DOGS AND ADMIN SUPPORT

DOTIES                        1988     1989   V a r ia tio n


CID (inside the ground)       13       14          +1

CID (outside the ground)      29       15          -14

Admin Support                 32       34          +2
(inside the ground)

Admin Support                 19       17          -2
(outside the ground)

Traffic Control               1                    -1


Dogs                          40       40

TOTALS                        134      120         -14




                                                                            1214
Document No. j    CONT’D




                    *■
                         B




                 1215
                                                                                                                                                           Mam          Police        Accuss
CONT’D                                                                                   MANPOWER DEPLOYMENT               -      GROUND SECTOR
                                                                                                     1988 and 1989
                 Sheffield Wednesday F. C,                                                                                                        Police
                                                                                                                                                  Room
1 95




                                                                                                                  First-Aid Room
                       Hillsborough Ground                                                                                                                         v\   r.' V   • '   V"
Document No.




                                                                                                                                                                   K’t - V X '' o > X
                                                                                                                                                                   1V n           \\N
                                                            1988 2Sgt 10PC                                            Gy/11/1 «s
                                                            1989 isgt iopc
                                                                                                1988       4 Sgts       30       PC's                                          O'.    \    X      '.y™-
                                          «©
                                                                                                1989       2 Sgts       21 PC's
                                                                                                                Nonni siAND


                                                                  1                                                                                                                       \ \  y                     , r ,
                                                                             ’0 I                                                                                                          V y \               ■ 'o <; /
                                        -Info8                                            Supervision/ Control
                                                                                   ft!          Ch/Supt Supt C/I. Insp. PS                           PC                                        Vv \ \'       v'-;         I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                 1988                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                         \          t'
                                   4 Sgt J40 PC
                                         T989 , y               1Sgt 121                                                                                            1988’2Sgts 20
               ■V / ,       /     ^     $ 1-16                     0
               •vy / c>) / / ^Sgts 4 0 |jO                         -S    III              1989         1                                                            1989 2Sgts 20
                                                                          I •II
               ' ’ '                %        V,^""                 W    1                                                                                      4
                                                                             -
                    if ;/      ^                 A5 A / G          1-
                   o' -
                / lo :
                                   *    \A                         <0
                                                                   Uf        .1                               1988      1 Sgt           18 PC's                                                                     <sA
               /‘     1                                                        -
                                                                 1909                                         1989      1 Sgt           20 PC's
                                                                               2                                I’ l n y o r s
                                                                1Sgt 12P
                A w a y Fans Entrance
                                                                                   V
                   auel E n c l o s u r e s c
                        1988 1Sgt 10Pi
                         19Q9 1S£t 10PC
                                                                                                       1988     2Sgts 21 PC
                              Police C o n l r o l                      19-22                                  S0U1II STAND
                                                                                                                                                               TOTALS
                                                                                                    r j m       4Sgts 20PC                            in-in-
                                                                                                                                                                    Ch Supt
                                                                                         Ottlclul   2 3 - 2 ulWri— 1— <--- J                      29-32
                            Reserves: 19&8 JSgts JOPC
                                                                                                                                                    Cur             C/Insp
                                               1989 2Sgts 20PC                                                         "WLJ
                            K!LL                                                   1988 JSgts JO PC     /
                                                                                   1989 JSgts^Q,.^, I:titmu co
                            WIINSltLES     .... IZZZZJ
Document No. j   95   CONT’D




                         C




                  1217
                                                               Document No. | 9 5    CONT’O
TE LE PH O N E.
SHEFFIELD (0742)78522
                                                       SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                          SNIG HILL
                                                             SHEFFIELD S3 8LY



W. W. JACKSON
A S SIST A N T CHIEF CONSTABLE




 Sir Kenneth Oxford CBE QPM
 Chief Constable
 Merseyside Police
 PO Box 59                                              OPS DR/SM
 LIVERPOOL
 L69 1JD                                                29 March 1989




 Dear Sir Kenneth

 LIVERPOOL V NOTTINGHAM FOREST - FA CUP SEMI-FINAL
 HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD - SATURDAY 15 APRIL 1989 - KQ 1500 rKXJRS

 In connection with the above fixture, it would be greatly appreciated if
 the following details could be given the widest possible circulation w i t h m
 your area.

 All vehicular traffic from Liverpool should approach Sheffield along the
 Ml rrotorway, leaving it at Junction 36 and taking the A61 towards
 Sheffield. Coaches and transit vans will park in Halifax Road where they
 will set down tteir passengers and pick up again after the match.
 will be allowed to park on the numerous side roads in the left hand siae
 of Halifax Road in ths area known as Parsons Cross (please see attached
 rraps).

  The route will be adequately signed by the AA and police officers will
 -be on duty throughout the route and in the parking areas to assist in the
  arrangements.

  All supporters should.time their journey to arrive at Sheffield between
  1030 and 1400 hours to ensure that they are in the ground for kick ott
  at 1500 hours.

  Gates will be open from 1100 hours and pre-match entertainment and
  refreshments will be ava ilable inside the ground.

  Supporters may expect to be searched at the turnstiles and will not be
          2 tti         if they are in possession of bottles, cans orary
  S i S s litely^o cause injury.A copy of     Sheffield W ednesday's Ground
  Regulations is enclosed.

  'mere will be a strict segregation policy enforced on the day. Liverpool
  S S r S r s S i ? « £ £ y t h f r S t h and west side of the ground, ftottingham
  supporters will occupy the spion kop and south side of the ground. Any




                                                                                 1218
                                                         Document No. 1 9 5    CONT’D




- 2 -


supporter or group of supporters occupying other than their designated
area will be ejected under the ground regulations.

This is an all ticket fixture. Tickets will NOT be on sale at the ground
and any person not having a ticket should refrain from making the journey.

Yours sincerely




Assistant Cinet Constable
Operations           J


Enc




                                                                              1219
                                                                                                                                        >
                                                                                                                                       .>




                                                        >/v*<//t •Joi^/t'H" .'Ai/ttu-
       IC o A Q ^ C                 *Tfcftr4£rT Va HS




                                                                          "l j i i w   ii   Inn   I ’ ll




                                                                                                                                            DocumentNo.
                                                                                                                                            195
1220




                                                                  M 1 MOTOHWAY                JU NC I ION   3»>   IA N K L R S L E Y




                                                                                                                                            CONT’l
          Sh e f f i e l d W e d n e s d a y
                                                                         Polico
Sheffield Wednesday F. C.                      '          '          \
                                                                         Room
                                               Hrst-Aici Hoorn \
  HillsboroughGround
                                                                                                ^\\\
                                                   Gymnasium


                                                                                                         v w73-70
                                                                                                    "     'A 55-72      V

                                                                                                                '.;vV
                                                                                  ].
                                                                                                        '   v               '



                                                                                      10




                                              Pliiyvr's
                                              funnel


                       »v
                                                                                  X
                                              SOUTH STAND
      Police Control    X                                                  mm_                   37-42
                                      23-20                              29-32 33-3G            p „,a
                            OtllclH
                                                                          C ar    '

                                                   JM Z)

    K EY                                                       >/,          I              r   o—        r a
                                                                                 Document No.    ]   95   CONT’t



                                        09JJKD REGULATIONS


 U n a u th o ris e d persons arc not p e rm itte d to e n te r upan the f i e l d of p la y .

 The climbing of floodlight pylons, stands or other buildings in the ground is
 forbidden

 The constnption of intoxicating liquors-is permitted only in authorisecKplaces
 and in accordance with the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol Etc) Act 1985.

Fireworks, smoke canisters, bottles, glasses, cans, flags, banners, poles and
other similar articles or containers including anything which could or might be
used as a weapon, are not permitted within the ground, and any person in possession
of such an article or container may be refused entry or ejected frar. the ground.

Under no circumstances is it permitted to thro* any object onto the pitch.

Any person who fails to canply with instructions from a steward may be ejected from
the ground.

Any persor. who remains in a gangway may be ejected from the ground.

The Club reserves the right to refuse atiaission to or eject any person who
refuses to be searched by a Police Of fitter.

The Club reserves the right for its servants and agents to remove free this ground
any person who does not canply with Ground Regulations and with the Rules and
Regulations of The Football Association and The Football League or whose presence
on the Ground is or could reasonably be construed as constituting a source of
danger, nuisance or annoyance to other spectators.




                                                     i




                                                         I
                                                         I




                                                         1


                                                                                                     1222
TELEPHONE:
                                                            Documervt No.   j ^ ^ CONT’D j
SHEFFIELD (0742) 76 8 5 2 2

                                                             SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                SNIG HILL
                                                                    SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


W. W. JACKSON
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE




    R Hadfield Esq QPM
    Chief Constable
    Nottingham Constabulary
    Sherwood Lodge
    Arnold                                                      OPS DR/SM
    NOTTINGHAM                                                              qqq
    NG5 8 PP                                                    3   March 1989




    Dear       Ha.             i

    NOTTINGHAM FOREST V LIVERPOOL - FA CUP SEMI-FINAL
    HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD - SATURDAY 15 APRIL 1989 - KO 1500 HOURS

    In connection with the above fixture, it would be greatly appreciated if
    the following details could be given the widest possible circulation within
    your area.

    All vehicular traffic from Nottingham should approach Sheffield along the
    Ml motorway, leaving it at Junction 34 and taking the A630 towards
    Sheffield. Coaches and transit vans will park in Herries Road where they
    w i n set down their passengers and pick then up again after the match.
    Cars will be allowed to park on the numerous side roads in the Rutland Road
    area (please see attached maps).

     The route will be adequately signed by the AA and police officers will be
     on duty throughout the route and in the parking areas to assist in the
     arrangements.

     All supporters should tine their journey to arrive at Sheffield between
     1030 and 1400 hours to ensure that they are in the ground for kick off at
     1500 hours.

     fetes will be open from 1100 hours and pre-match entertainment and
     refreshments will be available inside the ground.

     Supporters may expect to be searched at the turnstiles and will not be
     allowed in the ground if they are in possession of bottles, cans or any
     articles likely to cause injury. A copy of Sheffield Wednesday's Ground
     Regulations is enclosed.

     There will be a strict segregation policy enforced on the day. Liverpool
     supporters will occupy the north and west side of the ground. Nottingham
     supporters will occupy the spion kop and south side of the ground. Any




                                                                                  1223
supDorter or group of supporters occupying other than their designated area
will be ejected under the ground regulations.

This is an all ticket fixture. Tickets will NOT be on sale at the ground
and any person not having a ticket should refrain from reeking the ]Oumey.

Your assistance is greatly appreciated.

Yours sincerely




Assistant Chief Codstable
Operations    "Ss—
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        T7I5
                                                                                                                                                          Ml
                                                       A6I                                                                                               NORTH
                                               BARNSLEY                                                                                                               | INTERCHANGE | j A 6 l 0 9 j
                                                                                                          A 6135



  A6I6                                                                                                i OM                        S h ir« u it« ii
                                                                                                  C rcm
MANCHESTER
                      Vvoik* Pul'Cf                                                                                                                                                    TINSLEY
                         perla C'eund                                                                                                                                                  VIADUCT
                               100(11                                                                                                                                                                  A 630
                                                                        —<                                                                                                                            ROTHERHAM



                                                                                                                                                                                                  INTERCHANGE
               Hill»borou<jh
                                                                                       u(|li
                                                                       i p u ( l > St uDiu l

                 Hillsborough v                         O w k r lo n


                                                                                                               IV nouf
                                                                                                                                                                                       blOUN

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SOUTH

                                                                                         n
                            WulKlcy                                                      Mfauquoi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CATCUFFE
                                                                                                                          STTtBCt|f
                                                                                                                                                                                      t UiniOll

                                                                                                                                       L*ha <.                                                                                          INTERCHANGE
                C rooH ti


                                                                                                                         Midlond M otion
                                                                               Pond S tr e e t
                                                                               | 3u s b t O l i Q n

                                                  GlO^*

                                                                                                                                                                                                        WORKSOP
                                                                                                             SheffieldUnited
                                                                                                                    C



                                                                                                                                                                WOi HUJu H |>tf

                                        b n n cljffc                                                  ■   Heeley
                    tcckK jH
                                                                                                                                                                                                               N o T Y t fs|G t ( M   yv\   f o & g T




                                                                                                                                                                                       N
                                                                                                                                                                 I lu llin '. I m l

                               \                                                                                                                         I                                                       CoACIffeS      ftNfc 'T A fo fa x YAt(£
                                                                                                                                             y0,i    I i
                                                                                                                                                     •
                                                                                                                                                         '
                                                                                                                                                       ■ M   ileudle*>




             A625                                                              A Al
                                                                                                              . Police
        Sheffield Wednesday F._Ci                                                                               Room
                                                                                          First—Aid Room
CONT’D




                  Hilishorouah Ground                                                                                             V' Ok '' \
                                                                                                                                     0 \' ' \


                                                                                             Gymnasium
] 95




                                                                                                                                                :.s
                                                                                                                                                        (-76
DocumentNo.




                                                                             'V                                                                           ,2   ^

                  v   ^                 „




                                                                                                                         16                                        49-5
                                                                                                                                                                   43-41
                                                                                                                         10
       ,\                                     1-16
                                                                                                                              i     11 'i
                                                                                                                         U          2   1
                                                                                                                              '     o
                                                                                                                              -     as
                                                                                                                              !     X . 1
                                                                                                                         13         2 ■


                                                                                         P l a y e r '*                  12
                                                                                         Tu n n e l ■

              Kl^ooLPans E ntrance
                and Enc?jQS,wre6


                                                                                       SOUTH STAND
                                                     19-22
                           Police C ontrol
                                                                        23-28
                                                             0(llcl»l                                     □              33




                                                                        D i r e c t o r * £fif/jv/ic0                             W k S i        FAr&
                          f n u c r »   r c
                                                                                         DocumentNo. 1 9 5       CONT’D



                                                  G O J N D REGULATIONS


     1-     Unauthorised persons arc not permit led to enter upon the field of play.

            forb^dderf^          ^ ooc1^ ^ 1 PJ’^ons. stands or other buildings in the ground is

 3         TV.
           and                  * n ,o x * c a t ing liq u o r s -is permitted o n ly in authoriseciwplaces
                    accordance w ith the S p orting Evefits (Control of Alcohol E tc ) Act 1985.

           o t h e r ^ im i’ i Sraoke c a n is te r s . b o t t le s , glasses, cans, f la g s , banners, poles and
           used a s a                a r tlc      or conta in e rs including anything » tiic h could or might be
           o f snrh an                      are not                   w ith in the ground, and any person in possession
                               a r t i c l e or c o n ta in e r may be refused entry o r e je c te d fraci the ground.

          Under no circumstances is i t p erm itted to throw any ob ject onto the p itc h .

          the ground                  t0   con53*y w^ h in s tru c tio n s from a stew ard may be e je c te d from


7-        Any person who remains in a gangway may be ejected from the ground.

8'        i ^ u f i c bt I ^ ! ! rVeS H?6 r ig h t to re fu s e admission to or e je c t any person who
          re fu s e s to be searched by a P o lic e O ffic te r.

      ^                          the r lg h t f o r l t s servants and agents to remove from th is ground
      R p o..iaV i«        ,        n0t CGnply w ith                Regulations and w it h the Rules and
      nn the r 05 j                ^0 0 t ^)a^ A s s o c ia tio n and The Foo tball League or whose presence
      rtanoo*.      ro '^nc* * s o r could reaso nably be construed as c o n s tit u tin g a source of
          g • nuisance or annoyance to o th e r spectators.




                                                              i




                                                              !
                                                              i




                                                                                                            1227
Document No. 1 9 5   CONT’D
                                                        DocumentNo.   195    CONT’D




                                                         OP3 DR/SM

                                                         30 ttsrch 1989




Dear

NOTTINGHAM FOREST V LIVERPOOL - FA CUP SEMI-FINAL
HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD - SATURDAY 15 APRIL 1989 - HO 1500 HOURS

In connection with the above fixture, it would be greatly appreciated if
the following details could be incorporated in the match programme for
Liverpool v Sheffield Wednesday on 8 April 1989.

All vehicular traffic from Liverpool should approach Sheffield        the
ML notorway, leaving it at Junction 36 and talcing the A61 towards Sheffield.
Coaches and transit vans will park in Halifax Road where they will set down
their passengers and pick them up again after the match.
allowed to park on the numerous 3ide roads on the left hand side of Halifax
Road in the area known as Parsons Cross (please see attached soaps).

The route will be adequately signed by the AA and police officers will be
on duty throughout the route and in the parking areas to assist in the
arrangements.

All supporters should time their journey to arrive at Steffie id between
1030 ani 1400 hours to ensure that they are in the ground for kick off
1500 hours.

Gates will be open from 1100 hours and pre-match entertainment and
refreshments will be available inside the ground.

SuDDorters may expect to be searched at the turnstiles and will not be
allowed in the ground if they are in possession of bottles, cans ^ any
articles likely to cause injury. A copy of Sheffield Wednesday s Ground
Regulations is enclosed.

There will be a strict segregation policy enfiorcedon theday.
supporters will occupy the north and west side
supporters will occupy the spion tap and south side of the ground. Any




                                                                            1229
                                                        DocumentNo. 1 9 5     CONT’D



- 2 -


supporter or group of supporters occupying other than their designated area
will be ejected under the ground regulations.

This is an all ticket fixture. Tickets will NOT be on sale at the ground
and any person not having a ticket should refrain from making the journey.

Your assistance is greatly appreciated.

Yours sincerely




Assistant Chief Constable
Operations


Enc




                                                                             1230
                                                          Document No.   j   95   CONT’D




 The Press Box
 Notts County Cricket Ground
 Trentbridge                                                  OPS DR/SM
 Nottingham
 NG2 6AG                                                      30 March 1989




 Dear

 NOTTINGHAM FOREST V LIVERPOOL - FA CUP SEMI-FINAL
 HILLSBOROUCH, SHEFFIELD - SATURDAY 15 APRIL 1989 - KO 1500 HOURS

 In connection with the above fixture, it would be greatly appreciated if
 the following details could be incorporated in the match programme for
 Nottingham Forest v Southampton chi 12 April 1989.

 All vehicular traffic from Nottingham should approach Sheffield along the
 ML motorway, leaving it at Junction 34 and taking the A630 towards
 Sheffield. Coaches and transit vans will park in Herries Road where they
 will set down their passengers and pick them 15) again after the match.
 Cars will be allowed to park on the nunerous side roads in the Rutland Road
 area (please see attached maps).

 The route will be otequately signed by the AA and police officers will be
 on duty throughout th? route and in the parking areas to assist in the
 arrangements.

  All supporters should time their journey to arrive at Sheffield between
. 1030 and 1400 hours to ensure that they are in the ground for kick off at
  1500 hours.

 Gates will be open from 1100 hours and pre-match entertauxnent and
 refreshments will be available inside the ground.

 Supporters may expect to be searched at the turnstiles and will not be
 allowed in the ground if they are in possession of bottles, cans or any
 articles likely to cause injury. A copy of Sheffield yJednesday's Ground
 Regulations is enclosed.

 There will be a strict segregation policy enforced on the day. Liverpool
 supporters will occupy the north and west side of the ground. Nottingham
 supporters will occupy the spion kop and south side of the ground. Any
                                                         I Document No. ^    ^   CONT’D




- 2 -


supporter or group of supporters occupying other than their designated area
will be ejected under the ground regulations.

This is an all ticket fixture. Tickets will NOT be on sale at the ground
and any person not having a ticket should refrain from making the journey.

Your assistance is greatly appreciated.

Yours sincerely




Assistant Chief Constable
Operations


Enc




                                                                             1232
Document No.   | 9 5   CONT’O




                          E




                  1233
                                                        Document No. ^   95   CONT'D




Chief Aotoulanoe Officer
South Yorkshire Metropolitan                                   OPS OR/SM
  Ambulanc* Service
Headquarters                                                   30 March 1989
Mxirgate Road
ROTJERHAM




Dear Sir

Please find enclosed naps showing the routes to be followed by Liverpool
and Nottingham fans attending the FA Cup Semi-Final at Hillsbarougfr
football ground on Saturday, 15 April 1989, kick off 3 pro.

Parsons attending the fixture have been asked to arrive in Sheffield from
10.30 am and congestion can be expected until between 6 and 7 pro.

Yours faithfully




auef-Censta5le~


Bnc




                                         PC 808 Rosevear        3205


                                                                           1234
                                                        Document No.   195   CONT’D




The Chief Fire Officer
South Yorkshire County Fire Service                          GPS DR/94
Wellington Street
SHEFFIELD                                                    30 March 1989




Dear Sir

Please find enclosed maps showing the routes to be followed by Liverpool
and Nottingham fans attending the FA Cup Semi-Final at Hillsborough
football ground on Saturday, 15 April 1989, kick off 3 pa.

Persons attending the fixture have been asked to arrive in Sheffield from
10.30 am and congestion can be expected until between 6 and 7 pm.

Yours faithfully




Chief Uonstaole


Enc




                                          PC 808 Rosevear       3205



                                                                           1235
                                                             NOMINAL ROLL                  FA CUP SEMI-FINAL
                                                             DOG HANDLERS                  15 APRIL 1989
                                                                                                                        A
          SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE.                           WEST YORKSHIRE CONSTABULARY. NO TTIHG HAMS HI HE CONSTABULARY.


                                                       1    PS 3530 P.Jarvis               1    PS 108 B. Mellors
< V z/C I n s p e c t o r T . P h e n i x
                                                                                           2    PC 2^+1 A.Barnett
    1    PS 721 J H ill                                2    PC 2522 M Shilltoe

    2     p s 2227 A D ent                             5    KJ1>57 P Galvin                3       PC 1117 K Hill

   3      PC 1031 R J a r v i s                        b    PC 1+503 I Ramsey              If      PC 1552 A Crawshav

    b     PC 1 1 ^ 7 T W e i l s                       5    PC 5228 E Erby                 5       PC 17^1 P Squires

   5      PC 1 7 3 ° G H i b b e r d                   6    FC 21CA S Morton               6       PC 183^ J Wharviel

   6     PC 9 9 5 R P e a r c e                        7    PC 209^ B Baxter               7       PC 1865 P Adams

                                                       8    PC 1^65 S Butterfield          g    PC 1935 M Wilkinson
   7•     PC 3 3 5 6 D G i b l i n
   8      PC 2^71 R Twigg                              9    PC 2020 J Reynolds

   9      PC139^ G A llo tt                            10   PC 13^9 J Bladen



011
   10 PC 367 A Seedhouse
          PC       1^96       S             S ca rff
                                                       11

                                                       12
                                                            PC 29^3 D Leddle

                                                            PC 3709 T Baker
                                                                                               DPP DOC
   12 PC11+97 R Day
   13 PC1329 J Maguire
   1^ PC872           M Barber
   15 PC1M*3 J E llis
   16 PC 485 W P ickering
   17 PC2699 T A lle n
   18 PC1297 G H a ll
   19 PC1333 S Smith
   20 PC2878 P F ish
   21     PC 1583 S Hydes,




         C~
                        C




                                                                                        Y W p & Q e i v         Qsfotc-

                                                                                         (\AvA T   cb




                                                                                                                     I 236
                                                                          I Document No. 1 9 6        CONT’D {page
                             f .a . cjp siki f i n a l        15 APRIL          ^                           J
                             OFFICERS AND CALL SIGNS
                                                                                              MAIN DEPLOYMENT
 CALL SIGN                 OFFICERS
                                                                                              EY LOCATION

 03/1/1          SP. PHENIX / PC 29^5 LID3LE / PC 37 09 BAKER (WY).
                 ’                                                                     LEFFINGS LAIS/PEN ISTONE RT
 OG/S/1        FS 721 HILL / PC 241 SARIvETT (NOTTS)                                   CITY CENTRE SUPERVISION
 OG/S/2        ?S 2227 DENT / PC 1549 EL ADZ.1’ (VY)                                   PENISTONE RD/BRATFIELD RD.
OG/1/1         PC 1"3c HIBBERD/ PC 1117 HILL (NOTTS)                                   rTTA* rT-JTTs-r )
                                                                                       01 —            J HECIPTION AN.
03/1/2         PC 1594 ALLOTT / P C 1352 CRAWSHAW (NOTTS)                              CITY CENTRE )
CG/1/3         PC 3335 C-I3LIN / PC 1741 SQUIRES            (NOTTS)
                                                                                                   ' FROM MIDLAND
03/1/If        PC 1496 SCABFF/          PC iSjif WHARVEL    (NOTTS)                    CITY CENTRE ) STATION.
03/1/5         PC 1M*3     ~.T.T.q   / PC 2020 REYNOLDS (WY)                          .ST0CK5RII>3Z/DIEPCAR A o 16
0G/1/6         PC 2471 2WIGG / PC 1465 BUTTERFIELD (WY)                                MIDDLE,vOOD/DEEPC AR     A616
03/1/7         PC 1533 SXITH/ PC 2094 BAXTER (WY)                                      LEPPINGS LANE
|0G/1/8        PC 1297 HALL / PC 2104 MORTON (WY) -                                    TANKERSLEY A 61 RECEPTION
OG/1/9         PC 2699 ALLEN / PC 3228 ERBI (WY)                                       PENISTONE RD NTF/WADSLEY S
0G/2/0         PC 11+97 DAY / PC 2522 SHILLITOE (WY)                                   PENISTONE RD/PARKSIDE RD
0G/2/1         PC 111+7 WELLS / PC 1865 ADAMS (NOTTS)                                  KERRIES RD/ HERRIES RD SOU
0G/2/2         PC 1051 JARVIS / PC 1933 WILKINSON (NOTTS)                              BERRIES RD/FIRTH FK/
OG/2/3         PC 1+85 PICKERING / PC 1+503 RAMSEY                                     PENISTONE RD/HILLFOOT BRIDt
OG/2/k         PC 2878 FISH/ PC 1567 GALVIN (WY)                                       HALIFAX RD A 61 OUTWARD
C G /2 /5      PC 995 PEARCE / ?5 108 HELLORS (NOTTS)                                 MIDDLEWOOD RD/WADSLEY LANE
OG/2/6         PC 367 SEEDHOUSI/PS 3530 JARVIS (WY)                                    HILLSBOROUGH CORNER

OG/2/7         PC 1529 MASOUS/ PC 872 BASSES                                           WOC'DALL SERVICES M1 M/WA.Y


                                               MEAL TIMES

        NIAGARA 3PM or ASAP                   NIAGARA 3.45PM                        WEST BAR FROM 3PM AS DIRECTED
                                                                                    BY OG/S/1    PS 721 HILL
                03/1/1                                   OG/S/2
                                                                                    OG/S/1
                OG/ 1 /5                                 OG/1/6
                                                                                    OG/1/1
                03/1/7                                   OG/1/9
                                                                                    OG/1/2
                03/1/8                                   0G/2/0
                                                                                    OG/1/3
                OG/2/2                                   OG/2/1
                                                                                    OG/1/4
                OG/2/4                                   OG/2/3

                OG/2/6                                   OG/2/5

       SPECIAL TRAINS - LIVERPOOL TO WA3SIZY.                        SPECIAL TRAINS NOTTINGHAM TO MIDLAND.

        IN -   1402         OUT -      1705 ( 35O )                  IN - 1231.      1246.    1302.    1312 .^500/600
                                                                     OUT- 1750.      I8OO 0   I8O0 . 1818^ ON EACH
        SERVICE TRAINS FROM LIVERPOOL TO MIDLAND
                                                                     SERVICE TRAINS FROM NOTTINGHAM TO MIDLANI
EN.     1121 .1210,1219.1319.1410.
                                                                  IN. O92 i.IOO5 .IOi5 .IO23 .lli4 . H i 7 .li27 .i223 .
!ur, 1727.1822.1849.1918.2028.
                                                                      1227 ..1305 .1314 .1328 .1416 .1424 .1442 ,
                                                              OUT. 1715 .1722 .1805 .1831 .1922 .1934 .1945.2020

                                                                        2 ' .                                1237
            F.A. CUP SEMI-FINAL   SATURDAY 15 APRIL 19&9                     PAGE 5
            ARIAS OF PATROL FOR DOG HANDLERS.              ,_      x„
                                                            Document No. ] 9 £    CONT’O


OG/1/1      INSP PHENIX/ PC 29^3 UDDLE / PC 5709 BAKER

WILL PATROL PENISTONE ROAD NORTH FROM WADSLEY STATION TO AND INCLUDING
LEPPINGS LANE. PROVIDE ESCORTS OF SUPPORTERS FROM RAIL STATION AND COACH
FASKS TO GROUND. AT END OF MATCH TAKE UP POSITION LEPPINGS LANE ROUNDABOUT
ON NORTH SIDE.
MEAL TO 5E TAKEN AT 3FK IF DUTIES PERMIT.




OG/S/1     PS 721 HILL/ PC 2 *f1 EARNETT
WILL EE RESPONSIBLE FOP. DEPLOYMENT OF DOG HANDLERS IN THE CITY CENTRE AND AREA
OF THE MIDLAND STATION. WILL PROVIDE ESCORTS AS REQUIRED FOR BUSES FROM THE
STATION TO THE GROUND VIA DESIGNATED ROUTES. LIAISE WITH INSP.D1 RE ANY REQUIREMENTS
FROM THAT DIVISION. ARRANGE FOR PATROLS TO BE MAINTAINED THROUGHOUT THE DAY WITH
DOG HANDLERS TAKING MEALS AT STAGGERED TIMES     (3 in 2 out)   AT WEST BAR FROM 3.15PM




OG/S/2      PS 2227 DINT/ PC 13^9 BLADEN
WILL PATHOL PENISTONE ROAD EACH SIDE OF AND INCLUDING BRAIFIELD ROAD. SUPERVISE
THOSE OFFICERS ON THE CITY SIDE CF THE GROUND AS FAS AS SHAiESMOOR BUT NOT
INCLUDING THOSE OFFICERS UNDER THE COMMAND CF OG/S/1.      MAINTAIN PATROL UNTIL
HALF-TIME AND THEN TAKE MEAL AT NIAGARA. AT FULL TIME TAKE UP POSITION AT
PENISTONE ROAD/BRADFTELD ROAD.


-OG/1/1.   OG/1/2.   OG/1/3.   0G/1A. .    ALL ON CITY CENTRE PATROLS UNDER THE
COMMAND OF OG/S/1.




OG/1/5     PC l¥+3 El.IIS / PC 2020 REYNOLDS

WILL PATROL THE A616 ST0CKS3RIDGE / DEEPCAR ROAD. GIVE ASSISTANCE AS REQUIRED
IN THOSE AREAS.      TAKE MEAL AT NIAGARA AT 3.15***-
AT if.25PM TAKE UP POSITION AT MIDDLEWOOD TAVERN ,MIDDLEWOOD ROAD AND SUPERVISE
SUFFORTERS LEAVING THE CITY ALONG THE A616 OUT THROUGH.STOCKBSIDGE. ESCORT AS RBQ’D,
                                                     Document No. |   96   CONT’D   PAGE   k
  OQ/ 1/6    PC 21*71 TVIGG / PC 1 ^ 5 BUTTERFIELD
  WILL PATROL MIDDLEWOOD HOAD FROM CATCH3AR LANE ALONG A 616 TO AND INCLUDING
  DEEPCAH. ESCORT ANY COACEES/MINI BUSES TO UNLOADING AREAS. IE. CLAYWEEELS LANE
  FOR LIVERPOOL COACHES AND COAL RD. AND WARDSEND RD. NORTH FOR MINI BUSES.
  FURTHER PARKING FOR COAGEES WILL BE HALIFAX RD.
  PATROL TO HALF TIME. TAKE MEAL AT HALFTIME AT NIAGARA CLUB.
  AT FULL TIME TAKE UP POSITION AT MIDDLEWOOD ROAD/CATCE5AR LANE. SUPERVISE SUPPORTERS
 LEAVING AREA VIA A616.       RETURN TO NIAGARA ON COMPLETE ION.




 OG/1/7      PC 1533 SKITH / PC 209b BAXTER
 WILL PATROL LEFPINGS LANE FRO! PENISTONE ROAD TO CATCEBAR LANE. ASSIST WITH
 ESCORTS FRCK COACH AND TRAINS PICKING UP AT LEPPINGS LANE ROUNDABOUT AND ESCORTING
 TO TURNSTILES/RECEPTION AREA LEPPINGS LANE. MEAL AT 3PM IF CLEAR. AT HALF TIHE
 PATROL CF HOADS IMMEDIATELY SURROUNDING THE GROUND. AT FULL TIME TAKE UP POSITION
 ON FOOTPATH OPPOSITE LEPPINGS LANE TURNSTILES NEAR SIDE CLOSE TO WALL TO PREVENT
 SUPPORTERS GOING BEHIND VAN. FACE PINEITONE RD. BRING UP REAR CF MAIN COACH AND
 TRAIN ESCORTS. GO TO CLAYWEEELS LANE COACH PARK AND PATROL HtfOR TO ESCORT OF
 COACHES TO M1 TANKERSLEY...         RETURN TO NIAGARA ON COMPLETION.




OG/1/8      PC 1297 HALL / PC 2104 MORTON

WILL ASSIST WITH COACH RECEPTION AT M1 TANKERSLEY. DEPENDENT ON NUMBERS AND TIME
SPACING OF AHRARRIVALS TO GIVE ESCORTS OF COACHES AS FAB AS           TEE‘CROWN PUBLIC HOUSE*
ON A£1 (HIGH GREEN) WHERE THEY WILL BE TAKEN OVER BY OG/2/5 AND BROUGHT TO PARKING
AREAS AT CLAYWHEELS LANE AND HALIFAX ROAD. TAKE MEAL AS SOON AFTER 3PM AS POSSIBLE.
AFTER MEAL PATROL CF COACEPARKS CLAYWHEELS LANE AND HALIFAX ROAD. AT FULL TIME
PATROL HALIFAX ROAD AND SHOPPING AREAS IN AND ADJACENT TO HALIFAX ROAD. WHEN COACHES
                                                                                                 &
ABE FULL HEAD ESCORT TO M1. AS DIRECTED              RETURN TO NIAGARA ON COMPLETION.



0G/V9       PC 2699 ALLS*/ PC 3228 ERBY

WILL PATROL PENISTONE ROAD NORTH BETWEEN LEPPINGS LANE AND WAJDSLEI BRIDGE.
ASSIST WITH ESCORTS FRCM COACHES AND TRAINS TO LEPPINGS LANE. PROVIDE BACK UP
TO OG/2/5 IF REQUIRED.     MAINTAIN PATROLS UNTIL HALF TIME. TAKE MEAL AT NIAGARA.
AT FULL TIME TAKE UP POSITION IN PENISTONE ROAD NORTH AT GATE INN. PICK DP FRONT
OF SUPPORTERS ESCORT TO STATION. RIM AIN AT STATION UNTIL ALL SUPPOERTERS HAVE BEEN             U
                                                                                                I''
LOADED AND DEPARTED. PATROL HALIFAX ROAD AND PENISTONE ROAD NORTH PAYING ATTENTION
TO SHOPS AND WEITE HORSE PUBLIC HOUSE. RIM AIN ON STANDBY.
                                                                        1     "     '■}     c
                                                        Document No. 1 9 6   CONT’D j
  OG/2/t)   PC       EAT / PC 2522 SEILLITOI

  WILL PATROL FROM EIGH BRIDGE (Ex'TRANCE TO SOUTH STAND CAR PARK).PENISTONE ROAD

  PARKS IDE ROAD, CATC HEAR lane, extend to bradfield ROAD and give support to og/s/2

  AS REQUIRED. MAINTAIN PATROLS UNTIL HALF TIKE AND TAKE HEAL AT NIAGARA. A T FULL

  TIME TAKE UP POSITION AT FEN IS TONE ROAD / PARKS IDE ROAD. SUPERVISE SUPPORTERS ON

  FOOT AND ASSIST WITH ANY PSV ESCORTS TO CITY IF REQUIRED... RETURN TO NIAGARA
  ON CCKPLETION.




 0G/2/ 1                 VELLS / K 1S65 ADAMS

 PATROL CF EERRIES ROAD/KERRIES ROAD SOUTH.       ASSIST WITH ESCORTS OF COACHES ARRIVING

 VIA EERRIES ROAD FROM JUNCTION     Jk   M1. NOTTINGHAM COACHES WILL BE PARKED IN EERRIES

 ROAD BUS DEPOT AND MINI BUSES IN RAWSON SPRING ROAD - EERRIES ROAD SOUTH. MAINTAIN

 PATROL UNTIL HALF TIME AND TAKE MEAL AT NIAGARA. AT FULL TIME TAKE U P A POSITION

 ON CITY SIDE CF LEPPINGS LANE ROUNDABOUT FACING HERRIES HOAD. WHEN COACHES ARE

 READY TO LEAVE PROVIDE ESCORT TOGETHER WIIH OG/2/3 TO H1 (TINSLEY - JCN 3*0.
 RETURN TO NIAGARA ON COMPLETION.




OG/2/2       PC 1031 JARVIS / PC 1933 WILKINSON

WILL ASSIST WITH COACH RECEPTION AT TINSLEY (VULCAN BO AD) AND DEPENDENT ON NUMBERS

AND TIME SPACING WILL ESCORT COACHES AS FAR AS MOONSHINE LANE/HERRIES ROAD WHERE

TEEY WILL BE TAKEN OVER 3Y OG/2/2. TAKE M E A L AS SOON AFTER JFH AS POSSIBLE.

AFTER MEAL PATROL OF HERRIES ROAD AND SURROUNDING AREA. AT FULL TIME GO TO HERRIES

ROAD BUS DEPOT. WHEN COACHES ARE READY T O LEAVE,HEAD ESCORT TO H1 TINSLEY. OG/2/2

WILL BRING UP THE HEAR           ON COMPLETION RETURN TO NIAGARA.




OG/2/3      PC ^ 5 PICKERING /PC **503 RAMSEY

WILL PATROL THE HILLFOOT AREA     OF PDilSTONE   SOAD/NEEPSEND LANE AND WOOD STREET.

EXTEND PATROL TO HOYLR STREET/SEALESMOQR AND INFIRMARY HOAD AS REQUIRED. PROVIDE

SUPERVISION/ESCORTS CF SUPPORTERS AS REQUIRED AS FAR AS BRADFIELD HOAD. MAINTAIN

PATROL UNTILHALF TIME AND TAKE KEAL AT NIAGARA. AT FULL TIKE TAKE UP POSITION IN

FSNEISTONE ROAD OUTSIDE DANIEL DONCASTERS WORKS AND PROVIDE ESCORTS AS REQUIRED

TO C I T Y ........ RETURN TO NIAGARA O N COMPLETION.




                                                                                          I 240
                                                  Document No. 1 9 6    CONT’D   PAG* 6

   OG/2/k     PC 2878 FISH/ PC 156? GALVIN

   WILL PATROL HALIFAX ROAD FROM FOX HILL ROAD OUTWARD GIVING ATTENTION TO COACH

   PARKS. LIAISE WITH OG/1/9 AND PICK UP COACH ESODRTS AT TEE 'CROWN PUBLIC HOUSE'

   A61 (HIGH GREEN) AND ESCDKT TO COACH PARKS AT CLAYWHEELS LANE AND HALIFAX ROAD.

  TAKE HiAL AS SOON AFTER JfW AS POSSIBLE. AFTER MEAL PATROL OF HALIFAX ROAD,COACH

  PARKS AND SURROUNDING ROADS. ATTENTION TO SHOPPING AREAS HALIFAX ROAD FOR LOOTING

  AFTER Dip OF MATCH. AFTER COACHES HAVE LEFT RBiAIN ON STAND3Y IN AJEA UNTIL
  STAND DOWN..... RETURN TO NIAGARA.




  OG/2/5     PC 995 PEARCE / PS 108 MELLORS

 WILL PATROL HIDDLEWSOD ROAD FROM HILLSBOROUGH PARK TO KIDDLEVOCD HOSPITAL.

 WADS^ iEY LANE AND SURROUNDING AREAS. INSURE TEAT ALL PARK GATES ARE OPEN FOR

 EASE OF ACCESS. ASSIST OG/1/7 WITH ANY ESCORTSCF SUPPORTERS/COACHES/MlNI BUSES

 TO APPROPRIATE PARKING AREAS.        MAINTAIN PATROLS UNTIL HALFTIME AND THEN TAKE
 M E A L AT NIAGARA.     AT FULL TIME - WAIELEY LAN^/KIDDLEWOOD ROAD.




 OG/2/6      PC 367 SEEDHOUSE /PS 3530 JARVIS

W I L L PATROL IN THE VICINITY OF EELLS30R0UGH CORNER, COVERING LOWER PART OF

MIDDLEWOOD ROAD FROM HAWKS LEY AVE.'UE. BRAIFIELD R O A D ,LANGSETT ROAD AND HOLME

LANE. GIVE ATTENTION TO PUBLIC HOUSES ( BRAIFIELD ROAD - BLUE BALL; AS) WALKLEY

LA N E - FREEMASONS;      LANGSETT ROAD - THE BURGGYNE AND OTHERS). VISITS T O BE MADE

T O THE RIVELIN VALLEY ROAD AREA (Ji 628) RE SUPPORTERS ARRIVING V I A THAT ROUTE.

MONITOR AND REFORT AS REQUIRED O N NUMBERS.       TAKE MEAL AT   JFK   AT NIAGARA.

AT FULL TIME TAKE U P A POSITION AT THE TOP OF RAWKSLEY AVBTOE NEAR TO PARK GATES.

ENSURE THAT PARK GATES ARE OPEN TO PROVIDE ACCESS TO PARK IF REQUIRED.


O G / 2 /7   PC 1329 MAGUIRE/ PC 872 BARBER

TO PATROL WOODALL SERVICE STATION O N M1 MOTORWAY THROUGHOUT DURATION OF DUTY

A N D UNTIL SUCH TIME THAT TEE SERVICE STATION IS CLEAR. COLLECT PACK U P H E A L 9AM

F R O M NIAGARA BEFORE GOING TO WOODALL. ON ARRIVAL AT WOODALL CONTACT MR.ADAIR,

GENERAL MANAGER WHO WILL ARRANGE FOR A HOT MEAL DURING THE DAY.

OFFICERS ON TEES DUTY SHOULD BE AWARE OF OTHER TRAVELLING FOOTBALL S U H ’ORTERS
ON THIS DAI I.E. NEWCASTLE GOING T O ARSB*AL.

                       BIRMINGHAM GOING TO BARNSLEY

                       DERBY CO. GOING TO MANCHESTER UNITED.
                                                 NOMINAL ROLL                FA CUP SEKI-FINAL
                                                 1 0 3 HANDLERS              15 APRIL 19S9           3
       SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE.                  WEST YORKSHIRE CONSTABULARY. NOTTIKG HAMSHIjg CONSTABULARY.


n/x/C Inspector T.Phenix                    1   PS 3530 P.Jarvis             1    PS 108 B. Mellors
                                            2   PC 2522 M Shilltoe           2    PC 241 A.Barnett
  1    PS 721 J Hill
  2    PS£227 A Dent                        3   PC1^67 P Galvin              3      PC1117 K Kill

  3    PC1031 R Jarvis                      b   PC   4503 I Ramsey           k      PC1332 A Crawshaw

  4    PC1147 T Wells                       5   FC   5228 E Erby             5      PC1741   P Squires

  5    PC 1736 G Hibberd                    6   PC   2104 S Korton           6      PC1854 J Wharviel

  6    PC 995 P Pearce                      7   PC   2094 B Baxter           7    PC 1797 Constantine
                                                                             8    PC 1933 M Wilkinson
  7•   PC 5336 P Giblin
  8    PC 2^71 R Twigg                      8   FC   2020 J Reynolds
  9    PC 159^ G Allott                     9   PC   1349 J Bladen
  10 PC 367 A Seedhouse                    10   PC   29^3 D Leddle            Document No. 1 9 6     CONT’D
^ 1    PC       11*96    S       Scarff    11   PC   3709 T Baker
  12   PC 1^97 R Day

  13   PC 1329 J Maguire
  1^   PC 872    M Barber
  15   PC lkk?> J Ellis
  16 PC 485 ¥ Pickering

  17   'PC        2699       T     Allen

  18   PC 1297 G Hall
  19   PC 1333 S Smith

 20    PC 2878 P Fish

 21    PC 1083 B Hydes_

 22 PC 2955 Do*6 all




                                  v-




                                                                                 ftcTUAL-

                                                                                 M A T C H    -



                                                                                                     1242
                                                                       Document No.           |   9 £>   CONT’D
                           F.A. CU? SIM: FINAL      -     15 APRIL W

                            OFFICERS a:;d CALL signs
                                                                                             MAIN DEPLOYMENT
 CALL- SIGN                OFFICERS
                                                                                             BY LOCATION

 0G/I/1       INSP. FHENIX / PC 2945 LIDDLE /pC 2955 DOUDAI                3YP        LEFPINGS LANI^FENISTONE PI
 OG/S/1       PS 721 HILL / PC 241 3ARNETT (NOTTS)                                    CITY CENTRE SUPERIVISION
 OG/S/2       PS 2227 DENT / FC 1349 BLADEN (WY)                                      FENISTONE RD/BRADFIZLD RD.
 03/ 1/1      PC 1735 HI3BZRD / PC 1117 EILL (NOTTS)                                  CITY CENTRE )                 &
 03/1/2       PC 1594 ALLOTT / PC 1352 CRAWSHAW (NOTTS)                               CITY CENTRE )   ESCORTS
 OG/1/3       PC 3336 GI3LIN / PC 1741 SQUIRES           (NOTTS)                     CITY CENTRE ) FROM MIDLAND
 03/1/4       PC 1496 SCAEFF/         PC 1834 WHARVEL    (NOTTS)                     CITY CENTRE ) STATION.
 OG/1/5       PC 1443 ELLIS / PC 2020 REYNOLDS (VY)                                  STOCKBRIDGE/DEEPCAR          A616
OG/1/d        PC 2471 IWIGG / PC 3709 BAKER               (WT)                       MIDDLEWOOD/DEEPCAR           A616
OG/1/7        PC 1333 SMITH / PC 2094 BAXTER (WY)                                    LEPPINGS LANE
,00/ 1/8      PC 1297 HALL / PC 2104 MORTON (WY) -                                   TANKERSLEY A 61 RECEPTION
OG/1/9        PC 2699 ALLEN / PC 3228 ERBY (WY)                                      PENISTONE RD NTH/WADSLEY S
0G/2/0        PC 1497 DAY / PC 2522 SHILUTOE (WY)                                    FENISTONE RD/PARKSIDE RD
0G/2/1        PC 1147 WELLS / PC 1797 CONSTANTINE(NOTTS)                             HERRIES RD/ HERRIES RD'SOU
OG/2/2        PC 1031 JARVIS / PC 1933 WILKINSON (NOTTS)                             HERRIES RD/FIRTH PK/
OG/2/3        PC 485 PICKERING / PC 4503 RAMSEY                                      PENISTONE RD/HJLLFOOT BRID
OG/2/k        PC 2878 FISH/ PC 1567 GALVIN (WY)                                      HALIFAX RD A 61 OUTWARD
OG/2/5        PC 995 PEARCE / PS 108 MELLORS (NOTTS)                                 MIDDLEWOOD RD/WADSLEY LANE
0G/2/6        PC 367 SEEDHOUSE/PS 353O JARVIS (WY)                                   HILLSBOROUGH CORNER

OG/2/7        PC 1329 KAGUIRV PC 872 BARBER                                          WOODALL SERVICES M1 Vi/iUCL


                                            MEAL TIMES

       NIAGARA 3PM or ASAP                 NIAGARA 3.45PM                        WEST BAR FROM 3PM AS DIRECTED
                                                                                 BY OG/S/1         PS 721 EILL
               0G/I/1                              OG/S/2
                                                                                 OG/S/1
               OG/1/5                              OG/1/6
                                                                                 OG/1/1
               OG/1/7                              OG/1/9
                                                                                 OG/1/2
               O G / 1/8                           OS/2/O
                                                                                 OG/1/3
               OG/2/2                              OG/^/1
                                                                                 O G / 1/4
               OG/2/4                              OG/2/3
               OG/2/6                              OG/2/5


       SPECIAL TRAINS - LIVERPOOL TO WADSLEY.                 SPECIAL TRAINS NOTTINGHAM TO MIDLAND.

       IN -   1402         OUT -   1705 ( 35 O )                 IN - 1231.        1246.     1302.       1312.^500/600
                                                                 OUT- 1750.        1800.     1806.       1818^ ON EACH
       SERVICE TRAINS FROM LIVERPOOL TO MIDLAND
                                                                 SERVICE TRAINS FROM NOTTINGHAM TO MIDLAN.
JIN.   1121.1210.1219.1319.1410.
                                                            IN. 0921.1005.1015.1023.111^.1117.1127.1223
OUT. 1727.1822.1849.1918.2028.
                                                                1227..1305.1314.1328.1416.1424.1442*
                                                           OUT. 1715.1722.1805.1831.1922.1934.1945.202c
                                                                   -024,                                      243
                                                                                                PAGE 3
            F.A. CD? SEMI-FINAL          SATURDAY 15 APRIL 19»9
            AREAS    OF    PATHOL   FOR DOG   HANDLERS.                      """'**       1' [ S Z '    ...   :
                                                                       Document No.                    CONT’D i

OG/I/1      INSF PHENIX/ PC 29^3 LIDDLE / PC 3709 BAKER

WILL PAT30L PENISTONE HOAD NORTH FHOM WADSLEY STATION TO AND INCLUDING
LEPPINGS LANE. PROVIDE ESCORTS OF SUPPORTERS FROM RAIL STATION AND COACH
PARKS TO GROUND. AT END OF MATCH TAKE UP POSITION LEPPINGS LANE ROUNDABOUT
ON NORTE SIDE.
MEAL TO BE TAKEN AT 3FM IF DUTIES PERMIT.




OG/S/1     PS 721 EILL/ PC 241 BARNETT
WILL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR DEPLOYMENT OF DOG HANDLERS IN THE CITY CENTRE AND AREA
OF THE MIDLAND STATION. WILL PROVIDE ESCORTS AS REQUIRED FOR BUSES FROM THE
STATION TO THE GROUND VIA DESIGNATED ROUTES. LIAISE WITH INSP.D1 RE ANY REQUIREMENTS
FROM THAT DIVISION. ARRANGE FOR PATROLS TO BE MAINTAINED THROUGHOUT THE DAY WITH
DOG HANDLERS TAKING MEALS AT STAGGERED TIMES                 (3 in 2 out)   AT WEST BAR FROM 3.15PM




OG/S/2     PS 2227 D I M 1/ PC 13^9 BLADEN
WILL PATROL PENISTONE ROAD EACH SIDE OF AND INCLUDING BRAIFIELD ROAD, SUPERVISE
THOSE OFFICERS ON THE CITY SIDE OF THE GROUND AS FAR AS SHALESMOOR BUT NOT
INCLUDING THOSE OFFICERS UNDER THE COMMAND CF OG/S/1.                 MAINTAIN PATROL UNTIL
HALF-TIME AND TH0* TAKE MEAL AT NIAGARA. AT FULL TIME TAKE UP POSITION AT
FENISTONE ROAD/BRADFTELD ROAD.



-OG/1/1.   OG/1/2,    OG/1/3.       CG/1A...        ALL ON CITY CENTRE PATROIS UNDER THE

COMMAND OF OG/S/1.




OG/1/5     PC 1M+3 ELLIS / PC 2020 REYNOLDS

WILL PATROL THE A616 STOCKSBRIDGE / DEEPCAR HOAD. GIVE ASSISTANCE AS REQUIRED
IN THOSE AREAS.           TAKE MEAL AT NIAGARA AT 3.15***.                            .    '
AT 4.25FM TAKE UP POSITION AT           M IDDLEW O O D   TAVERN,MIDDLEWOOD ROAD AND SUPERVISE
SUPPORTERS LEAVING THE CITY ALONG THE A616 OUT THROUGH ST0CK3RIDGE. ESCORT AS REQ D.




                                                                                                   I 244
                                                        I Document No.   196   CONT’D page   k
        OG/1/6    PC 24?1 TYIGG / PC 1465 BUTTERFIELD                                *
       WILL PATROL MIDDLE^OCD HOAD FRO! CATCH3AR LAN! ALONG A616 TO AND INCLUDES
       DEEPCAR. ESCORT ANY COACHES/MINI BUSES TO UNLOADING AREAS. 12. CLATWEEELS LANE
       FOR LIVERPOOL COACHES AND COAL RD. AND WARDSEND RD. NORIB FOR MINI BOSES.
       FURTHER PARKING FOR COACHES WILL BE HALIFAX RD.
       PATROL TO HALF TIME. TAKE HEAL AT HALFTIME AT NIAGARA CLUB.
       AT FULL TIKE TAKE UP POSITION AT MIDDUVOOD ROAD/C ATCEBAR LANE. SUPERVISE SUPPORTERS
       LEAVING AREA VIA A616.     RETURN TO NIAGARA ON COMPLETION.




      °S/V7       PC 1555 SMITH / PC 2094 BAXTER
      WILL PATROL LEPFINGS LANE FRO! PENISTONE ROAD TO CATCH3AR LANE. ASSIST WITH
      ESCORTS FRCK COACH AND TRAINS PICKING UP AT LEPPINGS LANE ROUNDABOUT AND ESCORTING
^     TO TURNSTILES/RECEPTION AREA LEPPINGS LANE. MEAL AT 3PM IF CLEAR. AT HALF TIME
      PATROL OF ROADS IMMEDIATELY SURROUNDING TEE GROUND. AT FULL TIME TAKE UP POSITION
      ON FOOTPATH OPPOSITE LEPPINGS LANE TURNSTILES NEAR SIDE CLOSE TO WALL TO PREVENT
      SUPPORTERS GOING BEHIND VAN. FACE PEKEITCNE RD. BRING UP REAR CF MAIN COACH AND
      TRAIN ESCORTS. GO TO CTLAYWEEELS LANE COACH PARK AND PATROL PRIOR TO ESCORT OF
      COACHES TO M1 TANKERS LEY....... RETURN TO NIAGARA ON COMPLETION.




     OG/1/8      PC 1297 hail / PC 2104 MORTON

     WILL ASSIST WITH COACH RECEPTION AT H1 TANKERSLEY. DEPENDENT ON NUMBERS AND TIME
     SPACING OF AERARRIVAIS TO GIVE ESCORTS OF COACHES ASFAR AS          THE‘CROWN PUBLIC HOUSE*
     ON A61 (HIGH GREEN) WHERE THEY WILL BE TAKEN OVER BI OG/2/5 AND BROUGHT TO PARKING
     AREAS AT CLAYWHEELS LANE AND HALIFAX ROAD. TAKE MEAL AS SOON AFTER 3PM AS POSSIBLE.
     AFTER MEAL PATROL CF COACHPARKS CLAYWHEELS LANE AND HALIFAX HOAD. AT FULL TIKE
     PATROL HALIFAX ROAD AND SHOPPING AREAS IN AND ADJACENT TO HALIFAX ROAD. WEEN COACHES
     ARE FULL HEAD ESCORT TO M1. AS DIRECTED         RETURN 10 NIAGARA ON COMPLETION.



     OG/1/9      PC 2699 ALLEN/ PC 5228 ERBY

    •WILL PATROL PENISTONE ROAD NORTH BETWEEN LEPPINGS LANE AND WADSLEY BRIDGE.
     ASSIST WITH ESCORTS FRCM COACHES AND TRAINS TO LEFPINGS LANE. PROVIDE BACK UP
    TO OG/2/5 IF REQUIRED.      MAINTAIN PATROLS UNTIL HALF TIME. TAKE MEAL JET NIAGARA.
    AT FULL TIME TAKE UP POSITION IN PZNISTONE ROAD NORTH AT GATE INN. PICK UP FRONT
    CF SUPPORTERS ESCORT TO STATION. RIM AIN AT STATION UNTIL ALL SUPPOERTESS HAVE BEEN
                                                                                                   r
    LOADED AND DEPARTED. PATROL HALIFAX ROAD AND PBJISTONE ROAD NORTH PAYING ATTENTION             i
    TO SHOPS AND WHITE HORSE PUBLIC HOUSE. RffiAIN ON STANDBY.




                                                                                         12 45
                                                  I Document No, 196   CONT’d !   PAG2 5
   0G/2A)       1l+97 EAT / PC 2522 SEILLITOI

  WILL PATROL FROM HIGH BRIDGE (DJTRANCE TO SOUTH STAND CAR PARK),PENISTONE ROAD
  PARKS IDE ROAD, CATCEBAR LANE. EXTEND TO BRAIFIELD ROAD AND GIVE SUPPORT TO OG/S/2
  AS REQUIRED. MAINTAIN PATROLS UNTIL HALT TIME AND TAKE HEAL AT NIAGARA. AT FULL
  TIME TAKE UP POSITION AT PENISTONE ROAD / PARKSIDE ROAD. SUPERVISE SUPPORTERS ON
  FOOT AND ASSIST VITR ANY PSV ESCORTS TO CITY IF REQUIRED... RETURN TO NIAGARA
  ON COMPLETION.




 OG/2/1       P° 112+7 v m s / PC 1865 ADAMS

 PATROL CF EZSRIES ROAD/KERRIES ROAD SOUTH. ASSIST WITH ESCORTS OF COACHES ARRIVING
 VIA EERRIES ROAD FROM JUNCTION       M1. NOTTINGHAM COACHES WILL EE PARKED IN HERRIES
 ROAD BUS DEPOT AND MINI BUSES IN RAWSON SPRING ROAD - HERRIES ROAD SOUTH. MAINTAIN
 PATROL UNTIL HALF TIME AND TAKE HEAL AT NIAGARA. AT FULL TIME TAKE UP A POSITION
 ON CITY SIDE CF LEPFINGS LANE ROUNDABOUT FACING HERRIES ROAD. WEEU COACHES ARE
 READY TO LEAVE PROVIDE ESCORT TOGETHER WITH OG/2/3 TO M1 (TINSLEY - JCN ?M).
 RETURN TO NIAGARA ON COMPLETION.




 OG/2/2      PC 1031 JARVIS / PC 1933 WILKINSON

WILL ASSIST WITH COACH RECEPTION AT TINSLEY (VULCAN ROAD) AND DEPENDBJT ON NUMBERS
 AND TIME SPACING WILL ESCORT COACHES AS FAR AS MOONSHINE LANE/HERRIES ROAD WHERE
THEY WILL BE TAKEN OVER BY OG/2/2. TAKE MEAL AS SOON AFTER 3FM AS POSSIBLE.
AFTER MEAL PATROL OF HERRIES ROAD AND SURROUNDING AREA. AT FULL TIME GO TO HERRIES
ROAD BUS DEPOT. WHEN COACHES ARE READY TO LEAVE,HEAD ESCORT TO M1 TINSLEY. OG/2/2
WILL BRING UP THE HEAR          ON COMPLETION RETURN TO NIAGARA.




OG/2/3      PC W 5 PICKERING /PC 4503 RAMSEY

WILL PATROL THE HILLFOOT AREA CF PENISTONE ROAD/NEEPSEND LANE AND WOOD STREET.
EXTEND PATROL TO HOYLR STREET/SEALESMOQR AND INFIB'iAHY ROAD AS REQUIRED. PROVIDE
SUPERVISION/ESCORTS CF SUPPORTERS AS REQUIRED AS FAR AS BRADFIELD ROAD. MAINTAIN
PATROL UNTILHAIF TIME AND TAKE MEAL AT NIAGARA. AT FULL TIKE TAKE UP POSITION IN
JSiEISTCNE ROAD OUTSIDE DANIEL LONG ASTERS WORKS AND PROVIDE ESCORTS AS REQUIRED
TC CITY....... RETURN TO NIAGARA ON COMPLETION.
                                                                                            mw.uui luup.uium




                                                                                    1246/
                                                 Document No.   196   CONT’D PACT 6

  O G /2A     PC 28?8 FISH/ PC 1567 GALVIN

  WILL PATHOL HALIFAX HOAD FHOM FOX HILL ROAD OUTWARD GIVING ATTENTION TO COACH
  PARKS. LIAISE WITH OG/1/9 AND PICK DP COACH ESCORTS AT THE ‘CROWN PUBLIC HOUSE*
  A61 (HIGH GREEN) AND ESCORT TO COACH PARKS AT CLAYWHEELS LANE AND HALIFAX ROAD.
  TAKE MEAL AS SOON AFTER 3PM AS POSSIBLE. AFTER MEAL PATROL OF HALIFAX ROAD,COACH
  PARKS AND SURROUNDING ROADS. A U C T I O N TO SHOPPING AREAS EALIFAX ROAD FOR LOOTING
  AFTER EiD OF MATCH. AFTER COACHES HAVE LEFT RIM AIN ON STANDBY IN AREA UNTIL
 STAND DOWN         RETURN TO NIAGARA.




 OG/2/5     PC 995 PEARCE / PS 108 KELLORS

 WILL PATROL MIDDLEWOD ROAD FROM HILLSBOROUGH PARK TO MIDDLEWOOD HOSPITAL.
 WADSLEY LANE AND SURROUNDING AREAS. INSURE TEAT ALL PARK GATES ARE OPEN FOR
 EASE OF ACCESS. ASSIST OG/1/7 WITH ANY ESCORTS CF SUPPORTERS/CO ACHES/M INI BUSES
 TO APPROPRIATE PARKING AREAS.    MAINTAIN PATROLS UNTIL HALFTIME AND THEN TAKE
 MEAL AT NIAGARA.    AT FULL TIME - W AIKLEY LANE/M IDDLEWOOD ROAD.




 OG/2/6     PC 367 SEEDHOUSE /PS 3530 JARVIS
 WILL PATROL IN THE VICINITY OF HILLSBOROUGH CORNER, COVERING LOWER PART OF
MIDDLEWOOD ROAD FROM EAWKSLEY AV&'UE. BRAIFIELD W AD , LANG SETT ROAD AND HOIWE
LANE. GIVE ATTENTION TO PUBLIC ECGSES ( BRADFIELD ROAD - BLUE BALL; A ® WALKLEY
LANE - FREEMASONS}    LANGSETT ROAD - THE BURGOYNE AND OTHERS). VISITS TO BE MADE
TO THE RIVELIN VALLEY ROAD AREA (A 628) RE SUPPORTERS ARRIVING VIA THAT ROUTE.
MONITOR AND REPORT AS REQUIRED ON NUMBERS.     TAKE MEAL AT 3EK   AT NIAGARA.
AT FULL TIME TAKE UP A POSITION AT THE TOP OF EAWKSLEY AVZMJE NEAR TO PARK GATES.
INSURE THAT PARK GATES ARE OPEN TO PROVIDE ACCESS TO PARK IF REQUIRED.


OG/2/7      PC 1529 HAGUIHE/ PC 872 BARBER

TO PATROL WOODALL SERVICE STATION ON M1 MOTORWAY THROUGHOUT DURATION OF DUTY
AND UNTIL SUCH TIME THAT TEE SERVICE STATION IS CLEAR. COLLECT PACK DP MEAL 9AM
FROM NIAGARA BEFORE GOING TO WOODALL. ON ARRIVAL AT WOODALL CONTACT MR.ADAIR,
GENERAL MANAGER WHO WILL ARRANGE FOR A HOT MEAL DURING THE DAY.
OFFICERS ON THIS DUTY SHOULD BE AWARE OF OTHER TRAVELLING FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS
ON THIS DAY I.E. NEWCASTLE GOING TO ARSENAL.
                  BIRMINGHAM GOING TO BARNSLEY
                  DERBY CO. GOING TO MANCHESTER UNITED.
                                                                               <;oPr.      P ^ assi*

                                                                                                             -X L
                                SATURDAY 15 th AFP.IL 1QS9 I              Document No. 1 9 6        OONT’D ■
                                                                          ---------------------- _ J
                                       Personnel


 SCUTH YOPKS                                       MEKSSYSIDE                           NOTTS

 inspector      r.d-*avis                           Inspector wiikinson                 P.S.    1710 Watson
 ? . s ‘. 17o^ Thomas                               P.S 1952 Smith'. -                  P.W.    156 Hair.
 -- •w
     s • 399      ov                               ?.C. 1300 C-runhiil *                P.C.    790 Terry    -
 i; n                                               P.c 1696 Stanbridge                 P.C.    1226 Ellis
        2613 Lindsay -
        2550 Gillott -                              P .c    3844 Halpin                 P.C.    459 Kines.
        3186 V.'iison                               P.C. 3920 Evans -
        l4o5 Sv/ain                                 P.C. 4365 ^doe
       3°7 Kenwood                                  P.C. 4886 Harey
        2316 Scott                                  P.C. 5043 Fry “ -
        2472 ’.'heatcro'ft                          P.C. 5S55 Sinner'. -
        1105 Hurnan -                               P.C. 6278 Lunt
       357 Woodward -                               P . C . 70S 1 .Hadford _
        ?k8 Blades —
   :are                                            Spare*
 P.C.' 2183 Kaye                                   P.C. 5909 Bannister:
                                                   P.C. 2089 Peusl
    Station

 P.C. 2383 Ejnchcliffe
 P.C. 1o92 Woodward
 P.C. 2087 Hunt.

 P.C., 560 Marshall 1
 P.C. 1463-Allen " V %.tts
 P^V/._63 _Bentley. J'"'




 '3afr&ley'3 v .Birninrrhan!

A C . 1196 Brown'
” c. 3C02 Gant

 P ^C . 823]"Bens orfj
                       ^       iBuiibefs;
 P.C :^98iLPose..




                                                                                                             1 24 $
                                                                               Document No,               CONT’


                                S ATURPAT 15th APFTI iQg°
                                                                                                                    ti
                                        Personnel


SCUTH TOHKS
                                                                                   vc'--
-nspector ^ar.c-^&vis                                -nsrector      V.'illiinson O         F.S. 1710      U a is c 'ii
—, r>    .
         i
             i    rr»«
                   ~n0m3.s                           r.i:. 1->2     Sr.ith‘                *>•v
                                                                                           t  \.t*• i56
"D               SAr>r,'iV                          "«3 # ^""**         ?~ ^               P.C. 79C> Terry
^ .C . 2o1j?      i-'incLSciy                        P.C. 1o96      Staribridge r > V -    P.C. 122:- Ellis
       2550       Cillott                            F.C. 38 ^      Halpin       t*          .0. U=o Lnes.
       5156       V.'iiscn                           P.C. 3 9 23    Evans
       1495       Sv/ain                             P.C. 4355      Z&ze
                                                           45 56    f'arey
                                                     T
                                                     F.C. 5043       'ry
         2316 Scott                                        r-n ——
        2472 '..:heatcro'ft                                $853     Rirmer
        1105 Kur~an                                        6278     Lunt
                                                     t> r 7CS1      Kadford
        357 Woodward
        7^3 Blades
O'!
  rare                                              Snare
F.C. 2183 Kaye                                      P.C. 5909 Bannister
                                                    F.C. 2089 Peus.
     Station

p r. 2383 Einchcl:
     1692 Woodwari
     2087 Hunt.

         560 I-Marshall
         1463 Allen             Notts
         63 Bentley .—




Barnslev v rirringham

J.C. 1196 Brov.’n
 P.C. 3CG2 Gant


=
F.C. 5 S Sose.
     $84 DenS°n J
                X                Kunberside.




                                                                                                                         1249
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 O
—Sheffield Wednesday F C.                                                                                                                 P o ICO
                                                                                                                                                         ,    *\/        V \                  'K      /b&D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CM
 z                                                                                                       Firs I - A i d R o o m '
 o
 o            Hillsborough Ground                                                                                                                               ,,                                    .SlfU
                                   T     c   &m /co»cm            fSoa-? /utfftdgl uwf                                                                                                        P A
vD
On                                                                                                                                                       \\ /
                                                                                                                                                            /        VV. *o. V
                                                                                                                                                                             I.Nx N
                                                                                                                                                                                  \V<\n A
                                             TrtSP.          - pK P                                                                                                         V
                                                                                                                                                                                ' «• v \ ,\      V
                                                                                                              G y mn a s i u m
                                             •xwjpi
                                                                                                                                                                                                             C *7 7 -n it                        ,.v.
                                                                                                                                                                                         '       ‘ \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7 .'.1-7 G
                                                                                                                                                                       sir*. '                          '      V\                              0/
                                                                                                                                                                                               V ' '        S'/ ' ‘\ r>,-)-7 ?                 '

                                                                                                       WO/I 17/ ST AND



                                                                                                                                                                                                      V V'' •./>
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ' / '■■•5'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      V;             r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   < 7    </
                                                                                                                                                                                                            V\y*         1   V'(         •/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       'Ja   y\0         [
                                                                                                  CoOTV
                      3(8fc
                                                                                                  I /lAfli’o-S’t-
                                                                                                                                                                                               990. h
                                                     c/iri^                                                                                                                                                  w\\/      '/\ \\\-
                                                                                                                                                                                                             \<-\\\ \ / \ \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            v
                                                                                                   NoTTf                                                                             o i,.a^
                                  V          a   /   g                                                                                                                                                       \
                                                                                                                                                                                                             \ VV" v-IVa \\ '//           V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          \ 'v      '' Vv
                                                 QtlrL                                                                                                                                                               O k «SA
                                                                                                                                                                                     O 2U71
                                                                                                                                                                                     "        7<
                                                                                                                                                                                         (>w iru
                                                                                                       Ptnyor s
                                                                                                       T i ni t i a l                                                                    ^ovC                                            X\ \;
     A v / a y l: nnr, E n l r a n c o

          and finclpsiiros <
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   \\_■--
                                                                                                                                    242® JZ6(1
                     Polico C o n t r o l                               10-22                      SOUTH STAND                    " (fSfct: fifcf
                                                                                                                                                                 v,•.'!-:'A- r (/
                                                                                                                                                                                                 /*
                                                                                                  ..                             ,— n   — |---iii_iii_        i?/A-
                                                                                                                                                             ....                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                              :,V 7 ~ A 2
                                                                                         2 3 - 2 U ' L - , - - — r--u               !    1^ 0 - 3 2      33-30
                                                                                                                                                                      . . I ______
                                                                                                                                                                                         uimwwniU""
                                                                                                                                             Cor
                                                                                                          % □                       !—
                  KliV
                  1u,ms m nr.... . r/wj
                                                         C M
                                                         q
                                                                      o u i« . ^ lt-                     /
                                                                                         Dlmr.tois Knti/inco
                                                                                                                                                      |«|l|ltl   I UIK'U        /V<.• o   Oo

               lU                                                                                                                                                 ,N         tto u fra /
               SI Ief field Wednesday I-. C,                                                                                          Polico
                                                                                                                                                                 y .\- n                                             LO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CVl
                                                                                                                    ^         \    \\R o o m
CONT’C


                                                                                                                   Firs I- A id Room'
                         Hillshoroucjli Ground                                                                                                          •
                                                                                                                                                         /<\\    !.v\-      \
                                                                                                                                                                                  4- m *
                                            TgJiM /<o»CH          fSc^.a-?         U tjj
                                                                                                                                                        X \ \ . * - * '\\0
                                                                                                                                                                         ' '’b\
                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                       >'\ '\ /
                                                                                                                                                                              VO'
196




                                                 •stms P.     -Pk D
                                                                                                                      Cytllilasfimt                                      •»‘V \
                                                  iwt ?•                                                                                                                                   77-nn
                                                   ro+i                                                                                                                                                                 ■V ‘   x
Document No.




                                           <xi>-


                                                                                                               NOItrn STAND                               •V ^ ’A \>C\ '>A V^V;'
                                                                                                                                                            A ^ O U T \                 y\V.r.-72                   /              ,



                                                                                                                                                        Tl.il.iiil/— —i\ '» \ /'                               / s      '
                                                                                                                                                                                  X...\ . w. \ ^       V    /'
                         : PSjytou                                                                                                                                                  V>A.; ^                /
                                                                                                             yoo-rv
                  ' /■    p.t-iMF*
                                                                                                             L f yjftPoof-                                               M-i

                                                                                           egfl               NoTTf
                                                                                                                                                                                           W
                                                                                                                                                                                           >\\v        /A '\ N \ \                 :
                                             i ,!a   /g                                                                                                              o
                                                                                                                                                                     :: r<rts
                                                     C.^rL
                                                                                                                                                                     o -2W?1

                                                                                                                Plnyor's
                                                                                                                711111:0/
               A v /.iy Fnnr, E n l r n n c o                                                                                                                                                                               \ .

                   •'<ntl E n c lp s iir o s <



                                                                         19-2 2                               SOUTH STAND                  TJti
                              P olicc C o n l r o l
                                                                      'TmJcLC5uae k-JrTn-r-rr                                                                               3 7 -'I 2
                                                                                                                                      [   y?9 - 3 2      33-3 0        r-.,,,.
                                                             N W i3^     ^ ^ '0'                                  1                         One
                                                                   ar<U.                                           7JC:F
                           K l:Y
                           umnsiit nr.... .rzzm                                   11         D l r u r . t o i s T-nlr/iiicii                                                                              <3
                                                             C&
                                                             (R        « ^ .lk                                                                                                                     •            1
                                                                                                                                                               IVlillll         I’UIICl!         M U (JOtjii
     I
     toffield                   Wednesday F. C.                                                                                                    P o lic o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LO
                                                                                                                                                   Room                         ;'A\' |V J g * a                              CM
                                                                                                            Firs I—Aid Room                                                      •">V\ w - ,
         Hillsborough Ground                                                                                                                                                          '    2£<n#


                                        •Tr*SP-   *P^ 0
                                        •XMtP1    L4(U*<«<‘I‘>'1!                                               Oy/n/10 s/it/ii
                                                                                                                                                                                                          7 7-0 U
                                                                                                                                                                                                            .73-70


                                         Pw <<6                                                                                                                                 / s 1 ^ \                      v/
                                                                                                        N O I I 1II S l A N t )




          '\£S '?4
         / Pi
                                                                                                     SooTt*                                                                       i' fi?w
                                                                                         0            L 1KJ&kPo<»-

                                                                                                                                                                                   ft ^t2z<* *■
                                                                                                       NoTTf
                                  fA /G                                                                                                                                            O
                                         QilrE.                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                   o       ZU 72.
                                                                                                                                                                                           -7*8
                                                                                                         P i n y o r ’s


A v /n y Fnns E n lr n n c a
                                                                                                         T mica I                                                                                              \ > VV. VVv
    m d E n c lp s u r o s <



                                                               19-2 2                                 SOUTII STAND
               Polico C o n t r o l
                                                                                                                                                                 I      vf e \ ^ V'</ /J
                                                                                                                                  |— i-------- t        m-m           u ‘ ^ -          .   ;3j 7 - 4 2
                                                                        CHtlclut
                                                  NW
           K I: V
                                                                                                          J
            M i n n s v i n r .. ..   .127771                                      D l r u c l o i a H n Ui i n r . i l                                          .]                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2 ^ - 0   p M
                                             Document No. 1 9 6   CONT’D




The Chief Constable
West Yorkshire Police                                               OPS DR/SM
PO Box 9
WAKEFIELD                                                           4 toril 1989
West Yorkshire
WFi 3QP




 Dear Sir

 FA CUP SEMI-FINAL - SATURDAY 15 4 89
 MUTUAL AID - DOGS

 Further to a recent telephone conversation between a mentoer of your staff
 and my Inspector Pftenix, I wish to confirm my mutual aid request on behaLi
 of the Chief Constable in connection with the above events

 Dog Handlers                1 Sergeant        11 Constables

 The kick off tine is 1500 hours and the officers should report to Niagara
 ground at 0900 hours in double caged and double crewed vans. They should
 be in possession of boots and hard headgear. Meals will b? provided.

 Your assistance in this rretter is greatly appreciated.

 Yours faithfully




 Assistant Chief Constable
 (Operations)




                                          Insp Phenix               Sheff 852211 Ext 3



                                                                           1253
                                                          Document No. 1 9 6    CONT’ D   \


                                                                  —                       1




The Chief Constable
Nottingha-rtshire Constabulary                                      OPS DR/SM
Shsrvrood Lodge
Arnold                                                              4 toril 1939
NOTTINGHAM
NGS 8PP




 Dear Sir

 FA CUP SEMI-FINAL - SATURDAY 15 4 89
 MJTOAL AID - HORSES AND DOGS

 Further to a recent telephone conversation between members of your staff
 and rny Inspector Hand-Davis of the Mounted Section and Inspector Prenix
 of the dog Section, I wish to confirm my mutual aid request on behalf of
 the Chief Constable in connection with the above event:

 Haunted Officers                    8

 Dog Handlers                        1 Sergeant      7 Constables

Hie kick-off time   is 1500 hours and the mounted officers should report to
Niagara ground at   1000 hours. Th? dog handlers should report to Niagara
ground at 0900 in   double caged and double crewsd vans and be in possession
of boots and hard   headgear. Meals will be provided.

Your assistance in this natter is greatly appreciated.

Yours faithfully




Assistant Chief Constable
(Operations)



                                          In s p Hand-Davis   Mounted   Barnsley 753395
                                          Insp Phenix         Dogs      Sheff    852211
                                                                                 Ext 321


                                                                            1254
                                                         Document No. 1 9 6   CONT’D j




The Chief Constable
Merseyside Police
                                                                 OPS DR/SM
PO 3ox 59
LIVERPOOL                                                        4 April 1989
L69 1JD




Dear Sir

FA CUP SEMI-FINAL - SATURDAY 15 4 89
MJIUAL AID - HORSES

Further to a recent telephone conversation between a rrentoer of your mounted
staff and rrr/ Inspector Hand-Davis, I wish to confirm my mutual aid request
on behalf of the Chief Constable in connection with the above event:

Haunted Officers               12

Th? kick-off tim? is 1500 hours and the officers should report to Niagara
Police Stables at 10 am. Meals will be provided.

Your assistance in this matter is greatly appreciated.

Yours faithfully




Assistant Chief Constable
(Operations)




                                          Insp Hand-Davis        Barnsley 753395


                                                                          1255
                                                                            Document No.              CONT’D

                                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                    REF:    OPS DR/SM
         FROM:   pc 808 RQSEVEAR    FOOTBALL LIAISON SECTION
                                                                    STATION/DEPT.:    OPERATIONS
         TO:     CH SUPT NESBIT    OPS & TRAFFIC DIVISION
                                                                    DATE:             31 March 1989

                    SUBJECT:       FA CUP SEMI-FINAL
                                   LIVERPOOL V NOTTS FOREST
                                   SATURDAY 15 APRIL 1989 - HILLSBOROUGH




                    The provision of both mounted and dogs to the fixture on the above
                    date has been discussed with F Division. The requirement is for
                    36 horses and 40 dogs.

                   Barnsley also play this date against Birmingham City in the league
                   and request a reduced number of 4 horses and 4 dogs.

                   I am informed that South Yorkshire will supply 2 horses and 4 dogs
                   to Barnsley and 16 horses and 20 dogs to Hillsborough. We therefore
                   require to import 22 horses and 20 dogs for the fixture and these
                   have been provisionally arranged as follows:-

                   Humberside Police                   2   horses          Barnsley fixture
                   Merseyside Police                  12   horses          Semi-Final
                   Nottinghamshire Constabulary        8   horses          Semi-Final
                                                       8   dogs            Semi-Final
                   West Yorkshire Police              12   dogs            Semi-Final

                   I therefore request approval for this mutual aid. The necessary
                   confirmatory correspondence will then be prepared.




                   PC 808 Rosevear


                  cL                              ■




                                      m u




                           I                           3


                                                                                              9L_St




                  P C do ^ V<2C^T 0ir* •
                                                                                               1256
C-c\’?
                                                            UUCUnENV RECORD

                                                                                           l-her D o c u m e n t       Number




                         PHt. riA'iCH BR i EF i!JG F A                      CUP       SEMI. F I N A L         GIVEN     14.4.89




i- A C U P      SEMI          FINAL          - FRIDAY           14 A P R I L          1989




Ladies        and        Gentlemen




The    event            tomorrow               is    the     FA Cup Semi               Final        beteen        Liverpool             and

Nottingham               Forest.                The       k i c k o ff is         at    3    o ’clock         this      afternoon             and

the    gates            will     be      open       at    12     noon.




However,            there        will         inevitably               be    a    number           of    supporters              who    arrive

c a r 1y a n d we             shall          have    a     certain           number           of    gates        in all          parts        of    the

•jr o u n d \ h a y          will     be      capable           of     opening             from     11am a nd          we       will

endeavour               to    get-    people          into           t he g r o u n d       as     quickly        as    possible.




i must         stress           t h a t if     supporters                   do    not       have        a ticket        then whatever

they     s ay       they        will         not    be    allowed            into          the     ground.




 ifie g r o u n d        h as     a      capacity          of    34,000           people.               It    is a n a l l - t i c k e t

i^Uh          and       all     tickets            have     been           sold       so    there        is    no    room        f or   anyone

wh o    does        not       have       a     ticket       because              we    will        break       safety           limits.




 I he     =   tad   j   urn has          been       divided           to    ensure          maximum           segregation               and    to

 reduce        any       possibility                 of    public           disorder.



                                                                                                                            .     I ________ r—___i , ' “
 The W e s t        Stand           to    my    left,        otherwise                 k n o wn as       the

 and    the     stand           that         you     are     sitting             in no w,          which        is the N o r t h Stand*



                                                                                                                                           1257
                                                                                     I Document No.          197        CONT’D             PAvjti      H



                     I'-             v r po    o 1. o u p p o r i ^ f s.            All    access          t.o C lit1 u<" -if tr-I • - - ^ t

                       :"i•„!i i »         i i i L t*pp in g s >•a:;e                n>.t.




v, ;0         1.1i n                  r,rsst S u p p o r t e r s              have    been allocated                  tickets          for    the

;t,j.o n Kjp,             which         i » o n rny rig h t ,                 and    the     South Stand,              which          is

directly             behind           me      and       where        the      Director's             Box    and      the    Players

Tunnel          is.




To      ensure         that          supporters               from No ttingham                  Forest        do     no t     flow     along

the      back        of    the        South         Stand          and     towards         Lepping*           Lane     End       we    have

created          a     sterile             area         along        the      back, of       that      stand.




Tickets          are        colour-coded                   and       clearly         identified              for     the      sections        of

the      ground,           and        when         asked        for       advice       you      should         examine         the      ticket

and      give        information                   accordingly.                 Copies          of    the      tickets         are      on

display          on        the       information                   boards.




The      routine            vehicles               and        spectators            has      been     designed           to      bring

Liverpool              Supportes                   into       that     end     of     t he    ground         which       is      easily

accessible                 to    them,         and         in      simple      terms         that     is     from      the       north       and

th e     Nottingham                  Forest             fan s      have      been     routed         from      the     south       to

approach             South           Side          of    the       ground.



If      the     teams           are        drawing            at     full     time        today       there       will      be    extra       time ,

and      a ll       out     plans             need       to     be    adjusted            accordingly.




There          is     one       difficulty                 with       t he     two    teams,          and     that      is w i t h         regard

to      identification                        of    t he      fans       by    colours.              Those      of    you        with

football               knowledge               will        appreciate               that     both Liverpool                 and Nottingham

 play      in        red        in    normal            league        matches,            and    their        supporter*              usually          /



                                                                                                                                             1258
                                                                                      Document No. j                       CONT’D
                                                                                                                                     PAGE
                                                                                                                                     ■>




                                                  •f.h.'.'-.i W i * 1    slili        WKOir    their            n o r m a l -;,uppu r U- r ■■>


..ii i.u u r r> , i j t i o „      '.I,* -fxeld        i .am i o i d          that     Liverpoolwill                  wear        their

usual      r t>d s t r i p         end N o t t in g h a m will                play     in w h i t e .




II      is our i n t e n t i o n          today      that thism a t c h               will         take       place          without           any

public         disorder          and      we    must      ensure          t he    safety           of     the       public,        both

inside         and    outside            the    ground,         and       segregate            the        opposing           fans.




Th is    will        mean        control         by P o l i c e         Officers        and         in a d d i t i o n       to    ensure

thingi         run    smoothly            there        will      be      no    obstruction                of    the        highway        and

we   must       be    extremely            vigilant            to       ensure        that       there         is    no     damage        to

property,            either         in    the     ground         or      in    t he    vicinity            of       t he    ground.




I will         expect        a     high    standard             of      turnout,         good        attitude              towards

members         of    t he       public,         and     professionalism                     that       reflects            credit        not

only      on    the     police           service         in g e n e r a l ,       but        on S o u t h        Yorkshire           Police


1 n par t i c u l i r .




I w*.vt        the    public'to             be     treated           properly           but        thoses        who       transgress

dealing         with      firmly          b ut     fairly        within          the        l aw    .




I    cannot       stress           too     highly        t he     word        ’S a f e t y ' .          the     ground        will        be

full      to    capacity'today                   and     some        of    you      may       never       have        experienced               a

football          match          of      this     nature.            Our      job      is     to e n s u r e         the     safety        of

spectators            and        you     must      make       sure        you    know         the       escapes            routes,        the

                                 a n di -Kit       vynii ^re            fulls'    conversant               with       your
 problem         areas,                 that       y o u are

 r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s      should a crisis .rise.                            There will be a tremendou.

 atmosphere wi th in the ground but you must not be cau9 ht up in thi. or


                                                                                                                                          1259
                                                                                                   Document No.            *    Q    7    CONT'D
                                                                                                                           17/                         ;-


                    ;■> ..<,*1
                  r.■                            * Uiang           pi <=,<.* o>s T . i . r         fie ld ,          vou       n.u.-t     "       '•

■          i         -            A         !•                              i                     '-'.J r - > fu           to       e vs i’t




;      r:,a 1 i              in       v v "i r-ail     command          of       th e      operation                 but       have       delegatee*

, e r U in          sreas             <jf r e s p o n s i b i l i t y           to    particular                 Superintendents                      who

will      h av e         a    number             of    Senior          Officers              under          their          command.




The     Control.              Room,           which          is    in the            far     corner             to    my       lef t      and    is    tne

bl ue     box        attached                 to      th e    South         Stand,           will          be    commanded                by

Superintendent                         Murray.




Superintendent                         Greenwood              will        have        command            within            the       Stadium          and

touch          line          level.




Superintendent                         Marshall              will      have          responsibility                    f or         the       Liverpool

Supporters                   on       the     north          side      of       the     ground,             and Sup er intende nt

Chapman             will          have           responsibility                  for       the       Nottingham Forest                          Fans        who

are     approaching                      from         the     south         side        of     the         ground.




Al l     Inspectors                     who       attended           t he       briefing             yesterday,                     these       officers

will,          at    the          end       of     this       briefing,               speak           to    their          respective

contingents                   and         advise            them     of     what        they           expect         and           of    the    particular


problems             in       their              area.



Any      difficulties                       or     any       decisions               within            thoses          areas             will    be    taken

by S e c t i o n             Superintendents.                           I should              at       this          point          mention       CID

matters,             there              are        teams      of       detectives                 in    the      area           and ^ e l e c t i v e

Superintendent                          McKay          is    responsible                   f or     crime        matters.




In m o r e          general                 terms       and       in    respect              of t r a i n s ,          there             is    only one


                                                                                                                                                            1260
                                                                                      Document No. ^           < y j        CONT’ D
                                                                                                                                            r'AUE
                                                                                                                                            L> 12

 if s i n      ! i-ji:, i. • , e r :;..ju i w i u t h       will        arrive       at       W^Jiley        Briage          Station.               At


 •I- .L.-.i ti»«        f if       ir r 1 v   1.11    .j I that         J cjrat i on      can      wa i k e a s i ly         into        the

 ij 1    -f
          --        •,i.■ i-'.'i ihtul    t    0     oiij.cii tlit t
                                                                   'i t u 1 1 y .         A    trains        f r o m fJot t i hcjham

 w 1 1 -• ->rr ;.vt' ,-jt the             Shef field             Midland        Station,              between          12.30prn a n d

 l.ir-UpiTi arid buseii              are       being        provided           to    the       ground.




 the    return           journey          for        the    Nottingham              fans       travelling              by    train          may     be

a     little         different.               Buses         will       be    parked           outside        the       ground          in

Perustone             Road       North,            faring        towards       City,          and      fans    will          be    able        to

get     on     these         and    eventually               m a k e .their w a y              back     to    the      City        Centre,

 ihe    train         times        will       be a d j u s t e d        to    ensure           that     Nottingham                fans       don't

miss     their          train,           either        by    traffic          congestion               or    extra          time,       but

they     should            not     be     allowed           to    dawdle       along          t he     route.           I should

mention         at      this       point        that        whilst          there    is a          rigid      policy          with          regard

to L i v e r p o o l         fans       arriving            by    a special          train           into     Wa d s ley B ridge

Station.              About        1,000 will               no    doubt       arrive          by     service^ t r a i n            and

travel         from        the     City       Centre         by    bus.




These       Liverpool              fans       who      have       arrived       at     the M i d l a n d           Station             and

travel         by     b us    will       be     directed           to       Liverpool          allocated            transport

department              buses       that        will        be    parked       near       Wadsley            Bridge         Station           and

they     will         be     conveyed           to S h e f f i e l d         City    Centre.




Gentlemen,              the      order        covers         most       eventualities                 and     I can't             in    this

limited         time         cover       everything,               but       there     will          be a d d i t i o n a l        briefings

by y o u r      Supervisory               Officers               and    your    Inspectors                  have    had       a    copy       of

the     Operational                Order        and      are      fully       conversant              with     what          our

intentions             are       today.
                                                                                   Document No.                   CONT’D
                                                                                                          197
                                                                                                                            l>1L'


                            ' " ' , n i i n '3   'V l l h    Che    r,jfn ;L
                                                                               - ^i‘ T.i r u-t
                                                                                  - - - J-   t i >J M ,


                                            :     t n '     i ground       ,; K f‘rifffO♦_!!iT,


    ’-obod.
                              *   1"   k   0r         fine r s     lf(to   lhe
     iia   i                                                                   3 ground            and    nofcody g o e s   ln
               •■iru n k




     WU1       '!UW PaS S   y ° u o n t ° Mr.               Murray.




REPORT




                                                                                                                        1262
                                                          )OCUMtN i        RECORD           " ~ i -m •
                                                                                                           DPP DOC                       198


                                                                                 Ot h e r     Document           Number         D 13




                      ‘1/0 ‘tCiT

.c r i p t i o n      PRE    MATCH             BRitf iNu S E M I           FINAL        I_>G-t8■?




.adies      and       Gentlemen



The    event        today        is    th e      FA Cup        Semi        Final        between Liverpool                    and

Nottingham            Forest.              The     kick       off     is at        3    o ’clock          this    afternoon             and

the    gates        will     be       o p e n at         1E   no on.




I must       stress         that          if    supporters            do    not        have      a tcket          then whatever

they     say       they     will          not     be a l l o w e d     into          t he    ground.




The    ground         has    a     capacity              of 5 4 , 0 0 0     people.                It    is a b    all-ticket

match      and       all    tickets             have      been      sold        so     there        is    no     room    f or      anyone

who    does        not     have       a    ticket         because          we     will       break        safety        limits.           The

Stadium         has       been     divided           to       ensure       maximum           segregation               and

any    possiblity            of       public         disorder.



The    West         Stand     to m y            left,      otherwise             known        as    the    Leppings           Lane       End,

and     t he    stand       that          you     are      sitting          in    now,        which       is     the    North       Stand,

are     for        t he   Liverpool              Supporters.                A H        access        to   these        areas       is at


that      end       which     is       the       Lepping        Lane        End.




 The    Nottingham            Forest             Supporters            have          been     allocated            tickets          for   the

 Spion      KOP,          which       is       or, m y    right,       and        the       South Stand,           which           is

 directly            behind me             and where           t he    Directors               Bo,       and   where         the    Players


 Tunne1        is.




                                                                                                                                        1263
                                                                                       Document No.             j yg      CONT’D j
                                                                                                                                 |r ‘ rr              H
                                                                                                                                         D-13


To     ensure         that        supporters               from      Nottingham            Forest          do     not    flow       along

the     back         of     the       South       Stand        and       towards       the      Leppings              Lane    End    we     have

created          a    sterile           area          along       the     back    of    ch t h a t         stand.




Tickets          are        colour-coded                and       clearly        identified              for      the     sections          of

the     ground,             and       when       asked       f or    advice       you      should          examine           the    ticket

and     give         information                 accordingly.               Copies         if      the     tickets           are    on

display          on       the     information                boards.




If     teams         are       drawing           at    full       time     today       there         will        be    extra       time,        and

all     o ur     plans          need        to    be    adjusted           accordingly.




There       is       o ne      difficulty              with       the     two    teams,         and        that       is w i t h    regard

to     identification                   of       the       fans     by    colours.            Those         of    you     with      football

knowledge             will        appreciate                that     both       Liverpool            and Nottingham                 play        in

r ed    in n o r m a l          league           matches,           and    their       supporters                usually       wear        red


and     white.



It     is    our          intention          today          that      this      match      will          take        place    without           any

public           disorder             and    we       must        ensure       the     safety         of    the       public.         There

will        be    no       obstruction                of     t he    highway         and      we     must       be    extremely

vigilant              to       ensure       that       there         is   no     damage         to    property,              either       in t h e

ground           of       in    the    vicinity              of     the   ground.




I will           expect           a   high       standard            of   turnout,            good attitude                  towards

members              of     the       public,          and     professionalism                  that       reflects           credit        not

only        on       the       police        service           in g e n e r a l ,      bu t     on S o u t h          Yorkshire          Police


 in    part i c u l a r .



 I want          the        public          to be treated properly but those who transgress


                                                                                                                                         1264
                                                                                  | Document No.           j           CONT'D j
                                                                                                                       "             l»A G E
                                                                                                                                     D13

dealing       with       firmly       but     fairly          within         the       law.




I cannot       stress       t oo      highly        the       word        "Safety.5            This        ground           wni           be

full    to    capacity          today       and     some        of    you       may     never       have        expereienced                   a

football       match       of    this       nature.             Our       job     is    to    ensure           t he    safety             of

spectators          and    you     must       make       sure        you     know       the    escapes            routes,             the

problems       areas,       and       that       you     are       fully        conversant            with       your

responsibilities                should       a     crisis        arise.              There     will        be    a     tremendous

atmosphere          within       the    ground           b ut    you        must       not    be    caught            up    in       this      or

thge    events       that       are    taking           place        on     the      field     you     must           remain

detached       and       clear     headed          at    a ll      times        to     respond        to       events.




The    Control       Room,       which        is    in    the        f ar    corner          to m y    left           and       is     the

blue    box    attached          to    the       South        Stand,         will       be    commanded               by

Superintendent             Murray.




Superintendent             Greenwood             will     have        command           within        the        stadium             at

touch       line    level.




Superintendent             Marshall           will       have        responsibility                 for         the    Liverpool

Supporters          on    the     North       Side       of     the       ground,        and Su pe ri nt e n d e nt

Chapman       will       have     responsibility                   f or     the      Nottingham                Forest           fans      who

are    approaching          from        the      South        of     the     ground.




All    Inspectors          who        attended          briefing            yesterday,             these         officers              will,

at    the    end    of    this        briefing,          speak         to    their           respective               contingents

and    advise       them     of       what    they       expect           and      of    the       particular               problems               in


their       area.



Any    difficulties              or    any       decisions            within           those    area           will        be    taken         by

                                                                                                                                     1265
                                                                               IPoeunwnt No.            ^q    R CONt T ]
                                                                                               "               "            jpAGE         't
                                                                                                                              D 12

S ec t ion S u p e r i n t e n d e n t s .         I should          at       this    point         mention          CiD

matters.           There     are    teams          of    detectives             in    the       area         and    Detective

Superintendent             McKay        is       responsible             for    crime          matters.




In m o r e    general       terms        and       in    repsect          of    trains,            there       is    only    o ne

train       from    Liverpool        which          will       arrive          at    Wadsley            Bridge       Station        at

14.02.        Four       trains     from No tt i n g h a m               will       arrive         at    the       Sheffield

Midland       Station       between          12.30           and    1.20pm.           Buses         are       being    provided

to    the    ground.




The    train       times    will        be a d j u s t e d          to    ensure          that      Nottingham             fans     don

t miss       their       trains,        either          by    traffic          congestion               or    extra    ti m e .      I

mention       at    this     point       that       whilst          there       is    a    rigid         policy       with    regard

to    Liverpool          fans    arriving           by a        special         train          into      Wadsley       Bridge        about

10.0 0 .



Gentlemen,          t he   order        covers          most        eventualities               and      I c a n ’t    in    this

limited       time       cover     everthing,                b ut    there      will       be      additional          briefings

by y o u r    Supervisory           Officer             who     have      a    copy       of    the      operational           order

and    are    fully        conversant            with        what     our      intentions               are    today.




Let    me    just    say     this:




Firm    but       fair     policing          with       the     correct         attitude.

Safety       of    supporters           in       this    ground          is    paramount.

Nobody       gets     in w i t h o u t       a    ticket.

Nobody       takes       drink     or     banners            into     the      ground          and      nobody       goes    in w h o

is    drunk.




I will       now    pass     you    on       to    Mr    Murray.



                                                                                                                              1   266
                                                                                                         DPP DOC i
                                                          t Yh" 1 r-'G    SERVICE              L W riT O W t


                                                                                 u Cn          r       D u l u iti & n l    imu it? u f? r*        1 )^ 3




L*v!i «?                   L)i
                             .j :•o V

U & s c ri p i i o n     tJK ifc> I N u       P'iu ftci Re. bt'M I 'r I N A L         — SUPl                 MURkAY




   6RIbeINU            SHELi       — FAC       CUP     SEMI      FINAL        15.4.89




   Al l    Supt.        and     Ch.      Inspectors            have       received                 a     full        copy        of      todays

   operational             order         and     will     t/rlef         serials           under              their         command                as       to

    t he   contents           of    the       order      and     the      serials              specific                duties.                 I will

    confine         this      briefing           to w h a t        I consider              the            important               points.




    EMERGENCY           EVACUATION              PROCEDURE




    ONE    OFOUR        MOST       IMPORTANT           FUNCTIONS            IS T O         SAFELY                EVACUATE              THE         S T A D I*

    SHOULD       THE     NEED       ARISE.           This      can       only        be    achieved                  if a l l          officers

    know      their      specific             duties.          If a n       emergency                     situation               should              aris

    whereby         it m a y       be      necessary          to     evacuate             all           or     a section               of      the

    stadium,           t he     following          message           will       be    passed                 over          the    stadium                   pub

    address         system:-




     “T H E   ATTENDANCE              OF    MR    MEADOWS           IS U R G E N T L Y             REQUIRED                AT    POLICE             CONTR




     This     will       be     your       signal        to    take      up     the        specific                 positions                  and          du t

     designated            to      you     and     stand       by     there.              If       it       is    necessary                   to     carry

     out      the      evacuation             a message          to      that    effect                  will       be      passed             over          th

     public         address         system         and    t he      stadium          will              be     evacuated.                      If w e         as

     Police         officers            act     in a     professional,                    disciplined                      and      orderly                 mar




                                                                                                                                       1267
                                                                                             Document No. „ .                CONT’D
                                                                                                          199
                                                                                                                                    i-' AGE
                                                                                                                                    D43

wu     w    m          e i.. a n    c;<ampie        to    lha       pub-J. u      wnich      wii.i       give    them       confidence

a na       prevent             panic.




it,        after          being       placed        on    a    stand-by           situation            it     transpires          that

there           is    no       need     for    an    evacuation                then    the     following             message       will    be

passeds-




"MR     MEADOWS                IS N O      LONGER        REQUIRED          AT    POLICE        CONTROL"




ihis        will          De    your       signal        to   stand        down       and    resume           your    normal       duties.




TELEVISION                  AND    VIDEO




Besides              t he      fixed       CCTV     cameras         which        we    operate           in    the    ground,

officers              of       South       Yorkshire          Police           and    also     our       colleagues          from

Nottingham                  will      be     using       hand      held        video    cameras             within     the       ground.

The     whole             of    the     event       will      also        be    recorded          by     the    BBC.        If    there

are        problems             inside        the    ground          then       no    doubt       t he      media     cameramen          will

be     as       interested              as    our    own.




TRAVELLING                  FANS
                                                                                 i*



FROM        L I V E R P O O L :—




One        special             train       with     350       on   board        will    arrive           at    Wadsley       Bridge

Station              at     1402      and     depart          after       the    match       at    1705        unless       there    is

extra           time,          when     the    time       will       be    adjusted          accordingly.




Approximately                      iOO O L i v e r p o o l         fans    are        expected         to     travel    on       service

trains           into          Midland        Station,             where       they     will      be     met    by    *D*    Division
                                                                                                 Document No. ^            ^    CONT’O

                                                                                                                                  r AGE
                                                                                                                                  D43

u t t i   ce r s    a nd    es   co r te d    on     special          Duses       ta    i r> s    q r ouna .




adoul        1^0     coaches           are    expected           they will             park?,       unload          and    load       up

after        the     event        in H a l i f a x        Road    facing          away       from       city    and       Claywheels

Lane       the      remainder           will       arrive        in    private          transport          and       vans       and

minitiuses           should        be    directed           to    Wardsend             Road,       which       is    opposite

Wadsley            Bridge        Station.




F R0ivi N O T T I N G H A M :-




Four       special         trains        will       arrive        at       Midland       Station         at;




12 3 i     (480)           1246    (600)           1302     (500)           1322       (560)




They      will       depart        after          t he   match        at;




1750          1800               1806             1818




Again        the     times        will       be    adjusted           if    extra       time       is    played.

Additionally               another           iOOO        fans    may       travel       by       service       trains.           These

will       all      be m e t      by    "O'       Division        officers             and       escorted       on       special

buses        to     t he    ground.




About        100     coaches           are    expected           and       will    pa r k ,       unload       and       load    up

after        t he    event        at    the       bus     depot       on H e r r i e s       Road.        The       remainder          will

arrive         in    private           vehicles           and    vans       and    minibuses             will       be    directed         to

Rawson         Spring        Road,       off        Herries       Road       South.




EXECUTIVE            COACHES           - BADGE           - HALLAM           TOWERS        - LIVERPOOL                ^


                                                                                                                            1269
                                                                                                    Document No. - j ^ 9         CONT’D

                                                                                                                                 page
                                                                                                                                 D43

                                                          u k   OSVENOR       ~     f ORES'?




P K 1 3 O N t.RS A N D      EJ£CT10N3




All     prisoners           arrested           in    or       in     the    vicinity           of    the    ground        will    be

taken     to     the     Police      Room           as    will        any    person        whom       an    officer         feels

should      be    ejected          under        the       ground           rules.         The       sergeant         on   duty    will

be     informed        of    the    circumstances                     and    will        decide       on    the      next    course

of    action.          Persons       arrested                 away     from        the    ground          may   be    taken      to

Ecclesfleld            Police       Station              or     Hammerton           Road       if    it    is   more      convenient

but     Ecclesfield           will    be        used          to     process        Liverpool             supporters         only      and

Hammerton         Road       Notts    Forest.




ALCOHOL




I would        remind        you    that        it       is     an    offence:-




(1)               to     possess      alcohol                 when     entering           or

                  attempting              to    enter           tne    ground.




 (2 )             to     enter,      attempt              to       enter      or    be    in

                  the       ground        when       drunk.




 (3)              to     enter       or    attempt              to    enter        when    in

                  possession              of    bottles,               cans,       e t.

                   (bins      will        be        provided           near       the

                   turnstiles             for        same.)
                                                                                                     No.   199   CONT’D

                                                                                                                 PAGE
                                                                                                                 D 4 3



i.flAi-;uwH   j.   i Ifit'i'M N O    l£5 F U;.,L.Ow /




                                            InlFLATABLES




                      Much          press       and   media        coverage




                                            commonsense




                      Small          inflatables             -    no    problem




                      Huge          inflatables          -       make    them    deflate

                      if     causing            nuisance




                      If     refused            -   seize




                                                    FLAGS




                                            (Similar)




                       If    large       and        blocking           views    or   adverts   or

                       insulting            -       remove.




                                            INSIDE       THE       GROUND




                       Special          attention            to    betting       service   booths,
                                                                   I D ocum ent No.   9^    CONT P

                                                                                             HA Gt
                                                                                             D4 3

Programme         Sellers,          Snack       Bars,       face    Ticket     Kiosks.




                  ON    TURNSTILES




Searching         —    weapons       —   alcohol        —    drugs     —

flares       (last      season)




                  OUTSIDE




Complaints            from    public      -     don't       fob    them    off.




DS   Chariesworth             -   Intelligence




KEEP    MESSAGES            BRIEF    -   CONTROL        WILL       MAINTAIN       CONTROL




CALL    SIGNS

Ch   Supt     D   -    Yankee       1

Supts    &   Ch       Insp    -   Name     (Supt     Chapman)

Insps    &    Sgts      -    As   shown       on   order




ADMIN

Full    uniform         -    chin       straps     down

Mounted       -   look       after       them
                                                                                                Document No. ^ ^   CONT’D

                                                                                                                   PAGE
                                                                                                                   D43

                ‘i-' —   i-;s i . biipl . ? c K a y




            COMMUNICATIONS

            Ground           & PO             -       £5       -    Police      Control

            Mobiles              Also             —       1 —       Ops      (Pol.    control)

            CID     -    19          -    Caravan                   -   Owl    (Pol.    control)

            F i -       35       -       FI       (Poi.              control)




            PROPERTY

            Found        -       gym




            Seized           -       Forest                -       O w 1s

                                     Shop             -    rear         of    Kop




                                     Liverpool                      —   Portacabin

                                     Rear             of       West         Stand




            Where        they             will             be       labelled         with   name    and   P C ’s

            number.




            Give        person                taken                from      collar    number      and    inform

            where        it          may          be       collected            from.




GROUND   REGS   -   COPY             ON       ORDER
                                                                                        Document No. | 9 9   CONT’D

                                                                                                               PAGE
                                                                                                               D43



!‘io   inr uwi ng

i'jo p e r s o n s         on    field


,'10   ci in-tbing          s t a n d s , pylons,             auiidings

Mo     nuisance             behaviour,             foul       or    abusive     language

No     flags,          banners,             poles       or    anything        that    can   be

       use    as       a    weapon

Failing           to       comply      with        directions            of   steward

Kemaining              in gangways




ENTRY        MAY       8E       REFUSED       TO    ANYONE          REFUSING     TO   BE

SEARCHED           BY       PC




1ACIICS




All     UC    PR       visited          -    copies          to    Supts.




Official           car          park    closes          2pm




TO     DETER       PITCH             INVASION       -

TRACK        SERIALS             REINFORCED             AT    END




STERILE           AREA          ON   KOP     FOR    ANY       IDENTIFIED

LIVERPOOL              SUPPORTERS




SPECIAL           ATTENTION             AT    HALF       TIME       TO   WEST

STAND        TO    PREVENT             CLIMBING          FROM       TERRACES

AND     RAISED             AREA
                                                                                                                      Document No. 1 9 9   CONT’D

                                                                                                                                            PAGE
                                                                                                                                            D 4 3




C.H.> j S ;   l j ‘~.    —        I O v-i i        A i','0       F   UUDscL.Lt.Hb       t lj    H r   I'iO V E D




ON      IF       CAUSING                      OBSTRUCTION                   AND    IF       PERSIST             AND

NECESSARY                     AhKtST.




BUFFER                  AT    L/L             ROUNDABOUT

5    SERIALS                  -       4       DOGS           -       4   HORSES    -    2      PR.VANS.




SECURITY                     OF       GROUND




FRIDAY              NIGHT                 -   PRIVATE                    SECURITY       FIRM

SAM      -      2        EXPLOSIVE                     DOGS

AFTER           BRIEFING                       -     APPROPRIATE                  SERIALS




OTHER            INFORMATION




Team          Coahces                                                              Escorted             by m / c y c l e

                                                                                   wi n g

                                                                                   Liverpool                -    H/towers

                                                                                   Notts          -   A/House




Brian            Clough                                                            Sitting            Imm.         behind

                                                                                   dug         out

                                                                                   Kop         side     -       photographers!




Pre-match                     Ent                                                  Nil



                                                                                                                                           1275
                                                                                              Document No. ] 9 9   CONT’D

                                                                                                                     PAGE
                                                                                                                     u43



                 XC   k! i? I...         ‘i   p
                                                            b 0   I Ci 0   u t




             ti u s e s            for        return

             of       forest                  Fans          38     less          Liverpool




             4    Newsvendors                        from

             Noll                                           S e 1 1 i ng         P a p e rs




             TRANSIT                -         DS   MACKAY




END   OF   REPORT
                                                                       R.L. GREENWOOD SUPERINTENDENT




                                                Briefing Notes


On Friday the 14th April after the main briefing to Inspectors and above held at

Hillsborough I then briefed Inspectors and above w he were to be under m y caimand at


the semi-final match.


I told than that in particular from experience I could forsee two problems arising.

One was the question of supporters from the Leppings Lane terrace being hauled up by

fellow supporters into the West Stand at half                   time thus creating over capacity in

the West Stand.        The second p r o b l em I related was based on experience of the se mi ­

final m a t c h between the same teams last year in that it was quite forseeable that

there w o u l d be a large element of Liverpool supporters w ho by whatso e v e r means w o u l d

be purchasing tickets for the Spion Kop.                 This p r ob l e m h ad been evident    last year

and that cordoning Police Officers h a d come under threat                 to personal safety.          It was

agreed w i t h the Inspectors concerned that we w o u l d go to the Spion K op after m y

briefing and examine the area and h o w it could best be protected,                   and reserved for


Liverpool supporters.


I specifically spoke in clear terms about behaviour of Liverpool supporters based on

m y previous experience.           I told Officers that in m y v i e w generally speaking if

things were going well          for Liverpool supporters crowd management should be

reasonably well achieved, however should things in any w a y not go well                        them then

they h ad p r oved extremely difficult             to contain and moods w o u l d easily change.          I

related an incident         to them w h i c h I h a d w it nessed occurring at a Sheffield W e dnesday

- Liverpool m a t c h during the period of the Coal               Industry dispute.     It was at that

 time as I recall       that   the then k op was over capacity w i t h Sheffield W ed nesday

supporters and out of necessity some w e r e transferred to a pen on the Leppings Lane

 terracing (the Liverpool supporters occupying the West E nd of the ground including

 the terracing).        A p en w as left empty between Liverpool supporters and those

 S h e f field W e d n e s d a y supporters   that h a d been   transferred and a line of Officers was

 put   in the vacant pen between the supporters.                  O n transferring the Sheffield

 W e d n e s d a y supporters the Liverpool supporters went w i l d ^ t e m p t i n g    to scale the

 fencing in an attempt          to get to the Sheffield W e d n e sd a y supporters.           I t «   necessary
                                                 - 2 -                       Document No. ^ q q            CONT’D




for some Officers to dr a w truncheons        to contain the       Liverpool supporters.



I reminded Officers of the need for extreme care in               searching supporters and to bear

in m i n d the dangers of weapons such as Stanley knives, knives              or sharp bladed

articles w h i c h m a y be retained in a persons pocket.          Officers w e re also told of the

dangers of w e a kening a police line b y taking away supporters either under arrest or

for the purpose of ejecting than thus reducing the poli c e cover and thereby

potentially putting their colleagues at greater risk to their personal safety.



Above all I told the O f ficers that in m y v i e w a successful operation h i nged directly

on the alertness of Constables and that if they w e r e to be seen as not being awake

to potential problems then supporters w o u l d rea di l y take advantage of the situation.

O n conclusion of the briefing I then went          to the Spion Kop w i t h Inspectors         to

discuss specific plans in relation to the segregation of Liverpool supporters (of

w h o m it m a y be e x pected that there w o u l d be m o r e than last year)   from N o t t i n gh a m

Forest supporters on what w as an area w i t h a capacity for containing 21,000 people.



I also reminded O f ficers     that seme Liverpool supporters h a d climbed over the

Leppings Lane p e r imeter fence at the end of last y e a rs semi          final game and that

manpower ha d been arranged to prevent a repetition (I also discussed separately w i t h

Inspector Darling the normal pl a n to funnel players and officials into the player's

tunnel at the e nd of the game).



A f t e r the m a i n b r iefing on Sat ur d a y mor n i ng I perso n a l l y briefed the Serials having

duties on the Spion Ko p in terms of the plans for the segregation of the Liverpool

supporters and also outlined to than those points              that I h ad d i s c ussed on the Friday

as to behaviour of Liverpool supporters,           searching,    alertness and the undesirability

for arrest/ejection w h i c h w o u l d w e a k e n a poli ce cordon and thus put     their colleagues
                                              3                        Document No.           CONTD
                                                                                      m


Chief   Inspector Beal, Chief   Inspector Creaser and Inspector Calvert, all of wh o m

have had extensive experience of policing the Hillsborough stadium, were not present

at m y briefing on Friday but on Saturday I discussed w i t h them the particular

problems,   as outlined previously,   I had foreseen as w o u l d affect   their areas of

responsibility.



At   the conclusion of m y briefings I confirmed that everyone w a s familiar w i t h their


allocated duties.




                                                                                            1279
                                                                m




BRIEFING


Semi-Final

Intro self

We have Sector 2 -

All activities o/s ground in respect of Liverpool spectators.



Two Sectors - 2A, 2B



2A   Ch/Insp Waring

     Serials 22 - 33

             44

             46

             47

             48



2B   Ch/Insp Purdy

     Serials 34 - 51

     excluding 44, 46, 47, 48




                                                                    52 8 0
                                                 I Document No. ^ Q |   CONT’D



^                                       (                    2)


    SECTOR 2A         C/Insp Waring


    Sub-Sector 10

    Insp Humphries            Serials 22 - 25



    Sub-Sector 11

    Insp Selvood              Serials 26 - 29



    Sub-Sector 12

    Insp Millett              Serials 30 - 33




    SECTOR 2B         C/Insp Purdy


    Sub-Sector 13

    Insp Townend              Serials 34/35




    Sub-Sector 14

    Insp Ellis                Serials 36 - 38




    Sub-Sector 15

    Insp Brennan               Serials 39 - 40




    Sub-Sector 16

     Insp Brocmhead            Serials 41 - 43




                                                                        1281
                                           Document No. ^ q ^   CONT’D :



                                                    (3)




COACH RECEPTION   SEARCH SQUADS



Sub-Sector 17

Insp Wardle           Serial 44




Sub-Sector 18

Insp Morton            Serial 45




M3BILE UNITS



Sub-Sector 19

Insp Walker            Serials 46 - 48




Sub-Sector 20

Insp Robinson          Serials 4 9 - 5 1




                                                            1282
                                                             Document No, ^ ^ ^    CONT'D



                                                                             (4)

THIS IS WHAT EACH SERIAL WILL DO:

C/Insp Wiring



Humphries, Selwood, Millet, Wardie, Morton




Serial

22   PS Hodgitts          Public Order, Middlewood Rd

23   PS Lanas

24   PS Dolan

25   PS Perry
                          + Hillsborough Precinct

26   PS Cropley           Parkside Rd - Catchbar Lane

27   PS Morley            Penistone Road/Leppings Lane
                          Barriers, Urinators, Freebies

28   PS Wilson            Penistone Road/Leppings Lane
                          Barriers

29   PS Reynolds          Public Order Leppings Lane

30   PS Ashton              "       "      Leppings Lane Roundabout

                            n       n         H        H      •'
31   PS Pearson

32   PS Potts             Pub Order - Penistone Rd N

33   PS Atkin              "    "         Penistone Rd N




44   PS Hughes       F2   Coach Reception/Searching
                          A616 O/Bridg to G
                          Phase 1
                          Phase 3 - Leppings Lane Island

46       PS Hunt     F2   Tango 1       Stocksbridge

47       PS Hill     F2   Tango 2       O/bridge

48       PS Miller   F2   Tango 3       Wadsley/Middlewood




                                                                            1283
                                                                  Document   No,   2 0 1 C0N'r 0




                                                                                       (5)




SERIAL DOTIES            C/I Purdy

Insps Townend, Ellis, Brennan, Brocxnhead, Robinson



34   PS Sherratt         Coach Rec. Claywheels

                           II    II            tl
35   PS Lindop
                         Phase 3 Leppings Lane Island
36   PS France           Train Recp. Wadsley

37   PS Venables           "     "             "         Remain at

38   PS Tissington       Mini-bus rec. Wardsend Road !
                         Phase 3 Assist Serial 20 on ;

39   PS Doyle            Coach Rec - Hx Rd

                           n     ft        n       ii
40   PS Cloke
                         Phase 3 Leppings Lane

41   PS Hudson           Public Order      Halifax Road

                           II         II            It       11
42   PS Keenan
                            II        II            It
43   PS Graham

45   PS Murray           Coach Rec - Tankersley

49   PS Shaw             Tango 4 Foxhill

50   PS Hallbrook         Tango 5 Parson X

51   PS Cressey           Tango 6 Grenoside




                                                                                        1284
                                               Document No. 2 Q |    CONT’D



                                                                    (6)


Segregation

Liverpool in N/Stand & W/Stand

Turnstiles on Leppings Lane.



Colour Codes      Liverpool

    Brown        - North Stand

     Red         - West Stand

     Purple      - Leppings Lane
                    Terrace

     Also overprinted

     "Liverpool Area"


Forest

     Orange      -   Kop

     Blue        -   S/Stand

     Green       -   S/Stand (uncovered)




3 Phases         1      10 am - 3 pm

                 2      3 pm - 4.30 pn

                 3      4.30 pn - Stand down




                                                                    1285
                                                          Document No.   ^   q j     CONT’O



                                                                                   (7)

Get lads out minimum of delay.

Sgts to brief their respective serials as per order.

Crime matters to gym.

Crime prisoners




Liverpool - Trains.     Times n.y.k.   Each 550

3 specials into Wadsley Bridge.

Fans walk to ground under Police supervision.

Service   trains also into Midland Station.     Pick up SYPTE.

Buses under escort to Leppings Lane.    Via Middlewood Road.

Searched prior to entry.

Don't go on B/Rail Prop unless invited.



Coaches - Two areas - Claywheels Lane - fill up first.

Halifax Road      Don't allow anyone to get off until

(a)   They have been spoken to - searched - check tickets

(b)   So they'll know where to get back on their bus.

Drunks can go back!     Individuals arrested.

Look out for the sticker which will show coach has been searched.




                                                                               1286
                                                        Document No. 2 f } 1       CONT’D



                                                                               (   8)



Transit Van

Parking area - Wardsend Rd

If poss searching, spoken to

No unloading elsewhere

Check tickets.    If drunk or no tickets detain.    Inform ground control for

escort out of force area.



Private Cars - Parson Cross/Foxhill Estates

                 Wisewood/Marcliffe Rd areas

After Game -     Coaches and transits

                 Don't move until ground control say so.



S.Y.T. buses for Liverpool - These will be parked in Penistone Road North

                 fran Wardsend Rd Noirth to Leppings Lane Roundabout facing

                 city.   Outside Beeley Woods Special School.




                                                                               1287
                                                       Document No. p Q |     CONT’O



                                                                            (9)




PROPERTY/SEARCHING/GROUND REGS

No banner poles

No big flags

No big inflatables

No cameras



If prop seized - give collar no to person

Tell the person to claim prop frcm Police prop post.   Rear of West Stand.



SPORTING EVENTS - DRINK

Draw attention to Appendix 'O' which relates to main provisions.




GENERAL POINTS

High vis presence

Deploy troops in pairs

Be on the ground

Problems with

  Indiscriminate parking

  Thefts from cars

  Pick pockets

Inpress that officers must deal with jobs.




                                                                            1288
                           Document No. 2 0 1         ®QNT’D



                                            (   10)



Account for your serials

Prisoners

Paperwork

Firm but fair




                                          1289
I                                                                                             DPP DOC 202
%                                                    PART 6

                          COMMUNICATIONS - F.A.                     CUP SEMI FINAL AT

                                     HILLSBOROUGH ON 15 A P R I L 1989




                INTRODUCTION

         6.1    The       following             communication             arrangements

                w ere        m ade       for     the         police      operation            at

                H i l l s borough         on        15th      April      1989      and the

                subsequent emergency action.




%        6.2
                                           of       the      Communications            staff

                atten d ed           a        planning          meeting           at      'F'

I               Divisional               Headquarters,              H a mmerton Road on

                the 22nd M a r c h 1989 to note the requirements
I
                defi n e d      by the Division and offer advice if

 I              required.



 I               R ADIO


4!               T he     arrangements                for      radio      cover for the
         6.3

    9            match        were        the same as for all other games

                 at      H illsb o r o u g h         save      that      an      additional

    I            facility was provided at Neepsend to control

                 CiD       officers             working        on     crime p r e v e n t i o n
    I
                  duties,


    I
                  p a h i r> C o v e r

     I    6.4
                  R a d io     cover           for     the     H illsb o r o u g h ground,

                   for       b oth       i n t e r n a l and e x t e r n a l p a t r o l s ,       is
     I             provided              by     a     UH F     schem e        o p era tin g        on

                                                               97                                       1290
     1
                                                                                    Document No.   2 02    CONT’D


                    channel 25 with the aerial on the floodlig

    |               gantry     at        the    side    of the police control

                    room     inside        the * ground.        This gives radio

    |               cover     over a radius of approximately 1 mile

                    from the ground.



g            6.5    The radio installation in the police control

                    room      is    permanent and use d for all matches

                    at the ground.



^            6.6     Channel        25     is    one of 4 emergency channels

                     a v a ilable         to    all      U.K.      police     forces

    ■                (channels           19:    23:    29 are the others) which

    ■                are     regularly use d for c ontrolling activity

                     at football grounds.                It is a m a t t e r for the

    ■                force to control use to prev e n t interference

                     between        police        operations       working      on the

                     sam e channel.             T h e r e was nothing else taking

                      place        in-force       on 15th April 1989 to cause

                      interference.              Because of the hilly terrain

                      b e t w e e n the ground and adjacent police force

                      areas         interference           from      other      force's

                      communication is h i g h l y unlikely.                 T h e r e was

                       non e reported on the day.



                       In     addition to the U H F scheme at the ground
              6.7
                       channel           19 was u s e d by CID officers working

    ■                  on security duties in the designated parking

                        areas       at     Neepsend       and     Parson Cross.        The

m



        it                                                  98
                                                                                                          129 1
                                                                                      Document No. 2 0 2   CONT’D


                  aerial        for     this       is on Shirecliffe College

|                 which        is     high       enough        to provide cover of

                  approximately              3 miles radius which includes

1                 Hillsborough.              This        use    of     channel 19 is

a                 similar to the a r r a n g e m e n t in previous years

                  for semi-final matches.


I       6.8       Finally           the FI Sub-Division Regular Channel

|                 35     was    available           to officers with the Pye

                  Multi-channel radios.



^                 Radio Issue



|       6.9       Paragraph           4.11.4        of    tne Operational Order

                   (available           as        SYP Document 14) identifies

^                 radio        issue        to     all    supervisory         officers

^11               on the detail.



■       6.10      On     the        morning        of    the        15th   April   1989

^                 Communications                  Department          delivered     100

(                  Burndept 3 channel radios, tuned to channels

m                  19:     25:        29,        and 120 Pye PFX multi-channel

                    sets       to     the police room at the ground.                  In

■                  addition,          36 earpieces were delivered which

1                  would       fit either of the radio types.                      Spare

■I                 batteries were also provided, but no battery

                       chargers.


          6.11                         Allocation          and distribution of the sets and

    T         '        earpieces was effected by                     PC Fiddler.

    «                                                          99
                                                                                                       1292
                                                                                  Document No.   20 Z   CONT’D




        6.12    Two     radio       issue       books were used which
|               now           at         Headquarters            Communications

                Department.               76    PFX     sets and 63 Burndept

I               sets     are       shown        to have been issued.           Four

                earpieces          are     booked out to serial 21 (see
1               operational             order).       More earpieces were in

g               fact     taken       for        use    because at 24.4.89 20

                were         still        outstanding            for     return    to

|               Headquarters.



f               p*Hio Equipment



        6.13    There         is     a    permanent        UHF     radio      scheme

|               installed          at     the     ground      for policing all

                 football          matches.       This scheme was used for

(               the F.A. cup semi-final on 15th April 1989.



*        6.14    The radio set is provided by the Directorate

                 of     Telecommunications               and referred to as a

                 W15U portable base station.                      It is in fact

1                 pye W e s t m i n s t e r Mobile radio adapted for use

                  as     a     temporary         fixed     base station.           This

c                 type        of     installation is in frequent use at

    ■             all        football       grounds      in      the Force and by

                  most         other           forces      who         have   similar

    I             requirements.                  The set is powered by mains

                      electricity         and     is    located         in the police

    ■                 control room.


%   1

                                                           10°                                      1293
    N
                                                                       Document No. 2 0 2   CO N T’C



        Method of Operation



6.15    The    W15U       can     be operated in either 'talk-

        thro ' or 'non talk-thro' mode by pressing or

        releasing         a     button     on the radio set.        The

        choice is with the radio control operator.



6.16    The        radio operator in the control room uses

        a     handset with a 'press to talk' switch and

        a      speaker         for   incoming          messages.    The

        installation            at   Hillsborough has a 'tulip'

        microphone which stands on the desk in front

        of         the    controller       and     an     in-car   radio

        speaker, also desk mounted.



6.17    It is normal practice at Hillsborough to use

        the UHF radio scheme on 'talk-thro' and this

        was        the case on the 15th April 1989.                Talk-

        thro'        is       also used at other grounds in the

            force for policing football matches.



 6.18       Even     with      the   use    of     an earpiece, noise

            levels       in crowd situations, particularly in

            the confines of a football ground, can reach

            a level where the volume of the radio output

            is not sufficient for the user to be able to

            receive transmissions.




                                                 101
                                                                                      1294
 m                                                                                  JpocumeritWo.2 2
                                                                                                 Q     CONT’D



f j
              Effect of T a l k - t h r o 7 choices

■             T a l k - T h r o ' on



■      6.19   Everyone           with     a     radio,          turned     on to the

              appropriate                channel,               can       hear      all
I             transmissions              by anyone else,              including the

              control room.



B      6.20   If     more than one radio transmits at any one

              time      all       other        sets including the control

              room,        get     all        the     messages.          However,    it

V             becomes increasingly difficult to understand

              individual           messages           whe n      several officers

^             are speaking.


■      6.21   If    the      controller             is     transmitting on the

^1            hand s e t     and       one     of        the    personal      radios

              transmits at the same time,                        then the control

^pj           output is cut off.               All        the users,       including

              the     controller,              will       receive        the message

              from      the       personal radio.                This arrangement

               is    electrically              b uilt into the equipment.

               It    can     only        be    overcome          by de-selecting

^1            talk-thro'.



 1             Talk-Thro'          Off


 ■     6 22    If      the         controller             transmits,       all      sets


%              switched          on      to     the       channel will receive.



 l |                                                      102                                    1295
                                                            Document No. 2 0 2   CONT’ D



A     message transmitted from a personal radio

is only heard on the controllers set.



Whilst the controller is transmitting any of

the    personal        radios       can     transmit and the

message      will be received on the controllers

set.      The   transmitting personal radio will

not     receive        the    message       being    sent   by

control.



Radio Control Operational Order



Paragraph       4.11     of       the     operational   order

(SYP    Document 14)          deals with radio control

on the day.



In     connection       with paragraph 4.11.5 of the

Operational       Order       transmissions         cannot be

cut-off unless talk-thro' is de-selected.



Radio Equipment supervision



One     member of Communications Department was

on     stand-by at the ground from the briefing

onwards.



At     the   request         of    the Division the Force

Communications               caravan        and     Stonefield

Communications           Vehicle           were   located    at
        a                                                                                 Document No. 2 0 2   CONT’D


    *
                    Hill foot               Bridge          on      Penistone     Road    and

    i               staffed            by     a       further       2 officers from the

                    Department.                   a     fourth member was on mobile
    i               patrol to deal with communication demands as

                    they arose.
    i
    a       6.29   Activity            on     channel 19 and 25, and channel



    a
                   29,        which         was       being      used by West Bar for

                   city        centre         football           crowd    policing       was

                   monitored            in        the      communications caravan.

                   Channel             25     was       monitored        in     the   Force

a                  Operations

                   in         a
                                            Room by using a portable UHF set

                                       vehicle             adaptor,       without        any

a                  difficulty.



a           6.30   The      following             contingency          plans     were    in


a                  place in the event of equipment failure:-



                        A     stand-by            base      station was located in



a                       the control room.

                        into use.
                                                            This was in fact taken




a                       The        mobile             Stonefield         Communications

a                       Vehicle

                        Bridge.
                                            was       on    stand-by

                                            If both base stations or aerial
                                                                           at    Hillfoot



i                       installation               at the ground fail then the

                        vehicle         could take over.                 It is equipped
i                       with       a    pump-up            aerial and base station

1*                      and       would       restore communications on the



I                                                             104
                                                                                                           1297
                                                                                                     DocumetitNo. 2 0 ?   CONT’C


i
                  same         UHF     channel                 (25).         It would

                  about         10 minutes to bring into opera
    I             plus         the journey time to the ground,

    Q             the      pre-match                 planning this year,

                  previous            years,              decisions were made not

    s             to park the vehicle at the ground, whilst

                  on stand-by, because of congestion.
    i
                  The      th ir d          o p tio n a v a ila b le i s t o change

#                  th e    ground             o p era tio n           fr o m c h a n n e l 2 5 t o

 ■                 channel

                   caravan
                                     19

                                     w h ich
                                              by         u s i n g t h e co m m u n ic a tio n s

                                                         was     lo c a te d         a t H illfo o t

    ■              B rid g e .              T h is        w o u ld      mean t h a t c o n t r o l


    ■               c o u ld

                    u sin g
                                 e ith e r

                                     th e
                                                     be        from

                                                 ta lk -th r o '
                                                                         th e

                                                                             by
                                                                                     caravan,

                                                                                     th e
                                                                                                     or

                                                                                              p o lic e


    ■               co n tro l

                    The
                                      room

                                 d iffic u lty
                                                     u s i n g a p o r t a b l e UhF s e t .

                                                               w ith      th is        o p tio n      is

    m                in fo r m in g p a t r o l s o f t h e c h a n n e l ch a n g e.

                     The        caravan              w ould          n o t h a v e t o b e m oved

                     because           th e          b ase s t a t io n /a e r ia l s i t e           at

                     S h ir e c liffe          g iv e s c o v e r a t th e ground.




                 \ru v C o v e r



        6 . 31   Force          channel              1     was        dedicated t o p a t r o l s

                  o p era tin g        on r o u te s u p e r v is io n p r io r t o th e

                  m atch .            T h is         channel            is        c o n tr o lle d   fr o m

                  F o r c e o p e r a t i o n s Room.




                                                                      105
                                                                                                                     1298
J                                                    I Document No.                 2.02   C O N T’D



f   6.32    A     portable      VHF     set was used in the ground

            control      room     to        monitor        activity      on the

            Force        channel             one,         and      provide     a

            communication link if required.


I           TELEPHONES

I           Ground



i   6.3 3   The      following        telephone           installations are

            permanently available at the ground.
f
            Police Control Box
a

            1.       Extension        3279          off      Hammerton       Road

                     switchboard.

            2.       Extension    145        off      the        football    club

                     switchboard.

            3.       A   direct       exchange            line     -   Sheffield

^                    345294.



«           Police Room



^            4.      Extension         3277         off      Hammerton       Road

                     switchboard.

                5.   Extension        144     off     the,       football    club

■                     switchboard.


i
1


                                                     106
                                                                                       1299
                                                           Document No. 2 Q 2   CGNT’D



Gymnasium




6.    Extension         142     off    the football club

       switchboard.



Casualty Bureau



The     Casualty Bureau at Ecclesfield Training

Centre     has 8 permanently installed exchange

lines     for    use when required.            Four are for

incoming        calls    from      the public (Sheffield

570800)        and 4 for the Casualty Bureau staff

to      dial      out     for      enquiries     (Sheffield

570500).



in     addition     there       are 3 exchange lines to

the     Training        Centre switchboard (Sheffield

570700).



 Following        the     incident      both    570800     and

 570700     became       known to the public, so from

 the     time    the     Casualty      Bureau    went    into

 operation 7 incoming lines were available to

 receive public calls.



 At     1900     hours    a     further 3 exchange lines

 were       installed         by      British    Telecom    on

  Sheffield       570800 and one more exchange line

  on Sheffield 570500.
    I                                                                           Document No. 2 0 2   CONT’D


«       58     To     facilitate           the     flow of information from


    ■          the

               Hospitals
                          Royal     Hallamshire          and Northern General

                                   the following telephone links were

    ■          established              between       the Casualty Bureau and



    ■
               the police team at each location.




    ■          Time           Installation



    ■          1700           Fax

                              Hospital
                                         machine

                                                 on
                                                       at     Royal   Hallamshire

                                                       existing exchange line

                              Sheffield 766476.


    m          1900           Exchange                lines       installed        at

                              Casualty           Bureau to receive fax from
    m
                              hospitals:



                              Royal Hallamshire - Sheffield 570992
    m                         Northern General                - Sheffield 570990



I               1940              Fax    machines        connected         to the two

    n                             lines at Casualty Bureau.



    ■           2010
                                  Fax     machine        installed         at Northern

                                  General             Hospital        on      existing

                                  hospital line (Sheffield 424545).



                General


        6 39        The      following           additional       telephone       lines

                    equipment       were installed.

                                                            108
                                                                                                1301
    ■
                                                                     Document No. 2 0 2   CONT

    »
          Tine         Location

    I
          (Sat)

    ■    1900         Fax         machine    installed     in    HOLMES

                      incident room at 'F' Division.
I
I        2315         3    exchange      lines,      outgoing    calls

                      °nly ,      interview     rooms at Hammerton
I                     Road.


p                 5       exchange      lines,       outgoing    calls

I                 only, Hillsborough Boys Club for use

                  by relatives/friends of victims.

I

        (Sun)
I
        0001      Private           wire     link    installed     for

                  HOLMES          between     Hammerton    Road and
I
                  Headquarters.

I

        0515      2        exchange         lines,    Church    Hall,

                  Forbes Road, for use by relatives.



        1240      2    exchange lines Casualty Bureau.



        1310      2       exchange      lines     HOLMES   incident

                  room        -    to   facilitate      exchange of

                  casualty information.




                                                                                  1302
                                        109
                                                                     Document No.   202    CONT’D


   'lne          Location




  1650           British       Telecom       installed         trailer

                 with     6    payphones         at     Church Hall,

                Forbes        Road,    and    provided             (free)

                telephone call cards.



 1745
                2 exchange lines Medico-Legal Centre

                for police team.



British         Telecom       installed      a        total    of     26

exchange lines at the request.of the Force to

meet      the    demands        of    the incident,            m    the

area       of       Hammerton          Road           this      meant

disconnecting                   residents,                    without

consultation,           because the local exchange had
no spare capacity.




                                 110
                                                                                    1303
                                                                                                                       1304
   2 0 5
DPP DOC
                                                             RKRTAL MO 1 MKAI. TIMES 15/ 4/89


                                                                                                  1430-1445     1445-1500
                                                          1 330-1345   1345-1400      400-1415
               O FFICER          1300-1315    1315-1330

               INSP DARLING

               PS CHAPMAN

               PC WA L LP OL E

               PC MARSDEN

               PC BIRKENSHAW     12.30-1300

               PC ILLINGWORTH

               PC SMITH

               PC GROOM E

               PC HANSON
                                                                                                 EPPINGS LANE
                                                                            --P RISONER ESCORT
               PC HELLIWELL
               PC CUCKSON

               PC HOLMES

                PC STREET

                PC BROOKES

                PC WILSON

                PC LAMB

                PC COLLINS

                PC FINNEGAN

                PC R ICHARDSON

                PC FARTHING
                PC CROOT




           •                                    •                                     •                          •
o                                                                  NORTH STAND
                       . P C CUCKSON
             116   /   RT. 1 0 0 - 1 3 0


                                                                         PC STREET
                               P C M A RS D ENj
                                                                        RT 235 -2 .50
                               RT 11*5-215
                                                                                                                       PC BIR K E N S H A W
                                P C HANSON                                                                              R T 12.30- 100
                               RT. 1 6 5 - 2 2 0

                                PC BROOKES
                                RT 2 00-2.20                                                                                            P C LAMB
o                                                                                                                                     R J 130- 200
o
Q


                                                                   SFRIAL No.1 DEPLOYMENT
                                                                    [ R T - Refreshment Time]

    Tunnel




                                                                                                                                  PC GROOME


                                                                                                                PC CROOT               PC. HOLMES
                           W P C RICHARDSON        PC COLLINS              PC FINNEGAN
              12          • RT. 2 . 1 0 - 2 3 5                            RT. 1 0 0 - 1.20                     R.T.1 20-1.t>5
                                                   R T 1.00-1.30
                                                                                              P S CHAPMAN        PC HELLIWELL
                                  FARTHING                                                    RJ 1 0 0 -1 2 0




                                                                                                  Players
                                                                                                  Tunnel
                   Police
                   Control
                                                                       SOUTH ST®.D
                            DPP DOC   204




R E C OR D OF A RRESTS AT

  SEMI-FINAL 15.4.89




                                               I




                                        1306
      r 1^ ^     /

V->
                                    l •?Cfi*4r4   (■ ^
      'Jli>T   PlVIjT1      H
                                                         \ji^L,C^\
      inc^^rC
                                                         Ce<^-t^r-




      ^<;r       £*rx(fyrti

      (vci4-<s~r       'ro^ ^ )




         (&Vi




           @ &     u   L < j ~ fe
                             xf
                                  7~~

                                                     fiVi'S
f c v
                 <Ist
jD)\


('   ■’    :




                                        <T>4
                                               /Of
r'<~                U
 1c 11
                 t\\0 \V
    rn c
______ i_


    r ’S                t
 7S-1- ,



                                                                Ct Ol a"<-'■ )
                                                                     y
                        "I



          , f ''

               ±5




                                                                                        Document No.
                                                                ^ ■/M A.’           :
                                                      'ti'"'<

      A   Lf !

          1'/"




                                                                                        204
                   T~                                             LV-'/'iK ■(/- ^
                                        0       O -
                    'Dl                                                V
          i?ii




                                                                                        CONT’D
                                                                  / ’          }
o>                                                               .' ) -('/.A
o         r-. -                                                     .:->VC '
00
                                                                                    t\
                                                                          • ,
fD   € • £.

               V ”
                 '


                                                                         h




                                                                V    C       .




                                                                     d
                                                         *<?


                                                                             LV ,




              ■<3 <             ^

              Sossrcr-trsr <—       <-'4"t*

                                                               a/^




                                                                                     Document No.
                                              ro (/•/^   J-
                                                                         /£ -




                                                                                     20 4
                         wy                                               (L-
                           /




                                                                                     CONT’D
                                                                          i- ^ '
                              O/*          /V. €>. f i
                       .4--
             /

                                                         V     c
              PC               F 2     '
l ‘l         >
             :u u                                        Kfo
                      . .
              A i> '■



 0 r>         /*              A t
 /
              /JJ7

                                j■ ,

                 Ul



 7 '             p<
                 //(3
                       A •'

                  n l'v^
  ------


   7"/




                                                                   Document No.
   7*i




                                                                   204
       ?'(




                                                                   C O N T ’D
              Mk
             c./J

             cD
     Ik '*

                                                            tessrsct-
     OS                  J&c.        ^
                                                                                /J e ) J j ^ > .




                  r
                                                                                 V-C-
                                                                                                       A /i
     /•           h 1
                                                                                 K «




          17 f?   t: >
                                         <r

                                         sDst'j'/ir
                                                        |   ^   j   ,
                                                                                   i//c
A                                                                                 pi'o




                                                                                                              Document No, 2 0 4
          SP       V      '71S> S>       cS)
>1                                                                                V/                   Nc

                                                                                                   \ M


                                     *r S ^                             C-A^C     v/c              n
                   &                           CW<v/r
                                                                                       v




                                                                                                              CO NT’D
     ¥ Vi
                                           ^a-y^C^      ^                                    V C
                                                  ■}■(' c-'WA'.'r            o *4~~i&

                >3'        Cf> d                                                             K ft 4 v ^




                                            D   e     -o
                                                                    A                   /u
V           ^
                                 I\                                                                  V»
            /PS




                                                                        S^
                                                    VU/Ua /2
                                 PI

                                                 ~7f>                            /'r±         v-
N               pc,
            S    ir fO
                                                                                              V o ^ vU 7
                  !('(



                 N           iv \
                fa                          J*e<_          ^




                                                                                                                   Document No.
\   s                            V I
                //?i                                                                           M o
                                      'I
    .......t_l_ o n




                                                                                                                   Z 0 4 C°h '
it               ^                                                                                             u
        _ 15 w                                                                                 f\l'3      <f
        OJ           ,; .

        ^        K
                         l ■<
                           I1.
                                                                e_,
t-      Lf

                                                         l\!H




       .' £• /-*i/U'tt** (c?                                      c,


                                                         /\fo>        r e ls




                                    f f/o»J   l^b S’
7^       tc                                               C     j ,'< 'V

 fj6     'ULIXif-




       (JkTaA         ^
                                      fJlTTLfH                r ; X d ^
        (Ocp              \taiT^.         5 'i/tV^




     CLih 6        fins*-* .
                                       aJoj'IftI
'Tefaf&S          ^




       I A / I ia Sn r ^                       s r^ iA        c / ' v < < >0
         ^yyj         (rfUr^vJ-
f o o (!>
            n        x /
                         ^                      •                   <r^
                                                                                                                     /V



                                        crv^V
                                                            JrJi SLj-                    c       y           h




                 <   L       X     rfv^ ' |                                              G       i       U       ,
                Irvvn*^                fer^^^A*--
                                 nrv-Av.




                                                        S   J   i     $ i ~ J
                                                                                         C'          Jc-<JuiJ

                             f d < L




                  cT/uiu-— j                                    Poll-                        c       y           h
                                 S v | J L



                                                                                                                          o
                                                                                                                          O
                                                                                                                          O
                                                            G cv<-^        ~*-J.
                                                                                                                          c
                                                                                             c i < £ J                    3
                                                                                                                          CO
                                                                                                                          zs+-
                                                                                                                          r-
                                                                                                                          Z
                                                                                                                          o

                                                    r,./. > r,v.- v 1-          * ■. •                                    ro

                         Scc-V ^~                           Plo^          ftj *-<*.                   V ■c
                                                                                                                          O
                                                    *     e<vVc/^       *^i-                                              o
                                        Pe til
                                                        fVi Tbi0) C)A C k *^                                               —*
                                                         W sV^> (./W (('■>)                                                o
                                   DPP DOC




U T H    Y O R K S H I R E      P O L I C E




          OPERATION 'SUPPORT'

                 AND

           OPERATION 'MAINE'


           CONTINGENCY PLANS
DEAL WITH INCIDENTS OF SPONTANEOUS DISORDER
                                                     IJwcurnent No. 205   CO.'iVi)




                                INDEX


                                                           Page Nos;


                                                            1 - 3
INTRODUCTION

                         OPERATION •SUPPORT'


Actions by;

                                                            4       7
RECEIVING DIVISIONS
                                                             8   10
FORCE OPERATIONS ROOM
                                                            11   13
SUB-DIVISIONS PROVIDING RESPONSE
                                                            14   16
CH SUPT OPS & TRAFFIC

                          OPERATION 'MAINE'


Actions by:

                                                            17 - 18
FORCE OPERATIONS ROOM
                                                             19 - 20
SUB DIVISIONS
                                                                    21
 CH SUPT OPS & TRAFFIC

                '     OPERATION 'SUPPORT & 'MAINE'

                                                             22 - 24
 OBSERVATIONS




                                                                         1316


  Revised June 1986
                                                                     Document No.   205   CONT’D




                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

                            OPERATIONS AND TRAFFIC DIVISION




      CONTINGENCY PLANS TO DEAL WITH INCIDENTS OF SPONTANEOUS DISORDER




1        INTRODUCTION




1.1      The code name            ’Operation Support'   and   'Operation MAINE'

          signifies the need for the immediate deployment of all available

          personnel to a given rendezvous point to provide manpower


          support for either




          1    within this force area

          2     to another force area




          The purpose of this manpower support is to deal with a

          spontaneous       disorder situation warranting an immediate increased

          police presence over and above the normal police manpower


          a v a il ab il i ty •




1.2       The operation should not be confused wi th the Police Support

          Unit call-out system and is inaugurated to cater for only those

          spontaneous situations where pre-planned deployment is not


          practicable.




                                                                                      1317
                                                              Document No.   205   CONT’D
                                    2


2     INTENTION




2.1   The implementation of    'Operation Support'   is intended to ensure

      the immediate availability and response of additional manpower

      resources capable of supporting divisions of this force in

      dealing wi t h outbreaks of spontaneous disorder and ensuring

      our ability to contain situations which develop without pre­


      warning .




2.2   The implementation of   'Operation   MAINE' (Mutual Aid     In the

      N orth East)   is intended to ensure immediate availability and

      response of additional manpower resources capable of supporting

      other forces in dealing with outbreaks of disorder.




3     METHOD - SUPPORT WITHIN THIS FORCE ARE A




3.1   Intelligence and Assessment




      Where an incident of spontaneous disorder      occurs    it is

      imperative that the senior officer present accurately assess the

      situation -and reports to his sub-divisional control room on the

      nature of the incident and the number of persons involved.

      Where a developing situation is taking place an assessment

       should be made as to the possible overall extent of the problem

       in order that the level of response required may be as

       accurately assessed as possible.




                                                                               1318
                                                 Document No. 2 0 b     CONT’D

                           3




Authority for Implementation




When the senior divisional officer identifies the need for the

immediate deployment of additional resources,    he should contact

the Assistant Chief Constable (Operations), or in his absence,

the duty Chief Officer and advise him of the

situation,-indicating the level of additional manpower required

and seeking approval for the implementation of    'Operation

S u p p o r t '.

Command Structure

The officer in overall command of the situation will be the

Divisional Chief Superintendent or in his absence his Deputy.



He will be assisted by heads of other Divisions/Departments

regarding the manpower,   equipment etc as shown on Appendices   'F'.
                                                        Document No.   2Qb      CONT’D




Receiving divisions'      actions on receipt of approval for


implementation




a   Identify a rendezvous point at a location close to the scene of

    the disturbance,     bearing in mind the need for parking

    facilities and the possibility of the widening of the area of

    confrontation that may prevent or restrict transportation and

    deployment of personnel.       In the event of   'Operation Support'   or

    'Operation Maine' being implemented,        the following rendezvous

    points have been identified at each division as shown:-




    A Division

    1        The town centre area - A Division Headquarters




    2        If incident involves A Division DHQ - rendezvous point at

             Doncaster Racecourse Car Park, Grandstand Road




    3        To the west of Doncaster - Mexborough Police Station




     4        Sprotborough motorway post - Al(M)




     5        For Thorne area - H18 junction 6 - Vaterside   (use slip road)




        B Division




        1    Barnsley Divisional Headquarters

        2    Wombwell Police station

         3   Woolley Service Area - Ml motorway

         4   Ml Junction 36 - A61 at Tankersley
                                                                       Document No. £   0b   CONT’ D
                                           5




5           A1(M) Kotorway Ju nction with A635 at Marr




C Div is i on




See Page 5 (a)




D D i vi s i o n




1           Police Headquarters,           Snig Hill

2,          Ves t Bar Police Station

 3          A t t er cl i ff e Police Station

 4          Force Driv in g School,            Brigh ts id e Lane,   Sheffield




 E D i v is i on




    1        Hac ke nt h or pe Polic e Station

    2        H a l f w a y / M o s b o r o u g h Section Station


    3        Heele y Divisional Headquarters

    4        N o r t o n Aerodrome, N o r t o n Avenue




                                                  *            t
    F D i vi s i o n




     1       N i a g a r a Sports Ground, Niagara Road, Clayvh ee l s Lane

     2       En d cliffe T A V R Centre,        Endcliffe Vale Avenue, Ranmoor

     3        Force Driv in g School,           Brightside Lane,      Sheffield

        4      Force Tra in i ng School, The Common, Ecclesfield                             1321
                                                    Document No. 2 0 5   CONT’D
                            5 (a;




  Ci Sub Division

            Main Street Police Station

  NORTH     Eastwood Trading Estate, Fitzwilliam Road, Rotherham.

 SOUTH     Canklow Trading Estate, Canklow Road/West Bawtry Road,
           Rotherham.

 EAST       Simco Supermarket Carp lex, Wortley Road, Rotherham.

 WEST      Herringthorpe Playing Fields Complex, Off Middle Lane,
           Rotherham.

 C2 Sub Division

 NORTH     Warehouse Lane at its junction with Biscay Way
           (A633 Wath By-Pass), Wath. (Wath/Branpton area)

' SOUTH    Stadium Court at its junction with Mangham Road, Barbot Hall
           Industrial Estate, Parkgate. (Rawmarsh/Dalton/Thrybergh area)

 EAST       Marriott Road at its junction with Rowms Lane, Swinton.
            (Swinton/Kilnhurst area)

 WEST      Wentworth Park, entrance road B6090 Cortworth Lane,
           Wentworth Village. (Wentworth area)

 C3 Sub Division

  NORTH     a)   Hellaby Industrial Estate, off Bawtry Road, Hellaby.
            b)   Morrisons Supermarket, off Bawtry Road, Bramley.

  SOUTH     Woodall Services, Ml Motorway.

  EAST      Herringthorpe Playing Fields Cotrplex in Cl. Sub Division
            or Morrisons Supermarket, as identified above, can be used
            as the Eastern Rendezvous Point for C3 Sub Division.

  WEST      North Anston Trading Estate, Todwick Road, North Anston.




                                                                      1322
                                                             Document No. 2 0 b    CONT’D
                                   6




Inform Force Operations R oo m of the situation and request

activation of      'Operation Support',         giving details of the

authorising Duty Chief Officer and details of the

rendezvous point,        together w i t h suggested access routes and

advise whether or not shields are required for deployment and


the level of response required.




Identify reception officers, w o m e n officers if possible, and

d e spatch to rendezvous points w i t h nominal rolls etc.           Reception

officer to record number and name of officers arriving in serials

of one police sergeant and ten police constables.                Allocate call

sign 33 sierra S1./S2,            S3, S4 etc, and issue radio to sergeant.




Prepare plans identifying rendezvous points and area of

disturbance.        Each division n o w has largescale plans of areas where

it w o u l d be expected that spontaneous disorder w o u l d break out.

The se plans identify the p olice stations and also the rendezvous

points referred to previously.               Appropriate copies should be taken

from these plans         for d is t ribution to officers attending the

incident     f r o m w i t h i n our   force area and also from surrounding


forces on mutual aid.




Liaise w i t h Detective Chief            Superintendent and nominate C I D


 personnel     for -




                                                                                  1323
                                                    Document No.   2 Q3   CONT’D j
                                                                                 1




1      Prisoner reception and/or

2     Observations/surveillance points,   and/or

3      Information gathering/post disorder arrests and presentation


       of evidence

A      Photographers/AVA




Ensure the recall of-




1      Divisional Chief Superintendent or deputy

2      Sub-divisional Superintendent or deputy

3      Divisional Detective Superintendent or deputy

      and are fully updated with the situation



        Where off-duty officers are recalled to their stations

        ensure that they are fully updated and ensure that

        uniform PSU trained personnel are formed into Police Support


        Units and equipped ready for deployment.




    Consider requirement for separate major incident control and

    staff for same,   consulting with ACC (Operations) and Detective


    Chief Superintendent, Headquarters CID.




                                                                       1324
                                                                  Document No. 2 0 b        CONT’D
                                     6




ACTION BY FORCE OPERATIONS ROCM

a       Despatch an    'E' priority message to all sub-divisions using

        format plus 68.      In addition all' sub-divisions will be

        contacted by telephone informing them that such a priority


        message   is being sent.




b       Conmence an   extended incident       log.




c       Identify and despatch most available general             traffic patrol

        vehicle to the rendezvous point and establish a c o mm an d point


        for conmunication purposes.




d       Call out Chief Superintendent, Operations and Traffic Division,


        to Force Operations Room.




e       Call out Superintendent, Operations Division, a nd his deputy,

        and direct to the rendezvous point to assist w i t h the

         reception,   control and deployment of manpower.




 f       Update the Chief C on stable of the situation and if attending


         call out the appropriate Staff Officer.




    g    Identify Channel    2 for dedication to this event and clear all


         other traffic.




    h    After consultation w i t h the Chief Superintendent, Operations

         and Traffic Division, contact the supporting forces selected

         from those detailed in Appe nd ix C and advise them of the

          implementation of and activation of the force              ’O p e r a ti on Support-

         using the agreed r e g i o n a l   code   'Operation M a i n e 1 , ie 'Mutual A i d
                                                   D o c u m e n t No. 2 0 5   C O N T ’D

                               9




in the North East'      and indicate the level of response ie:-




1        Operation Maine Standby (personnel to be drawn together

          in readiness for    'Operation Maine Implement').




2        Operation Maine Implement (immediate deployment to


          requesting force).




3        Operation Maine Stand-Down (no further assistance


          required).




Where other forces are responding In accordance »ith

    ■Operation Maine Implement',    indicate the rendezvous point for

 visiting forces,       in accordance vlth those indicated at Appendix

 C and after selection by Chief Superintendent, Operations and

    Traffic Division,    include recommended routes of travel, bearing

    in mind the existing and developing situation.




    Obtain details of approximate time of arrival and confirm

    numbers.of officers responding.     Despatch a motor cycle to the

    agreed rendezvous point and cause them to stand by avaitlng


    escort instructions.




     Call out Superintendent, Communications to assist with


     communication facilities.




     Call out Superintendent, Community Liaison,     to deal with press


     facilities.
                                                       Document No. 2 0 b   CONT'D




Call out Chief Superintendent, Management Services,           to arrange


and assist with feeding facilities.



Call out Superintendent, Traffic Division,         to assist with

transport arrangements and arrange for the standby of the three


force coaches.




All available motorvay and general traffic patrol cars to be

brought on the air to provide Initial basic force cover.             They


will remain on Channel 1.




Call out the Underwater Search Team who will act as logistics.

 Initially they will attend the rendezvous point in order to

 assist with the reception and welfare of officers attending the


 incident.




 scenes of Crime (minimum two officers) to attend rendezvous


 point.




 Audio Visual Aid to attend rendezvous point.




  Dog Section to attend rendezvous point for initial security of


  vehicles and equipment




  All on duty Crime and Vandal units to be called out via their

  respective divisions and directed to the rendezvous point.



  Where vehicles are left unattended at the rendezvous point,

   these are to be secured and the ignition keys, suitably marRed

   „it h the v e h i c l e ’s registration number, - 1 1   be left vith     ^


    logistics officer stationed at the rendezvous point.
                                      11                        Document No. 2 0 5    CONT'D




SUB DIVISIONAL ACTION




a       On receipt of the message switch signifying the implementation

        of    -Operation S u p p o r t ’ all available unifo r m personnel   should

        be irrmediately re-called to their respective stations and

        despatched to the incident rendezvous point           leaving behind

        a bare m i n i m u m cover on sub-divisions capable of dealing w i t h

        the normal day to day enquiries, receipt of telephone messages

        and response to situations in urgent cases.             Full use should

        be made of the transport available at sub-divisions,             the most

        appropriate     transport being the personnel carrier as these

        accomnodate at       least   11 officers.   This transport should be

        utilised wh e re v e r possible.     Once at the rendezvous point these

        officers will be formed into units of 1 Sergeant and 10 Police

        Constables.       W henever possible, these units will consist of


        officers from the same division.




b        Sub-Divisional      control rooms should change the status of each


         resource attending to '09'.




    c    Sub-DiviSional      control   rooms should enter on the extended

         incident     log the vehicle details and total number of officers


         travelling therein.




    d    En route to the rendezvous point the officer            in charge of each

         vehicle must compile a list to include the following


             information:-

             a)   vehicle type a nd registration number;

             b)   numbers and identities of all officers travelling in the
                                                           Document No.    05        CO NT’D
                                  12




c)      if Officers are PSU trained and to what          level;

d)      if in p osition of protective equipment.




The      list   is to be handed to the receiving officer on arrival


    at the rendezvous point.




    I, is important that officers attached to the Divisional Crime

    and Vandal U n i t s    remain in their units a n d w il l be deployed

    from their respective divisions to the rendezvous point as a

    complete unit.         T h e y will be in possession of   their protective


    equipment and shields.




    ,,           iKl_          incnectors at sub-divisions will attend in
    Wherever possible,         inspector

    the ratio of 1 Inspector for 2 serials.            Divisional    comnanders

    will   ascertain from their control rooms the nunber of officers

     attending from their division and will direct a Chief Inspector

     or Superintendent to attend in the ratio of one for every eight

     serials.     In any case a Chief Inspector or Superintendent will

                          i.   f c r i a l c raised b y the division be
     attend should the nunber of serials raisea o y


     less than eight.




     C on t a in e d in the store rooms of number one and number two

      divisional    Police Support Units are two dragon lights and two

      lo„d hailers.        Th i s equipment   is to be brought   to the rendezvous


      points w h e n the serials attend from divisions.




,      Serials attending the rendezvous point will await instructions

       from the S u p e r i n t e n d e n t , Operations Division, who will deploy

       serials as instructed by the divisional Chief Superintendent.
                                                                                     1329
                                                      Document No. 2 0 5   CONT’D



Sub-div isions will contact      the Chief Superintendent,

Operations and Traffic Division,       an d   ascertain if it is

necessary to recall off duty officers to their stations.

If it is necessary then two officers will be identified by

the sub-division to embark on a call-out procedure of all

or some of the off duty officers depending on the instructions

of the Chief Superintendent, Operations and Traffic.




Arrange for reception of officers on call-out and remain at

their stations pending a decision on their deployment by the

divisional officer,      following instructions from Force/Incident


C on tr ol .



All nominated members and reserves of Police Support Units

and Crime and Vandal Squads to” be in possession of personal

protective equipment and shields.




Other officers to be in possession of reinforced helmet,

 anorak, box, shin pads and visor and any available divisional

 reserve protective equipment.        Under no circunstances should

 personal protective equipment be used b y any other officer

 th a n   the one to w h o m it is issued.




 Consideration should be given to calling out Special

 Constabulary staff to report to police stations in order to

  assist with routine police duty.
                                                  Document No.   205   CONT’ D




EF SUPERINTENDENT OPERATIONS AND TRAFFIC DIVISION

On receipt of notification of implementation of 'Operation

Support' arrange for Operations Division staff to attend at the

rendezvous point to assist with the reception, deployment and

welfare of visiting officers.




After consultation with the Divisional Commander and the

Assistant Chief Constable (Operations), identify the level of

support required and that which should be requested from other


force areas.




Liaise with Force Operations Room re:-




1       Implementation of 'Operation Maine* at mutual aid in the


        north ease;



2       Nominate the rendezvous point for mutual aid and also the

        recommended routes of travel, bearing in mind the existing

        and developing situation.




Consider use of:-



 1      Traffic Division for use of observation point and peripheral


        patrols;



    2   Mounted Department for cordons and/or dispersals;




    3    Protected vehicles (Range Rover - Transits etc) or transport

         of prisoners,   show of strength, dispersal etc;
                                                        Document No.   205   CONT'D




h            Barricade removing equipment, grappling irons, vehicles,

             etc ;



5            Lighting equipment (dragon lights, portable generators,

             etc).   Dragon lights will be in possession of the visiting

             serials from within our force area;




6            Loud hailers for giving warning messages to the crowd etc.

             Again, these will be in possession of the visiting serials

             from within our force area;




    7        Briefing and de-briefing teams,




    8        Management information teams;




    9        Community Interveners, (liaise with Divisional Chief

              Superintendent and or Community Liaison Inspector) Press

              Officers (Superintendent, Community Liaison Dept),




    10        Scenes of Crime and Audio Visual Aid - these officers -ill

              have already been Instructed to attend the rendezvous points


               by Force Operations Room;




        11     Casualty Bureau team;




        12     Magistrates' Court In the event of mass arrests;




        13     Provisions for mealing (Chief Superintendent, Management


                Services);
                                                Document No.   2.05   CONT’ D
                         16




14   Specialist weapons team;



15   GOMBA Stonefield Mobile Control Vehicle




Consider informing




1    emergency services (Ambulance Fire etc)

2    South Yorkshire Public Transport Dept

3    TV, radio, press (warning messages etc).




                                                                  1333
                                                            Document No. 2 0 5    CONT’D




8     METHOD - SUPPORT TO OTHER FORCE AREAS    OPERATION'    MAINE

8.1   Authority of Implementation


      Authority for activating 'Operation Support' to aid other forces

      will only be given on the authority of the Assistant Chief

      Constable (Operations) or, in his absence, the duty Chief

      Officer.




8.2   Actions by Force Operations Room on request for aid




          Request for aid to other forces will generally be received by

          Force Operations Room who should obtain the following

          information in order that the authorising officer may consider

          the position and give the necessary authority for

          implement at ion:-



            i     the force name and rank of the officer requesting aid and

                  his telephone number;

           ii    brief details of the incident and its venue;

          iii    the level of aid required;

           iv    whether or not shields are required;

            v    the rendezvous point in the receiving      force area;

            vi    the radio channel upon which the operation is being


                  controlled.



      b    Once authority for implementation has been given, call out Chief

           Superintendent, Operations and Traffic Division, or. if

           unavailable, his deputy.




                                                                                 1334
                                                                              Document No.           20 b   CONT’ D




In c o n s u l t a t i o n w i t h C h i e f   Superintendent,            Operations          and


T r a f f i c D i vi si on ,    i d e n t i f y the   f or ce r e n d e z v o u s p o i n t   a nd


circulate           telex m e s s a g e   in a c c o r d a n c e w i t h A p p e n d i x D.




D i r ec t    ne ar e s t   available      g e ne ra l    t ra f f i c p a t ro l   car   to the


r e n d e z v o u s po int     to e s t a b l i s h conrounications a n d to act as


comm a n d vehi c l e w h e n units            l e av e   the c o un ty .




Di r ec t     the    force co a c h e s     to the r e n d e z v o u s p o in t .




Ca ll    out Superintendent, Communications,                            to assist w i t h


 conmunications              facilities.




 D i re c t    two m o t o r   cycles      to r e n d e z v o u s p o i nt    for e s c o r t d u t i e s




 Conrrence an e x t e n d e d         incident        log.
                                                 Document No.   205   CO N TD
                             19




OPERATION    'MAINE' SUPPORT TO OTHER FORCES - ACTION BY SUB DIVISION



a       Recall all available on duty uniformed personnel to their

        stations and despatch to the rendezvous point in the ratio of

        one sergeant and ten constables per unit, leaving only a bare

        minimum cover capable of dealing with the normal day to day

        enquiries, receipt of telephone messages and response to

        situations in urgent cases.   Inspectors should also be

        despatched, if possible, in the ratio of one Inspector per two

        units.   Units should be deployed in personnel carriers but

        where these are not available car loads of officers in the

        agreed ratio should be despatched.    On arrival officers to be

        instructed to await Operations Division staff.




b        Divisional Commanders will ascertain from their control rooms

         the number of officers attending from their division and will

         direct a Chief Inspector or Superintendent to attend in the

         ratio of 1 per 8 serials.    A Chief Inspector or Superintendent

         will, in any case, attend should the number of serials raised

         by the division be less than 8.


         Identify two officers to embark upon a call-out procedure of

         all off duty officers who should be warned to report to

          their respective stations forthwith.




          sub divisions will contact the Chief Superintendent Operations
    d
          and traffic Division and ascertain if it is necessary to recall

          off-duty officers to their stations.    I f it is necessary then 2

            officers will be identified by the sub divisions to embark on a

            call-out procedure of all or some of the off-duty
                                         Document No.   2 05    CONT’ D




depending on instructions from the Chief Superintendent

Operations and Traffic Division.




                                                               1337
                                                               Document No.   2 Ob    CONT’D




iO       OPERATION   'M A I N E ' SUPPORT TO OTHER FORCES - ACTION BY CHIEF

         SUPERINTENDENT OPERATIONS AND TRAFFIC DIVISION




     a     On receipt of call-out attend at Force Operations Room




     b     Call out Operations Division Staff and direct to rendezvous

           point for reception and deployment duties




     c     Contact requesting force and advise them of our response and

           obtain further details of the incident, giving details of our

           estimated response and time of arrival.




     d     Superintendent, Operations Division to attend at rendezvous

           point, in readiness to accompany officers to requesting force

           a re a.




                                                                                     1338
                                                  Document No. 2 Ob     CONT’ D




11   OBSERVATIONS



         In all cases where 'Operation Support' is activated, every

         effort should be made to ensure that manpower is deployed in

         the ratio of one sergeant and ten constables and that

         personnel carriers, where available, should be used.




        However, it is appreciated that cars may have to be used but

         in order to reduce the number of vehicles at rendezvous

         points these should be fully loaded and identified as

         separate units.




         If the assistance is being provided for use in ANOTHER FORCE

         then those officers who arrive at the rendezvous point in

         cars will transfer to the force coaches, remaining in their

         respective serials.




         South Yorkshire Police have 16 Police Support Units and six

         Crime and Vandal Squads, making a total of 19 units.

         Between 25% and 30% of those officers on operational duty at

         any one time will be a member of a Police Support Unit and

         therefore fully trained.   This should be taken into

         consideration when sub divisions are forming their serials

         in response to 'Operation Support' and therefore whenever

         possible each serial should comprise of at least two

         officers from a Police Support Unit.   These officers will

         then be in a position to advise the remaining untrained

         officers within the serial.



                                                                       1339
                                             Document No. 2 0 5   CONT’ D




When providing support within this force area the six crime

and vandal squads will remain together as units.   Individual

officers will not be used from these units, no matter what

duties they are doing at that time, to form serials.




Except on specific instructions from the Assistant Chief

Constable (Operations) the Crime and Vandal Squads will not

be deployed OUTSIDE this force area.




Once the manpower situation allows consideration should be

given to forming some, if not all, the Police Support Units.

Obviously, officers from within these units will have been

deployed with serials formed upon the initial response to

 •Operation Support'.   Others will no doubt be on standby

 having been previously off duty.




 Once formed, these Police Support Units, who are fully

 trained and equipped to deal with disorder situations,

 should replace those serials in the most   vulnerable


 situations.



 At all times officers should be . » »   of the possibility of

  the activation of 'Operation Support' and as such should

  have available, when on duty, full uniform Including

  reinforced helmet, anorak, staffs, handcuffs, bo* and

  shinguards.   dominated officers on Police Support Units and

  Crime and Vandal Squads m i l retain their protective

  equipment at divisions.   This equipment WILL SOT be taken
                                                          Document No.    2 05   CONT’ D




        h   Initially, when serials are formed, officers' details will

            be endorsed on the nominal rolls supplied.   Police Support

            Unit operational books will be taken into use when Police

            Support Units are formed.




Assistant CM^sf Constable
Operations




                                                                             1341
                                   OPERATION 'SUPPORT' - NOMINAL ROLL             DATE
APPENDIX    A




           DIV          OFFICER                       REGISTRATION to
           SUB-DIV/     RANK/NO/                      AND TYPE OF       PSU              FIREARMS   l ‘R f y r K ( T ! VI

           DEPARTMENT   NAME         CALL SIGN        VEHICLE           TRAINED          TRAINED    KOWIPMKNT
TIME




                                                                                                                     Document No.
                                                                                                                     205
                                                                                                                     CO NT’D
  1342
                                                                          Document No. 2 0 5      CONT’D



OP ERATION 'SUPPORT'     (IN FORCE)



All available ur.iforrr.ed personnel      are to be directed to the following
RENDEZVOUS POINT forthwit h:-

The rendezvous point        should be approached via:-


Inc ident :-


Wherever possible personnel should be in possession of D R AG ON LAMPS and
W HI L ST EN ROUTE T O THE RENDEZVOUS the officer in charge of each vehicle
            •i     i ■ * t      =  t w f TY PF A ND REG N O O F T H E VE HICLE
must c o ^ . l e a list of.-    .                 ALL P E K C N N E L TRA VE LL I NG IN T H E VEHICLE




LISTS MU S T B E HANDED T O T H E RE CEPTION O F F I C E R O N ARRIVAL AT TH E
RENDEZVOUS POINT


CONTRO L ROCMS SHOULD AL S O T A K E T H E FO LLOWIN G ACTION RE GA RDI NG THESE
R ES OU R CE S :-


 1    The STATUS C O D E of each officer attending MUS T be change d to 09
      (eg US C A L S : C A L S :CALS:09. Up to 11 call signs m a y be change
       in one transaction).

       .. N B   The time an officer   is due off duty M U S T N O T be changed at
                this stage.


 2     Enter details of the nunfcers of officers attending on the Ex tended^
       Incident Log immediately they are en route (eg 1 Insp. 1 S g t ,




 Additional Tex




     ** END O F MESSAGE**




                                                                                                1343
                                                                 Document No.   2 Ob   CONT’


AID FROM OTHER FORCES - 'OPERATION MAINE'



WHERE SPONTANEOUS AID IS REQUIRED FROM
ACTIVATION OF 'OPERATION SUPPORT1, THE CODE NAME WILL BE
'OPERATION MAINE' (MUTUAL AID IN THE NORTH EAST). BECAUSEOF THE
TOCATION OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE, AID WILL NOT NECESSARILY BE FROM
^      wiraiN^R S     o n an ^> set out b e lc w are t h e forces w h i c h
MAY NORMALLY RESPOND, THE LOCATION OF THE INCIDENT W A R R A N T ^
SUPPORTIVE AID, DICTATING WHICH FORCES ARE CALLED. HOWEVER,
FORCES ARE LISTED BELCW IN A GENERAL ORDER OF PRIORITY:-

                                                   BASIC AID AVAILABLE FOR
                                                   DEPLOYMENT FROM FORCES
- FORCES                                          WITOIN TWO HOURS



WEST YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN POLICE                 3 PSU
                                                   2 PSU
 HUMBERSIDE POLICE
 NOTTINGHAMSHIRE CONSTABULARY                      2 PSU
                                                   2 PSU
 DERBYSHIRE CONSTABULARY
                                                   2 PSU
 NORTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                   4 PSU
 GREATER MANCHESTER POLICE


 RENDEZVOUS POINTS



 QtiTT&RTF VFNUES FOR APPROACH AND FOR THE FASTEST
            S e TOUNTY   THE RENDEZVOUS POINT SHOULD EE SELECTED
 DEPENDENT UPON THE VENUE OF HIE INCIDENT OF SPONTMECUS DISORDE
 and ^ jpon toe direction f r m w h i c h a i d is a t t e n d i n g .


                                             NORTH/SOUTHBOUND Ml
 WOODALL SERVICES
                                             SOUTHBOUND, SITUATE ON Ml,
 WOOLLEY EDGE SERVICE STATION
                                             NORTH OF JUNCTION 38

                                             SOUTHBOUND, SITUATE ON Al,
  FORTES SERVICE AREA -                      APPROX 3 MILES NORTH OF
  BARNSDALE BAR                              REDHOUSE

                                              SITUATE ON Al NORTHBOUND,
  BLUE STAR GARAGE, BLYTH
                                              BLYTH

                                              SITUATE ON M180, WESTBOUND,
  WOODHOUSE INTERSECTION
                                              JUNCTION 2



                                                                                 1344
                                                                     Document No.   205   CONT’ D




OPERATION MAINE



Mutual Aid to CC


All available uniformed personnel are to be directed to the following
RENDEZVOUS POINT forthwith:-



Incid ent:-




Shields and personal protective equipment required (YES/NO)



Whilst EN ROUTE to the rendezvous point the officer            in charge of each
vehicle M U S T CC MPI LE A LI ST o f : -


a     Vehicl e type and registered number

b     Details of personnel       travelling   in the vehicle



O n arrival at the rendezvous point           the list should be han de d to the member
of Operations Division who          is arranging deployment.




    **e n d   of   message   *




                                                                                          1345
                                                                 Document No. 2 0 5        CONT'D
RECEIVING DIVISION - ACTIONS


        S e n i o r c-i           resem   to obtain authorisation or duty Cr.ie:
        O fficer for       implementation..

2       Identify rendezvous point and route.

3       Inform Operations Room giving:

        a     Authorising duty Chief Officer
        b     Rendezvous point
        c     Reconroended route
        d     Shield requirement

4       Identify Reception Officer and despatch to rendezvous point
        w i t h nominal rolls. (Record in serials of 1 PS 4 10 PCs and
        allocate call sign 33 SI, S2, S3, S4 etc.    Issue radios if
        possible to Sergeants).

5       Prepare plans identifying rendezvous point and area of
        disturbance.

6       Liaise wi t h Detective Chief Superintendent and nominate CID
        personnel         for:-

        a     Prisoner reception and/or -
        b     Obse rvati on points and/or
        c     Information gathering/post disorder arrests
        d     Photo graphers/AVA
        e     Major enquiry investigation and evidence gathering team


7        Ensure that:-

         a    Divisional Chief Superintendent or Dep uty
         b    Sub-divisional Superintendent or Depu ty
         c    Divisional Detective Superintendent or Depu ty
         d    Off du ty u n if o rm personnel are r e c a “ ^ “ ®r           n^     e rs
              Chief Superintendent, Operat ions a n d Traff      >

            are all   fully updated and that re-call ed uniformed personnel are
            formed into PSUs and equipped ready         for   deployment.

    8       Consider requirement for separate major i n d e n t                   “ ? ve
            staff for same, consulting wi t h ACC (Operatio
            Chief Superintendent,         HQ CID.




                                                                                           1346
                                                                  Document No. £ O b   CONT’ D


FORCE OPERATIONS H X M - ACTIONS


1   Despat ch an 'E' priority message switch to all              sub-divisions
    using       format +68.

    a       Incident
    b       Rendezvous point
    c       Suggested access route
    d       Shield requirement

2   Commence an extended incident             log.

3   Traffic car to rendezvous point             to establish:-


    a       Cormiand post
    b       C omnun icat io n point

4   Desig na ted Channnel 2 for operation.

5   Inform Chief Constable and if attending call out his
    staff officer.

6   Cal1 out:

    a       Chief Superintendent, Ops & Traffic
    b       Superintendent and Depu ty (Operations Division)
    c       Superintendent (C omn unic atio ns)
    d       Superintendent (Conrnunity Liaison)
    e       Superintendent (Traffic)                      — rr.
    f       Chief Superintendent (MS) & Force Caterin g Officer
    g       Underwater Search T e a m (logistics team) to attend rendezvous
            point in order to assist w i t h reception and we lfa r e of
            officers
    h       SOC (minimum two officers)         to rendezvous point
     i      Audio Visual Ai d to rendezvous point
     j      Dog Section to rendezvous point for initial security
            of vehicles and equipment
     k      Crime and Vandal Squads via divisions and direct           to
             rendezvous point
        1    Force coaches to be readily available for transportati

     m       Mo t or w ay 6 and general   traffic patrol vehicles to be on
             Channel   1 for basic cover




                                                                                       1347
                                                                    Document No.   20j    CONT’ D


OP ER ATI ON M AI N E - FORCE OPERATIONS RO O M ACTIONS




After consultation wi th Chief Superintendent, Operations and Traffic

Division,       contact supporting forces and indicate    level of response

e it h e r :-



a      Opera tion M A I N E - STANDBY

b      Oper ation M A I N E - IMPLEMENT

c      Opera ti on M A I N E - STAND DC W N




If     Ioeration M A I N E is implemented message switch format +69 is to be used.




Obtain:



 a   Time of arrival of mutual aid and numbers attending

 b    Despatch motor cycles to rendezvous point




                                                                                         1348
                                                         APPENDIX   E



                                                        Document No, 2 0 5   CONT’D
SUB DIVISIONS PROVIDING RESPONSE




1   Recall all available on duty uniform personnel.

2   Despatch to rendezvous point in ratio of 1 Police Sergeant and 10
    Police Constables.   Serials to take possession of Dragon Rights and
    Loud Hailers from PSU stores but not PSU officers' personal
    protective equipment.

3   Retain bare minimum in sub division.
    •                 «

A   Where possible, serials despatched to rendezvous point in personnel
    carriers.   Otherwise in cars in ratio 1 Police Sergeant and 10
        Police Constables.

5   Serials will attend rendezvous point and await instructions from
     the Superintendent, Operations Division.

6   Two officers to embark on call out system of all off duty officers
     to their respective stations.      /.        .w- ;               ••

7   Arrange reception of officers on call out and retain at own sub
     division pending decision on deployment, following instructions
        from Force/Incident Control.

8   All nominated members and reserves of PSU's and Crime and Vandal
     Squads to be in possession of personal protective equipment.

9   Other officers to be in possession of reinforced helmet, anorak,
        box, shin pads, visor, etc.




                                                                           1349
                                                            APPENDIX   E



                                                            Document No.   2 Ob   CONT’ D


OPERATIONS CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT - ACTIONS


1   After consultation vith:-

    a   ACC (Ops)
    b   Divisional Commander

    identify level of response

2   Liaise with Force Operations Room re:-
                     %

    a   Implementation of Operation MAINE
    b   Rendezvous point and route from forces providing mutual aid

3   Consider use of:-

    a   Traffic division for observation points and peripheral patrols
    b   Mounted Dept
    c   Protected vehicles (Range Rovers - Transits, etc;
    d   Barricade removing equipment                                    -
    e ' Lighting  (Dragon Lights,  portable   generators, etc) -
    f   "Loud hailers for warning messages etc
    g   Briefing and de-briefing teams
    h   Management  Information Teams
        Community Interveners - P r e s s Officer (Superintendent Community
    i
        Liaison)
    J    SOC and Audio Visual Aid
    k    Casualty Bureau
     1   Magistrates Court (mass arrests)
         Provisions for mealing (Chief Superintendent, Management
    m
        Services)
        Specialist Weapons Team

4   Consider informing

    a   Emergency Services (Ambulance, Fire)
    b   Transport Department
    c   TV, Radio, Press (warning messages)




                                                                              1350
                                                                   /W V J      /U1 i   V/J l-i_ L-




                                        CH SIFT (OPS &    ^ m O             OR DEPUTY                      DET CH SUP           OR DEPUTY       cif   sift   (B w s w t r r
DIVISIONAL         (OR DEPUTY)

                                        1 INCIDENT CONTROL (If incident controlled                         1 PRISONER RECEPTION and/or          1 CAT!:R TNG
1 a) SECTOR OOWIANDERS ) Liaise with
                       ) Ch Supt          from Force Headquarters, Operations
                                          Room) Commence Incident Log.                                     2 OBSERVATIONS/SURVEILLANCE POINTS   2     FIELD CATERING
  b) PSU 00MWTOER3     )Ops & Traffic
                                                                                                             and/or
                       )
                                        2 PROVISION OF:       a) Manpower (PSUs, C & Vs                                                         3 ACCOM-ODA'I'TON &WH.FAUF. OF
    c) PSUs             )
                                                                 spec, weapons team)                        3 INFORMATION GATHERING/POST          OFFICWS
                                                                                                              DISORDER ARRESnS & PRESENTATION
2   Incident Room (If retained at                                                                             OF EVIDENCE                       S IF T    TRATNrNC. D H T
                                                              b)    Equipment
    (Division).

                                                              c) Logistics & Records                        4 PTOIOCRAFHERS/AVA                 1 CASUALTY HIRFAlI TFAM
3 Briefing and De-briefing
  information. (See Supt                                                                                    CH SUPT   DISC & COMPLAINTS         2     FIRST AID OFFICERS (FTH.I) CAS)
                                                              d) Forward holding area &
  Training Dept)
                                                '                security of vehicles
                                                                 (Logistics personnel &.                    COMPLAINTS OFFICER                  3     BRIEFING & D E -H U I'F irr. 'I l / W ;
 4 Manpower Planning
                                                                  dog handlers)                                                                       ( S e e Div Ch S u p t )
   (Liaise with Ch Supt
    Ops & Traffic Division)
                                                              e) SOC Officers
 5 TACTICAL ATVISCRS
                                                              f) Audio Visual Aid Unit
   (supplied ty Ops Div)                                  1
                                         SUPT TRAFFIC

                                         1 TRANSPORT           a) Personnel carriers
                                                               b) Protected vehicles
                                                               c) Force coaches
                                                               d) fVcycle escorts
                                                               e) Traffic Patrol
                                                                   (Observation vehicles)

                                         SUFT OOmJNICATICTB
                                                                                                                                                                                      O
                                          1 COMhB              a) Mobile Incident Rocm                                                                                                ©
                                                                                                                                                                                      o
                                                               b) Forward ccmunications                                                                                               c
                                                                                                                                                                                      3
                                                                  station                                                                                                             CO
                                                                                                                                                                                      3
                                                               c) Personnel radios

                                          SUFT QOMUNTTY LIAISON
                                                                                                                                                                                      ro
                                                                                                                                                                                      o
                                          1                                                          PRESS & RJBLIC RELATIONS                                                         u~i
        — *•                              2 OOM'UNTTY INTERVENERS
                                                                                                                                                                                      o
                                                                                                                                                                                      o
        ^                                 CH B S P   PROSECUTIONS
                                                                                                                                                                                     o
                                          MAGISTRATES' COURT IN THE CASE OF MASS ARREST
                                                                        DPP DOC              206
                                                                        ------------------ rrrorx—
                                                                                          Page 1


                                MAJOR INCIDENT MANUAL


This manual is orqamsed so that if you are consulting it w hen a major incident has
occu^ed you may take the right course o f action by method.cally carry,ng out the
activities listed in the relevant section of the manual.

The activities relating to your situation are in the section as indicated below.
                                                                                SECTION

INTRODUCTION

Definition of a M ajor Incident
Objects of the M ajor Incident Plan
Basic Principles of M ajor Incident Operations
Police Duties and Responsibilities


ACTION ON RECEIPT OF INFORMATION

The Alert                           , „
Duties of the First O ff ice r a t the Scene
Duties of the First Supervisory Officer at the Scene
Force Operations Room
Duties of the Inspector, Force Operations Room
Checklists for Callout by Operations Room
Duties of the Sub-Divisional Control Room
Duties of O ther Sub-Divisional Control Rooms


 ACTION AT THE SITE

 Duties of the Site Commander                                                         ^
 M ajor Incident Site - Instruction Cards
    Card A     Parking Arrangements
    Card B Traffic Routes at Site
     Card C Police Incident Post
     Card D Site Security
     Card E    M e d ic a l Arrangements at Site
     Card F Assembly and W elfare of Persons Involved
     Card G Lost and Found Property
     Card H Press Liaison
     Card I   Search of Scene
     Card J Fatalities
     Card K Incident Investigation
     ^ a S M ^ !c Y e ec     ^   t »   L
                                       ceT —     is and M u l t i p l e ^ i d e n t s )
     Card N    Vehicle Pound Officer (Motorways and M ultiple Accidents)
  Police Incident Post (Staff and Duties)




                                                                                              1352

                                                                                      JAW JAR Y1M 8
                                                    Document No.         2 0 6 CONT'D


                                                                     INDEX

                                                                     Page 2

                                                          S E C T IO N




DEPARTM ENTS
                                                               13
Duties of Road Traffic Divisions                               14
Duties of Criminal Investigation Departm ent                   1^
Duties of th e Communications Departm ent                      16
Press Liaison D epartm ent                                     17
Duties o f O th er Departments


ORGANISATIONS
                                                               18
Responsibilities of Area Authorities                           l9
Voluntary Organisations


SPECIAL ARRANGEMENTS
Traffic Control and Routes to Hospitali                         20
                                                                21

J H*Kenyon Ltd, Funeral Directors - Appendix A
                                                                22
M ortuary Liaison Officers                                      23
Casualty Enquiry Bureau                                         24
Hospital Liaison Officers                                       25
M ajor Incident Equipment                     .
Sub-Divisional M ajor Incident Box - Appendix A
Force M ajor Incident Box - Appendix B
Communications Command Caravan - Appendix C


 INCIDENTS INVOLVING SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                                                26
 Crashed Aircraft - Special Measures                            27
 Colliery Accidents                                             28
 Explosives                                                    29
 Flooding             •                                         30
 Rail Accidents - Special Measures                              31
 Nuclear/Radio-active Materials           raMltr„               32
 Hazardous Chemicals - Emergency Procedures                      33
 M ajor Incidents Involving the M otorw ay
 Maps o f M1 M otorw ay
  Maps o f M 18 M otorw ay
  Maps of A1 M otorw ay
  Maps of M 180 M otorw ay

               *




  appropriate section - eg XR 300.

                                                                            1353

                                                                    JANUARY 1 9 M
                                                                                 Document No.       ^ O b C O N T ’D


                                                                                          SECTION 1


                                         M A JO R IN C ID E N T



D E F IN IT IO N

A major incident is defined as a serious disruption of life, arising with little or no warning,             X R 200
causing or threatening death or injury to numbers of people in excess of those that can be dealt
with by the public services operating under normal conditions and which require special mobil­
isation and organisation of those services.




                          OBJECTIVES OF THE MAJOR INCIDENT PLAN

It is impossible to cater for every contingency which might arise in a major incident situation.            XR201
The Major Incident Plan, therefore, contains a basic format on which all major incidents should
be based.

Whilst setting out basic principles and responsibilities to be adhered to, it also allows for flexibil­
ity and initiative in the prevailing circumstances.




                                                                                                          1354
                                                                                                               Document No.    L   J     CQ‘ !T j j

                                                                                                                        S E C T IO N 2



                             BASIC PRINCIPLES O F M AJO R IN C ID E N T O P E R A T IO N S




                                                                                                                                            XR 202
T h e i n i t i a l o b j e c t i v e s o f all services i n v o l v e d in a m a j o r i n c i d e n t are:


        (a)         To   ensure that those who can assist, get to the scene as soon as possible.
        (b)         To   safeguard all persons and property from further danger.
        (c)         To   release casualties from the wreckage as soon as possible.
        (d)         To   quickly and accurately assess and treat injuries.
        (e)         To   transport casualties to hospital with the minimum of delay.
        (f)         To   provide prompt and skilled treatment on arrival at hospital.
        (g)         To inform the relatives of casualties of their condition and whereabouts.
        (h)         To re-establish normal conditions as soon as possible.

These objectives cannot be met by any one service. A major incident will invariably require the
full involvement of all three primary emergency services - ie police, fire and ambulance. These
services will be supported by the local authority and a number of other agencies.

To deal effectively with a major incident there must be a common policy and a complete under­                                                XR203
standing between all three services. This will necessitate: —

          i.         The establishment of lines of control and communication at the earliest
                     possible stage.
         ii.         The establishment of liaison between all services for effective co-ordination.
        iii.         The provision of facilities to enable each service to operate to maximum
                     efficiency.
         IV.         The co-ordination of requests for, and allocation of resources in order of
                     priority.

The overall control and co-ordination of the effort of all the services involved in dealing with a
major incident is a POLICE responsibility.




                                                                                                                                       1355
                                                            ,un u :rt No.:        2 0 6c . T
                                                                                                        SECTIO N 3



                              POLICE D U T IE S A N D R E S P O N S IB IL ITIE S



                                                            assume o v e r a l l ch a r g e o f t h e scene.               X R 205
1       PREVENT FURTHER DANGER

                                                             notify and co ordinate the response of all
        MOBILISE E M E R G E N C Y SERVICES            -
2                                                            essential and voluntary services.

                                                             set up POLICE IN C ID E N T POST under the
3       C O M M A N D OF IN C ID E N T
                                                             control      of      the   S ITE      COMMANDER.


        SITE C O N T R O L A N D S E C U R IT Y        -     arrange rendezvous points for essential per­
4
                                                             sonnel and security of all property.

                                                             provide adequate control of all routes to
5       O F F S IT E C O N T R O L
                                                             allow free ingress and egress of all services.

                                                             to provide o n/o ff site communications and                   XR206
6       C O M M U N IC A T IO N S
                                                             assist other essential services if necessary.

                                                             (a)     assist in the rescue and care.
7       C A S U A L T IE S
                                                             (b)     set up the C A S U A L T Y E N Q U IR Y
                                                                       BUREAU.
                                                              (c)      make provisions           for a temporary
                                                                       mortuary.
                                                              (d)      identification and notifying next of
                                                                       kin.

                                                              organisation of manpower and equipment
8        LO G ISTIC S
                                                              including welfare and catering.

                                                              undertake investigation into the cause of                     XR 207
    9    IN V E S T IG A T IO N
                                                              the incident, criminal or otherwise.

                                                              prepare         a   comprehensive        and     detailed
10       REPORTS
                                                              report of all aspects of the incident.




                                                                                                                          1356
                                                            Document No.    2 0 6   CONT’ D

                                                                                          S ECTIO N 4




                                              THE ALERT


                                                                                                          X R 209




that the available information may not immediately indicate the exact exte




stances will soon indicate if a large scale response is not required.

if notification is received the information must be passed immediately to the Force ° P erf J '° ns
Room S l i l l        M     other « * * « »    - V    -        * ™ i° r inciden, ma¥ h3Ve ° CCUmid ^
that the police are implementing the "Major Incident         plan.

The recognised codeword between the emergency services is :-

                                          "C A T A S T R O P H E ”




                                                                                                        1357
                                                                           Document No.        d06    CONT’ D
                                                                                                                 SE C TIO N 5




                                        F IR S T POLICE O F F IC E R A T TH E SCENE


                                                                                                                                     XR2J1



rescue p la n s are t o be b r o u g h t i n t o o p e r a t i o n .


The following guidelines may be most effective in the circumstances:-

                                                                       _     upwind and downhill where appropriate.
1         APPR O A CH T H E SCENE
           C A U T IO U S L Y
                                                                       _     speed is essential, a general picture will
2         IN IT IA L R E C O N N A IS S A N C E
                                                                             suffice.

                                                                       —     or take any personal risk!
            DO N O T G E T IN V O L V E D IN
            RESCUE W O R K
                                                                       _     by     the best    means available giving the           XR 212
            IN F O R M FORCE O P E R A T IO N S
                                                                             following inform ation:—
            ROOM
                                                                             (a) E X A C T L O C A T IO N
                                                                             (b) TY P E OF IN C ID E N T (aircrash, fire,
                                                                                     etc.)
                                                                              (c)    RISKS     (explosion, chemical, radio­
                                                                                     activity)
                                                                              (d)    C A S U A L T IE S (numbers, persons
                                                                                     trapped, injuries, fatalities, etc.)
                                                                              (e)    E M E R G E N C Y S E R V IC E S (present or
                                                                                     required)
                                                                              (f)    RO A D S (blocked, best access routes)


             LIA IS E W IT H F IR S T S U P E R V IS O R Y O F F IC E R A T T H E SCENE




                                                                                                                                    1358
                                           Document No.             2. 0 6 CONT’ L1 .
                                           ----------   ■ 111......... "—   1       *   S E C T IO N 6




           D U T IE S OF F IR S T SU PER VISO RY O F F IC E R A T SCENE
                             (INSPECTOR OR A B O VE)


                                                                                                          XR 214
                                                 until the arrivai of the SITE
ASSUME C O N T R O L
                                                 C O M M A N D E R - ie the Divisional Officer
                                                 or his deputy


C O N F IR M IN IT IA L REPORT                   of the first officer 3t the scene.

                                                 initially and at frequent intervals.
U P D A T E FORCE O P E R A T IO N S

                                                 ensure that an incident post has been estab­
IN C ID E N T POST
                                                 lished and that the best means of com­
                                                 munication have been utilised.


U P D A T E T H E SITE C O M M A N D E R         on his arrival.




                                                                                                         1359
                                                         Document No.     2 0 6   CONT’ D
                                                                                             SECTION 7

                                                                                                   Page 1




                                      FORCE O P E R A T IO N S ROOM




             xr;;.v,TS,‘
              •   •                       the Fnrrp area       elsewhere than on the motorway, police         XR 216




o T e ^ ts                                           ™ r * >hiS d""*W*            ^   l3,er 5,a9C!' ° fder
to allow sub-divisions to carry on with normal policing.

The R E S P O N S IB IL IT IE S of the O P E R A T IO N S ROOM a r e .-

      (a)      to ensure that the necessary action is taken in respect of special safety measures
               demanded by the circumstances of the incident;

      (b)      to alert the emergency services and other authorities and departments whose
               facilities and expertise will be needed;

      (c)     to deal with the possible Forcewide problem of traffic congestion;


      (d)     to direct the Forcewide deployment of manpower and equipment.




                                                                                                             1360
                                                         Document No.        2 .0 6   CONVD
                                                                                                SECTIO N 7

                                                                                                      Page 2



                  D U T IE S OF T H E IN SPEC TO R FORCE O PER A TIO N S ROOM


                                                                                                                  XR 217
On receipt of information that a major incident may have occurred, the following action should
be taken:—

       C O M M U N IC A T IO N S V E H IC L E        -       send a traffic mobile equipped with a V H F /
1
                                                             U HF repeater to set up a U H F base station
                                                             on Channel 25. This vehicle to maintain
                                                             communciations with Force Operations on
                                                             V H F Channel 2.


       IN T E R R O G A T E F IR S T O F F IC E R    —       using the following guidelines:—
       A T SCENE                                             (a)    E X A C T L O C A T IO N
                                                             (b)    TYPE OF IN C ID E N T
                                                             (c)    RISKS
                                                             (d)    C A S U A L T IE S (numbers)
                                                             (e)    SER VIC ES        (present or required)
                                                             (f)    ROADS (blocked, best access routes).


From the information obtained the officer in charge of Force Operations Room must decide
whether to implement the Major Incident Plan. The only advice that can be offered in making the
decision is to consider the major incident definition in the light of the information gained from
the first officer at the scenj. Having decided to implement the plan, the following action should
be taken:—

                                                     —       alert F IR E and A M B U L A N C E services          XR 218
        A L E R T E M E R G E N C Y S E R V IC E S
                                                              using the codeword "C A T A S T R O P H E .


        C O M M E N C E IN C ID E N T LOG            —       using the "Extended Incident" facility on
                                                              the command and control computer.


5       IN F O R M SUB D IV IS IO N                  —       ensure that the sub-divisional control
                                                              covering the affected area is aware;
                                                              notify adjacent sub-divisions that a major
                                                              incident may have occurred.


6       D E P L O Y PER SO NN EL                         —   deploy available traffic vehicles to
                                                              junctions and routes in the vicinity.


7       IN C ID E N T UPDATE                             —   using the following guidelines:—
                                                              (a) C O N F IR M L O C A TIO N OF
                                                                    IN C ID E N T A N D A S C E R T A IN
                                                                    LO C A TIO N OF IN C ID E N T POST
                                                              (b) RISKS A T T H E SCENE A N D L IM IT S
                                                                    OF T H E A R E A A F F E C T E D OR EN ­
                                                                     DANGERED
                                                              (c)    C A S U A LT IE S A N D F A T A L IT IE S
                                                              (d)    C O N F IR M T H E BEST ACCESS
                                                                     ROUTES IN A N D A R O U N D T H E
                                                                     SITE.



                                                                                                                 1361
                                                 Document No.        2 0 6   CONT'D   s e c -j-| o n   7


                                                                                              Page 3



                                                   pass on all confirmed information to the                 XR219
UPDATE E M E R G E N C Y SERVICES
                                                   FIRE and A M B U L A N C E services. Request
                                                   that a senior officer from each of those ser­
                                                   vices attends the scene to liaise with the
                                                   POLICE SITE C O M M A N D E R .

                                                   ensure that the Force major incident box
FORCE M AJOR IN C ID E N T BOX
                                                   (kept at Force HQ) is taken to the site.

                                                   contact the Communications Officer in
C O M M U N IC A T IO N S
                                                   respect of the mobile police station, pro­
                                                   vision of radios and telephones, etc.

                                                    of senior officers and departments. SEE
CALLOUT
                                                    C H E C K L IS T .


C A S U A L T Y E N Q U IR Y B U R E A U            the number of casualties involved and the
                                                    number of enquiries received will indicate
                                                    whether or not to set up the Bureau. See
                                                    callout procedure held in the Operations
                                                    Room.

                                             -      if the Casualty Enquiry Bureau is set up,               XR 220
H O S P IT A L LIA ISO N
                                                    inform the relevant hospitals in readiness to
                                                    receive the Hospital Liaison Officers.
                                                     Inform the hospitals that they will receive
                                                    further information from staff at the
                                                    Casualty Enquiry Bureau.


 L IA IS O N W IT H SITE C O M M A N D E R   -      maintain liaison with the Site Commander
                                                    throughout the incident.




                                                                                                           1362
                                                          Document No.     2 0 6   CONT’D
                                                                                            SEC TIO N 7

                                                                                                 Page 4



                                 O P E R A T IO N S RO O M C H E C K L IS T 1



The following list of police personnel should be notified in the event of a major incident. The list      xr   22!

is not necessarily in order of priority.

      1      Assistant Chief Constable (Operations)
      2      Detective Chief Superintendent, C ID
      3      Chief Superintendent, Operations & Traffic
      4      Superintendent, Operations
      5      Superintendent, Communications & Computer Development
      6      Superintendent, Com m unity Liaison (media)
      7      Superintendent, Training (Casualty Enquiry Bureau)
      8      Chief Inspector, Operations Room
      9      Detective Inspector, Scenes of Crime Department
     10      Coroner's Officer (if fatalities)
     11      Plans Department
     12      principal Administrative Officer
      13     Force Catering Officer




                                  OPERATIONS ROOM CHECKLIST 2


The following list incorporates other services and organisations who may be of assistance in the          XR222
case of a major incident All points of contact can be found on the BODS files on the command
and control computer.

        1     W R VS
        2     British Red Cross
        3     St John Ambulance Brigade
        4     Automobile Association
        5     RAC
        6     East Midlands Gas
        7     Yorkshire Electricity Board
        8     Yorkshire Water
        9     British Telecom
       10     Forensic Science Laboratory
       11     District Council (including the Emergency Planning Officer)
       12     " R E A C T " , " R A Y N E T " and"B E C O N ".




                                                                                                      1363
                                                      Document No.        L 3 6 CONT’ D
                                                                                               SECTION 8

                                                                                                   Page 1



                         D U T IE S OF S U B -D IV IS IO N A L C O N T R O L ROOM


                                                                                                             XR22E
The Sub-Divisional Control Room will receive details of a major incident by e ith e r:-

       A.      Initial report from members of the public etc.,
       B.      Implementation of the Major Incident Plan by Operations Room.


A.      IN IT IA L REPO R T

1      SEND O F F IC E R TO SCENE                   —     if possible this officer should be in a vehicle
                                                          equipped w ith a V H F radio.


2      A L E R T O P E R A T IO N S ROOM            —     giving all known information.


3      IN T E R R O G A T E F IR S T O F F IC E R   —     using the following guidelines:—
       A T SCENE                                           (a) E X A C T LO C A T IO N
                                                           (b) TY P E OF IN C ID E N T
                                                           (c) RISKS
                                                           (d) C A S U A L T IE S (numbers)
                                                           (e) S E R V IC E S    (present or required)
                                                           (f)  R O A DS (blocked, best access routes).


B.      IM P L E M E N T A T IO N OF M A JO R IN C ID E N T PLAN

                                                          instruct all personnel to maintain radio           XR227
1       R A D IO SILEN C E
                                                          silence and depute tasks to personnel in
                                                          conjunction w ith Operations Room.


        IN IT IA L REPORT                                 sub-divisional control will know which
                                                          officers are likely to be first at the site and
                                                          they will instruct one nominated officer to
                                                          report the facts — ie location, type, risks,
                                                          casualties etc.


        IN C ID E N T LOG                                 update       incident   log   on   command   and
                                                          control.


        IN C R E A S E ST A FF                             make arrangements to increase staff if
                                                           necessary and alert all personnel of
                                                           incident.

                                                           ensure that    the sub-divisional major           XR 228
        M A JO R IN C ID E N T BOX
                                                           incident box is transported to the site,
                                                           ideally accompanied by the sub-divisional
                                                           superintendent or his deputy.


        CALL OUT                                           contact senior divisional officers not on
                                                           duty.


        L IA IS O N                                        sub-divisional control will maintain liaison
                                                           with Operations Room which will there­
                                                           after assume responsibility for all control
                                                           aspects of the incident.                          1364
                                         Document No.   ^ 0 6   CONT’ O
                                                                           SECTION 8

                                                                                Page 2



                                            as the major incident-procedures build up,    XR 228
8   SU B-DIVISIONAL I NV O LV E M E NT
                                            sub-divisional controls will be relieved as
                                            much as possible of involvement and will
                                            revert to their normal role in the day-to-
                                            day policing of their area.




                                                                                         1365
                                                       Document No.       ^   0b   CONT’ D    SECTION 9




                   D U T IE S OF O T H E R S U B -D IV IS IO N A L C O N T R O L ROOMS


                                                                                                               XR 231
On being informed m a t a ma,or incident has occurred on another sub-d,„sion the following
action will be taken:—

1    L O C A T IO N OF M A JO R IN C ID E N T

     Consider the location of the incident and what routes between that site and h°spitals m or­
     tuaries, fire stations, etc. are likely to be used. The v.tal j u n c t i o n s along these routes, par
     ticularly those close to hospitals must be manned. (See S EC TIO N 20.)

     Consider whether the proxim ity of the site will affect any road or ground within the sub­
     division and take the appropriate action.

     Where the incident occurs on a M O T O R W A Y the sub-divisional control will deploy
     personnel to man the m otorway diversionary routes and ensure that the relevant signs are
     displayed. This must receive the highest priority.



2    H O S P IT A LS

     Send officers to the casualty departments of affected hospitals to assist in control of traffic
     and crowds.


                                                                                                                XR 232
3     R ESER VE M A N PO W ER

     A n absolute minimum number of officers will continue to police the area. Detail other avail­
     able manpower to their respective sub-divisional stations to form a reserve. C D office,!
     also form part of this reserve. Operations Room may call upon this reserve to be deployed
     anywhere in the Force area and the necessary transport should be arranged.



 4    A D D IT IO N A L M AN PO W ER

      Sub-divisions may need to call out off duty personnel and special constables in order- to
      meet their commitments. Records should be kept of which off.cers are deployed where.




                                                                                                               1366
                                                        Document No.      ^ 0 6     CONT'D    SECTION 10

                                                                                                      Page 1



                                   D U T IE S OF T H E SITE C O M M A N D E R


                                                                                                                  XR 234
The SITE C O M M A N D E R will be the senior divisional officer or his deputy. in/ he event              'H i*
incident occurring on the M O T O R W A Y , the site commander will be the sen.or Ro
officer on duty.

The   SITE   COMMANDER             will immediately attend the scene, report his arrival to Force
Operations Room and carry out the following d u tie s :-



1       ASSUM E O V E R A L L C O N T R O L                  of the incident and identify himself by
                                                             wearing the tabard kept in the major
                                                              incident box.

                                                              receive   situation   report   from   the   first
2       IN C ID E N T U P D A TE
                                                             senior officer at the scene.

                                                              ensure that rescue operations, cordons, and
3       E S T A B LIS H O R D E R
                                                              traffic diversions are taking place to the
                                                              best advantage.

                                                              ensure that the evacuation of persons has            XR235
4       E V A C U A T IO N
                                                              been considered and adopted where neces­
                                                              sary.

                                                              satisfy himself with regard to the police
5       PO LICE IN C ID E N T POST
                                                              incident post, and the efficiency of its
                                                              functions, particularly its communications
                                                              system and the collation and dissemination
                                                              of information pertinent to the incident.


6        L IA IS O N W IT H O T H E R SER VIC ES         -    identify himself to the other emergency
                                                              services commanders, establish a commun­
                                                              ications link with them and ensure that
                                                              maximum liaison is maintained.

                                                               assign particular tasks to supervisory
 7       D E L E G A T IO N
                                                               officers in charge of teams of personnel.
                                                               The     major    incident   boxes   contain
                                                               "Instruction Cards” giving detailed instruc­
                                                               tions relating to the tasks. (See SEC TIO N
                                                               11, Cards A to N).




                                                                                                                  1367
                                  Document No.    2 0 6   CONT’D
                                                                      S E C T IO N 10

                                                                             Page 2



W E L F A R E OF O F F IC E R S   —   the work required at a major incident may         XR236
                                      be physically, mentally and emotionally
                                      demanding, and personnel will tire quickly
                                      and lose operational efficiency. Frequent
                                      rest periods and suitable refreshments
                                      should be provided. Look for signs of
                                      stress; withdraw and relieve persons show­
                                      ing signs of exhaustion or distress.


D E B R IE F A N D REPORTS        —    at the conclusion of the incident collate all
                                       information for the preparation of a report.
                                       A debriefing conference should also be
                                      arranged.




                                                                                        1368
                                             Document No.       2 06   CONT D
                                                                                     S EC TIO N 11

                                                                                            Page 1



                M AJOR IN C ID E N T SITE — IN S T R U C T IO N C A R D S


                                              Create separate parking areas for police, fire and     XR 238
P A R K IN G A R R A N G E M E N T S
                                              ambulance vehicles not actively employed in
                                              operations.

                                              Organise traffic in and around the site to follow
T R A F F IC R O U TES A T SITE
                                              signed routes, which should be manned and clear
                                              of any obstructions.

                                              Create a signed, staffed office, preferably in a
POLICE IN C ID E N T POST
                                              building with telephone and radio commun­
                                              ication.

                                              Clear the site of unauthorised persons and set up
SITE S E C U R IT Y
                                              a boundary fence with barriers or rope.

                                              A suitable area should be cleared as an ambul­
M E D IC A L A R R A N G E M E N T S
                                              ance loading area and assistance given for
A T SITE
                                              casualties to be brought there. Assist movement
                                              of ambulances to and from the area.

                                                                                                      X R 2 39
                                               Establish signed accommodation for uninjured
A S S E M B L Y /W E L F A R E C E N T R E
                                              persons and witnesses.

                                               Set up a lost and found property office near to
 LOST A N D F O U N D P R O P E R TY
                                               Incident Post.

                                               The appropriate department should deal with
 PRESS L IA IS O N
                                               the media as a unit.

                                               A search of the scene by teams responsible for
 S E A R C H OF SCENE
                                               particular areas should be organised jointly by
                                               all services.

                                               Bodies will not be moved w ith ou t the consent of
 F A T A L IT IE S
                                               HM Coroner, and until they have been photo­
                                               graphed, labelled and position recorded.

                                                Evidence should be noted, photographed and             XR240
  IN C ID E N T IN V E S T IG A T IO N
                                                recorded without interference.

                                               This officer will be responsible for liaising with
  W E L F A R E & C A T E R IN G
                                               the Force Catering Officer, who will be respon­
  L IA IS O N O F F IC E R
                                                sible for all aspects of catering.




                                                                                                     1369
                                                     Document No.     ^-06   CONT’ D
                                                                                       SECTION 11

                                                                                            Page 2



The following cards ate applicable to M O T O R W A Y incidents, and may apply to multiple vehicle   XR 240

accidents off the motorway: —

M      V E H IC L E C L E A R A N C E O F F IC E R   Will organise the methodical removal of all
                                                     vehicles from the carriageways to a recovered
                                                     vehicles area.


N      V E H IC L E POUND O F F IC E R               Will establish a 'Recovered Vehicles Area' at
                                                     which vehicles removed from the site will be
                                                     impounded.




                                                                                                      1370
                             Chart showing responsi' ^ l s o f Incident C om m ander and distr                            o f Instruction Cards



                                                                           INCIDENT SITE COMMANDER                                ROAD TRAFFIC
                                         CID




                                                                                     SITE CONTROL                                                          WELFARE
               RESCUE




                                                                             B                          C               D                         G            H
                                 J                       A
                                                      Parking              Traffic                  Incident          Site                   Lost &           Press     W elfare
  Medical     Assembly      Fatalities                                                                Post           Security
                                                                           Routes                                                            Found           Liaison   & Catering
rrangementt   W elfare                                                                                                                      Property




                                                                                                               Crowd          site
                                               Marshalling      Disposal
                                                                                                               Control    Demarcation
                                               of Vehicles         of
                                                                Vehicles                                                  and Security




                                                                                                                                                                                   Document No.
                                                                  Within         Access      Location     Operation
                                                                   Site           to &
                                                                                  from
                                                                                   Site




                                                                                                                                                                                   ^06
                                                                                                                                                                                   CONT’D
                                                                                                                                Motorway Accidents
                                  Investigation




                                                                                                                           M                                N               l/>
                                                      K                                                                                                                     m
                                                                                                                   Vehicle Clearance                  Vehicle Pound         n
                            Incident               Search                                                                                                                   H
                                                                                                                        Officer                          Officer         •o
                         Investigation            of Scene                                                                                                               0) O
                                                                                                                                                                        (O     z
                                                                                                                                                                         rt>

                                                                                                                                                                         U1
            CID are responsible for duties set o u t on cards I & K. Road Traffic D e p a rtm e n t are responsible for cards M & N.
     This does n o t preclude those departm ents from being involved in other duties at the direction o f the Incident C om m ande
                                                       Document No.   206   CONT’D
                                                                                      SECTION 11

                                                                                          CARD A



IN S T R U C T IO N C A R D - P A R K IN G A R R A N G E M E N T S


                                                                                                        XR 242
The indiscriminate parking of vehicles will cause serious problems at the site and may well
obstruct rescue and fire fighting operations. The proper marshalling and disposal of all vehicles
not actively being employed for fire fighting, rescue or ambulance purposes is vital and will be
given immediate attention when the police first arrive at the scene.

The aim is to establish separate parking areas for police, fire and ambulance vehicles. Each
parking area should be located preferably off the roadway but on the approach route to the site
and convenient for personnel to park their vehicles and report to the Police Incident Post, Fire
Control Point or Ambulance Control Point before entering the site. Each area must be suf­
ficiently large to enable vehicles to turn around. Ambulances will also park prior to the driver
being summoned to the Ambulance Loading Area to receive casualties and obviously it is more
important that the Ambulance Parking Area should be more conveniently located than the Police
Police Parking Area.

                                                                                                        XR 243
Parking will need to be supervised to ensure that available space is sensibly utilised and it may be
practicable for ignition keys to be left with the vehicle or with the member of the service in
charge of that parking area.

It can be anticipated that continual use will cause parking surfaces to deteriorate, particularly if
the weather conditions are bad. A t an early stage arrangements will have to be made to reinforce
parking surfaces with hard core, gravel, grit or timber. Since these arrangements may take some
time it is imperative that this need should be anticipated.

The parking areas will need to be well signed and particular attention given to indicating their
position on the approaches.

Parking areas may need to be illuminated.

Although a member of the service will remain at the entrance to the parking area to supervise
vehicles and give information, the responsibility for establishing the parking areas and marshalling
vehicles rests w ith the police.




                                                                                                       1372
                                                       Document No. 2 0 6   CONT’ D    SECTION 11

                                                                                            CARD B



 IN S T R U C T IO N C A R D - T R A F F IC R O U T E S A T SITE



Traffic at the scene travelling to and from the site and between the parking areas, loading points,       XR 245
etc. should be marshalled to adopt routes which cause the minimum interference with other
routes. Where routes do meet it will be necessary to establish control by a police officer
performing traffic duty, although as soon as possible police officers should be replaced by
civilians or by mechanical apparatus. Although in the initial stages traffic routes at the site will
have been one of the priority tasks of the police, it is likely that traffic will soon have adopted a
workable flow pattern in and around the site and the need for police to actively marshall traffic
will diminish. Routes may need to be signed using sign boards, cones, roadlamps, tape, rope, etc.

Lighting will be required if operations may continue during darkness and it is important that
arrangements are made in advance if emergency equipment is to be available ready for when it is
needed.

It can be anticipated that continual use will cause routes and standing areas to deteriorate, par­        XR 246
ticularly if the weather conditions are bad. A t an early stage arrangements will have to be made
to reinforce routes and standing areas with hard core, gravel, grit or timber. Since these arrange­
ments may take some time it is imperative that this need should be anticipated.

The terrain might be such that a bulldozer could improve parts of the route.

Routes must be kept clear of parked or broken down vehicles and arrangements should be made
to bring the necessary towing vehicles, tractors, breakdown equipment, mechanics, towing gear,
etc. to the scene via sub-divisional control or Force Operations Room.

A regular inspection and supervision of routes at and around the scene will be necessary.




                                                                                                        1 3 7 3
                                                Document   No.   2 0 6   CONT’D   ^   SECTION 11


                                                                                          CAR D C

                                                                                             Page 2




SIGNS

The effectiveness of the Police Incident Post will depend considerably on how                          XR 251
located and how well it is signed. Sub-divisional control and Operations Room w.ll broadcast
details of its location to personnel at the site and such messages may need to be repeated, fcvery
effort should be made via sub-divisional control to obtain the necessary signs. It is Part' ^ lar V
important that the route from the Police Parking Area to Police Incident Post be well marked and
while signs are being erected officers should be deployed to direct persons arr.v.ng at the s.te.


C O M M U N IC A T IO N S

                                                                                                       XR 252
The necessary personal, telephone or radio links with Fire and Ambulance Control Points, the
Assembly and Welfare Centre, Force Operations Room, sub-divisional control and Casualty
Enquiry Bureau should be established. Force Operations Room will call out the Commun.cations
Officer to provide all possible assistance. Sub-divisional control will send any additional personal
radios to the Police Incident Post.

As far as possible communications between Police Incident Post and other positions should be by
telephone where the message is a request fo r equipment, information, etc. This will leave the
radio clear for urgent messages, broadcasts, deployment of personnel, traffic regulation, etc.

Officers in charge o f teams carrying out tasks at the site should be equipped with radios to com ­
municate with the Police Incident Post. Other key personnel at the site, including the s.te medical
officer and commanders of other services will each be assisted by a police officer who w.ll be
responsible for dealing with communications.

                                                                                                       XR 253
E Q U IP M E N T

The sub-divisional major incident box will have been sent immediately to the Police Incident Post
by sub-divisional control. Force Operations Room will have arranged for the Force Major
Incident Box to be sent from Headquarters. Other sub-divisions will send their major incident
boxes if requested. The contents of the boxes are shown in Section 25. The mobile police station
contains a great deal of office equipment and maps.

 Sub-divisional control and Force Operations Room will be sending equipment to the site either
on their own initiative or as requested by the Site Commander.

 It is likely that much of the equipment w ill be onty partly used or not immediately required. All
 such spare equipment should be stored and supervised near to the Police Incident Post so that it
 is readily available when needed.




                                                                                                       1374
                                                     Document No.   L 0 6 CONT’D      SECTION 11

                                                                                           CARD C

                                                                                             Page 3




A D M IN IS T R A T IV E TASKS

The following tasks should be dealt with by personnel at the Police Incident Post.—

     (a)    Maintain a log of the incident. This should be in chronological order, giving
            details of problems, conferences, decisions, action taken, persons concerned, res­
            ponsibilities of particular persons, identity of prominent personalities and times
            of arrival at site, etc.

     (b)    Maintain record of police officers present at site, tjieir hours of duty, postings,
            etc. Care should be taken to ensure that the record includes A L L officers, as
            there will be cases when an officer — eg an off-duty officer — attends the site
            w itho ut first reporting to the Post. Arrange reliefs as appropriate. Anticipate
            what manpower and related equipment might be required at future stages of the
            incident.

     (c)    Maintain record of personal radios, telephone numbers of other method o f com­
            munication with particular police officers or other persons, points or areas at the
            site. Organise any necessary redistribution of radiosand batteries. Sub-divisional
            control can assist.

     (d)    Prepare a plan of the site, showing the location of Police Incident Post, parking
            areas, salient features, high risk areas, etc.

     (e)    Maintain record of police vehicles at the site, officers bringing them, station
            where garaged. It may be expedient for the Police Incident Post to retain
            possession of vehicle keys. Police Incident Post staff may organise transport
             leaving the site to return vehicles and officers to their originating stations.

      (f)   Maintain a record of all equipment at site, including its use and whereabouts so
            that such equipment can be quickly located if necessary.
                                                      Document No.   2 0 6   CONT’D
                                                                                        SECTION 11

                                                                                            CARD D




IN S T R U C T IO N C A R D - S IT E S E C U R IT Y



For reasons o f safety, security or in the interests of proper investigation, it is extremely impor­     XR 258

tant that no unauthorised person should be allowed to enter or remain within the s.te area. This
is particularly so in the case of crashed military aircraft incidents, in relation to which the police
have a duty to guard the site and any wreckage until relieved of that responsibility by t e
military authorities.

The task of sealing off the vicinity of the site T O V E H IC L E S is the responsibility of Force
Operations Room using Traffic Department and other personnel.

The task of clearing the site and preventing access TO P E D E S T R IA N S is one of the respon­
sibilities of the Site Commander and the swift deployment of sufficient personnel to accomplish
this task may save a great deal of effort and manpower being used at a later stage.

Loudhailers and public address equipment will be useful.

                                                                                                         XR 259
It will be necessary to tape or rope off the limits of the site, placing barriers at roadways and vul­
nerable points.

Suitable signs prohibiting access or warning of danger if appropriate should be placed.

It will be necessary to man the points in the perimeter through which the routes for emergency
vehicles pass and post officers to suitable points around the boundary.

It may be appropriate to arrange that the perimeter of the area prohibited to unauthorised pedes­
trians should correspond with that prohibited to traffic and thereby reduce the need for barriers,
personnel, etc. This will depend on the topography of the site and may not be practicable.

                                                                                                         X R 260
In addition to preventing access and guarding the perimeter of the site it will be necessary to
patrol areas of the site to deal with persons who have gained access. It may also be expedient to
mount guard over particular places, wreckage, bodies, property, etc. within the site to prevent
interference from persons properly present at the site.

Consideration should be given to the need to equip persons engaged on security tasks with pro­
tective clothing, torches, etc.

Dog handlers will be usefully employed on such duty.
                                                    Document No.      2 0 6   CONT’ D
                                                                                        S E C TIO N 11

                                                                                            CARD E

                                                                                               Page 1




IN S T R U C T IO N CAR D - M E D IC A L A R R A N G E M E N T S A T SITE


                                                                                                         XR 262
The officers responsible for police action relating to medical arrangements must ensure the
smooth working of the arrangements outlined below, with particular attention
loading and despatch of ambulances according to the medical priorities of casualties. I        be
wrong for the police to become involved in giving first aid to the relatively less ,n,ured mstead
of carrying out the more vita! responsibility.

In particular every effort should be made to ensure that ambulance crews are able to load the
priority patients rather than the relatively slightly injured. In a very short period
vehicles will be available at the scene to transport all the in.ured to hospitals throughout the
region.

In the event of a major incident occurring, the ambulance service will send ambulances to the
scene, all of which w ill be in radio contact with Ambulance Control whether or no          y
normally operate in the South Yorkshire area. Ambulance crews will be under the control o
senior ambulance officer at the site.

                                                                                                         X R 263
One or more medical teams, suitably equipped, may be sent to the site by the hospitals tc, assist
in the treatment of casualties and to advise the a m b u l a n c e service wh.chcasualt.es need pnor y
for removal to hospital. It is anticipated that circumstances w ill indicate that casualties shou d
removed to hospital rather than being treated at the scene.

One of the hospitals will send a doctor to be the ‘Site Medical Officer' in charge of medtart
arrangements at the site. Until his arrival, the senior ambulance service c
Medical Officer, supported by whatever medical expertise is available The S.te Medical O ff cer
should be accompanied by a constable equipped w ith personal radio in contact w ith Sub-
Divisional Control. When the U H F station is set up at the site, the Site Medical Officer should be
accompanied by a police officer equipped with a portable radio on that local frequency. This w
provide a link between him and the Site Commander.
                                                                                                         X R 264
The Site Commander in consultation with the senior officers of the other emergency services at
the scene, will have indicated the proposed location of an 'Ambulance Parking Area Police
action necessary for organising the Ambulance Parking Area and directing ambulances to it will
be taken by the police 'Parking Arrangements' team but for the sake of clarity details arese
there The Ambulance Parking Area should be on the route being taken by am bulance
approaching the site and the police should create sufficient space for ambu ances to enter park
and leave. Whether this will best be on a series of routes along which the police can create a one
way system or on open ground, will depend on the location of the incident. T h e p o l i c e wil need
to indicate to ambulances the location of this area until it can be signed, and direct ambulances
 to it. Ambulance Control will broadcast this location via ambulance radio.

                                                                                                          X R 265
 The Site Commander, in consultation with the senior officers of the other emergency                *
 the scene will have indicated the proposed location of the 'Ambulance Loading Area . This will
 be in a safe place accessible to ambulances and to the rescue parties bringing casualties to it_The
 police w ill have to clear sufficient space for the ambulances to attend, load up and depart. There
 must be additional space for the less serious casualties to await transport, and sherter is obviously
 an important factor. If requested by the ambulance service, the police will do what they can to
 establish communications between the Ambulance Loading Area and the Ambulance Parking
 Area.
                                                                                                           1377
                                                                                     SECTION 11
                                                Document No.     2 0 6   CONT’ D

                                                                                         CAR D E

                                                                                            Page 2



                                                                                                      XR 265
in the vicinity of the Ambulance Loading Area, casualties awaiting transport will be rece.ving
£ s ! l i d T e a < m e n , from the medical teams, ambulance personnel fire serv.ce personnel and
perhaps other trained persons who have volunteered their services.

                                                                                                      XR 266
The police will assist in equipping this area by obtaining via Sub-Divisional c ° n" ° ^ " Y
resources such as lighting, blankets, first aid equipment, etc. The amount of these resou
ckHjend o n flo w long the incident is likely to extend before all c a s u a lty can be removed to
hospital. It is anticipated that the medical authorities will normally have sufficient resources of
their own.

It is not intended that documentation of casualties should take place pnor to the r removal to
hospital. It may be that uninjured persons who were involved in the incident will accompa y
their injured friends to the Ambulance Loading Area. Such persons s h o u l d be discouraged from
congregating there and instead be marshalled to the Assembly and Welfare Centre (established by
another of the police teams) where they willl be cared for.




                                                                                                      1378
                                                   Document No.       2 0 b   CONT’ D   SECTION 11

                                                                                            CARD F

                                                                                             Page 1




IN S T R U C T IO N C A R D - A S S E M B LY A N D W E L FA R E OF PERSONS IN V O L V E D


                                                                                                         XR 269
The action in d i c e d below may require                                     °°
the particular incident and is suggested for general guidance only.


There may be present at or near the site a num* "                                                   by
injured or who have been treated at the                         requirements can be attended to and


be made to marshall all such persons to an Assembly and We a


LO C A T IO N
                            t   i oo r.nt nf the wav of operations but not far from the site,
The Centre should be in a safe place, o                     possible arrangements should be
ideally in the vicinity of the Pol,ce lnci * " t _ a Dolice station or other suitable place. However,
made to remove such persons from the scene           P       missina w j|| need to be made wherever
arrangements as to documentation and persons reported missing w .ll need
 the location of the welfare accommodation may be.
                                                                                                          XR 270
 A C C O M M O D A T IO N

 The m o * comfortable and convenient place. It may b               e           ^               ^
 will need to be used. Shelter, w arm th, toilets and catenng should be considered.


 SIGNS




 made via Sub-Divisional Control where necessary.

  „ may be appropriate to publish details o, the Assembly and Welfare Centre to the site by using
  loudhailers or public address equipment.

  PERSONS R EPO R TED M ISSIN G

        •      •    u hi ho marip of Casualty Enquiry Bureau, if practicable by the person from whom
  fh^q1enquiry°orfginates Casualty E nquiry Bureau may be contacted by telephone us.ng the

  number supplied by Force Operations Room.
                                                                                                            XR271

  D O C U M E N T A T IO N

  Using stationery available from the m a jo rJ " ^ re,;tr                                         th "
  persons artending the C en tre^inc u ing w                           Casualty Record Forms should be

   completed ^ r w p e c t ^ ^ pereons injured -

   ” °on|v ^                                          Caa-alty Enquiry Bureau. . . might be practicable

   to obtain witness statements.


                                                                                                           1379
                                                        Document No. L 0 6 CQNT'D                SECTION 11

                                                                                                      CARD F

                                                                                                         Page 2



                                                                                                                    XR 271
LOST A N D FO U N D PR O PER TY

A lost and found property office will be established at theAssembly and Welfare C e n w where
details of property", «     or found will be .c o rd e d and
labels from the major incident boxes. A full scale Los an              0 ffjCe will arrange for
set up near the Police Incident Post and the officer in charge of that office will arrange
property to be collected from the Assembly and Welfare Centre.
                                                                                                                    XR272
C O M M U N IC A T IO N S


Radio and telephone                               fe ^ ^ ie ^ o ^ h a v ^ rv u n i^ r'^ s y s te m ^ p e ra tln g
and provide equipment for the Centre, it may De            e
between the Assembly and Welfare Centre and the Police Incident Post.


TR A N S P O R T




made via Sub-Divisional Control or Force Operations Room as appropriate.




                                                                                                                    1380
                                                  Document No.      £ 0 6   CONT’ D
                                                                                         S E C TIO N 11

                                                                                              CARD G




IN S T R U C T IO N C A R D -   LOST A N D F O U N D PROPERTY

                                                                                                           X R274
A Lost and Found Properry Office will be established near to the Police                          ^
enquiries and property will be dealt w ith as at any pol.ce stat.on, us.ng            the books, labels.
envelopes, etc. contained in the major incident boxes.

A senior police officer will be responsible for                                           ^ W e lfa r e
ertv He will also supervise the lost and found property                           ,     , , .  t t uese

ir                                                                                ““
                                                                                                           XR 275




where they were found.

Articles subject of customs and excise involved in air^rashes may be handed over to Customs and

Excise off icials.

Particular attention should be paid to articles which might be mail in transit.


                                                         sssstj: s k                    tsz ss
When the decision is made to discontinue the Lost and Found Property Office at the site the
 property will be taken to the local sub-divisional headquarters.




                                                                                                           I 381
                                                   Document No. 2 0 6       CONT’D       SECTION 11

                                                                                             CAR D H

                                                                                                Page 1




IN S T R U C T IO N C A R D - PRESS L IA ISO N

                                                                                                           XR 277
Any major incident will attract a great deal of press activity at the site and it is
liaison between police and representatives of the press is quickly established so that mformation
can be made available through authorised channels. Otherw.se some people may act .rrespons.b y
by seeking to give or receive information individually.

The Force Press Liaison Department will contact the news media via normal channels and arrange
for a press conference, addressed by one of the Chief Officers, to take place at a stated time at
Police Headquarters. Subsequent similar press conferences will take place there at regular state
times.

The Site Commander will depute a senior officer assisted by press liaison department personnel
to be responsible for dealing with the press at the site. Officers so designated will wear the Police
Press' armbands contained in the major incident boxes. Members of the press have been
instructed to look for this identification.

                                                                                                           XR278
It is vital that emergency measures at the site should not be hampered by the activities of
irresponsible members of the press or public. Members of the press are not entitled to enter the
area to which the police are restricting unauthorised pedestrian access. Where, however, it isc ear
that emergency measures would not be jeopardised, the police will give every assistance to enable
accredited members of the press to do their work.

If possible representatives of the press at the site should be dealt w ith collectively and given infor­
mation and facilities including:-

         (a)   the essential facts of the incident avoiding any statement as to causes;
         (b)   the arrangements that have been made for the press conference at Force
               Headquarters;
         (c)   facilities to televise and photograph appropriate areas of the site.

                                                                                                           XR 279
The details of any information released at the site must be telephoned to Force Operations Room
for general distribution to the press.

 It may be possible for the police to arrange for witnesses to be made available to the press con­
ference at Force Headquarters.

In the event of any incident happening on private property, facilities for the press should be by
agreement w ith the owner's representative. In the case of railway property, this will probably be
the senior British Transport Police officer present.

 Enquiries on technical matters may be referred direct by the police, as appropriate, to such estab­
 lishments as the A tom ic Energy Authority, the Central Electricity Generating Board, or relevant
government or other department.

                                                                                                           XR280
 PRESS P H O TO G R A P H S A T T H E SITE

 So that a proper investigation can be made of the cause of the incident it is vital that the * e n e
 should be disturbed as little as possible pending expert examination. Where there is a risk of fire
 or explosion fro m the escape of aviation fuel, petrol, gas etc., the use of flash equipment is

                                                                                                             I 3 8 2
                                                 Document No.        2 0 6    CONT’D        SECTION 11

                                                                                                 CARD H

                                                                                                   Page 2




dangerous. In cases involving military
interests of security. For these reasons it is clear that as far as practical
prevented from taking photographs at the site.

Police action at the scene of the incident will lead to the clearing
persons including members of the press As soon as^poss.Ue howe«r            -V                      of)jcer
afforded to such authorised representatives of the press and t . » i » o _
responsible for liaison with the press deems appropriate in the circumstances of the

„ will c,early be lessdis^ptivetoe-r^ncy s e r v i c e s ^ a ,                                                " *
made with the press that representatives take photographs as p rty
than indiscriminately.




accident and covered or removed any classified materi        .   ,            *    .     fUms provjded this
comply with such a request, they should be P«nnitttdI o                                or the observance of

anySsafetylp ^ ® J^ ° ^ r‘^ ° ^ c®°a              create " addi' i0" a' « " -
bulbs or electronic flashes near to free gasolene vapour.

 Before they leave the scene of the
 addresses and telephone number and             ose              ^           ^ ^            member of   ^
                 ^ a ^ o n ^ v T w h o will thereafter be responsible for reporting as necessary direct
 to the Ministry of Defence.

 Where the accident involves USAF and RCAF t^ r -^ s ^ r a g T a r h T o u ld         <£
 RCAF arrive a similar procedure to a  t J            f RCAF authorities on their arrival,
 but the inform ation obtained should be passed to the U5>a i - or


 Persons other than authorised
 services, should be              ,h* a    ‘”   photographs are taken before approval has been given


  over the camera or negatives to the police.




                                                                                                              1383
                                                 Document No. 2 0 6       CONT’D
                                                                                        SEC TIO N 11

                                                                                             CARD I




IN S T R U C T IO N C A R D - SEARCH OF SCENE
                                                                                                         XR 285
As soon as it is safe and practicable to do so, and bearing in mind the needs of investigation, the
police should liaise with the other services and organise a full scale search of the scene to en->ure
that all casualties have been found, all sources of danger properly disposed of, and all bodies, high
value property and equipment are located and properly dealt with.

It is imperative that persons undertaking the search are properly equipped and briefed that they
must not move or touch anything unnecessarily but should report anything they find o           e
medical teams or the teams of police officers detailed to deal w ith bodies. P W ^ V . 'e t c - - wlh°
will accompany the search. The searchers should be warned of any areas into which they should
not go for reasons of safety and security.
                                                                                                         XR 286
The search must be carefully supervised with all personnel divided into teams headed by officers
responsible for searching specified areas of the site. Each team leader should prepare a plan of t e
area of search for which he is responsible and note on it anything found. These plans will be
handed to the officer in overall command of the search as they are completed.

It is envisaged that use will be made of fully trained exhibits officers from the Criminal
Investigation Department. He could use the Record of Exhibits Book provided fo r the purpose,
and ensure full continuity should this be necessary for evidential purposes.




                                                                                                         1384
                                                      Docum ent No.      206      CONT'O j      S E C T |0 N 1 1


                                                                                                      CARD J




IN S T R U C T IO N C A R D -   F A T A L IT IE S
                                                                                                                   XR 287
The officer in charge of duties relating to the dead should consul, the section of the Major
Incident Scheme Manual •Fatalities'. He should ensure that a reconnaissance smade of m e sit
obtain information as to how many dead bodies are involved, their w h e r M to ^ n d w h « h e V
special problems arise because of dismemberment, contamination, etc. « n e cessary .^
will get Force Operations Boom to send Police Surgeons to the scene. When;,n
assessment of the problems has been made details should be given to the S.te Commande

The Site Commander will consul, with the Coroner and Force Operations Room » J o what
arrangements should be made with regard to bodies and parts of bodies at                        .          .
will indicate whether they should be left in situ pending n e c e s a r y viewing b , '                        “
oart of the investigation When it is decided that the bodies should be removed whether from
s " o r to a c e n « , ^ o i n , prior to being moved elsewhere, they will first ^ ' ^ ' l e d ^ p h o ^ p h e d
and their position, condition and location recorded m accordance with the procedure set ou
below.
                                                                                                                    XR288
T h e 'body book' contained in the major incident box will be used in connection w ith this task.


A plan of the site should be prepared.

Sufficient stocks of books, labels, string, bags, stretchers, markers, hammers, stakes, etc. should
be obtained.

Selected officers will be formed into one or more teams equipped with protective clothing. A
photographer should accompany each team.

 One senior officer in charge will alone be responsible for allocating a number for each, body or
 part found at the site and recording its position on the site plan. The team will label^the
 related p ro p e r^ and mark the location before taking the necessary action to remove it to await
 transportation from the site.
                                                                                                                     XR289
 A senior officer will be responsible to the Site Commander fo r transport arrangements a"? will
 obtain confirmation from Force Operations Room that the proposed d « t.n a t,o n is_su,uible
 before authorising removal of each body from the site. Transport will *
 Room and where practicable a police officer will accompany any such vehicle from the site to the
 m ortuary accommodation.




                                                                                                                   1385
                                                         Document No. 2 0 6   CONT’D
                                                                                       SEC TIO N 11

                                                                                           CARD K




IN S T R U C T tO N C A R D -   IN C ID E N T IN V E S T IG A T IO N

                                                                                                        XR 291
Once it is safe to do so and before any evidence is lost or disturbed it may be desirable at an early
stage to commence obtaining photographic evidence at the site and to record sal.ent information
which will be needed for subsequent investigations and report purposes. This may include an
estimate of damage and if necessary a surveyor should be contacted.

Expert investigators will attend the site of air and rail accidents but their arrival may be delayed
and the needs of the investigation may demand urgent action. However, if circumstances permit
it will be better to await the arrival of expert investigators before carrying out any sort of
inspection of wreckage and great care should be taken not to disturb any wreckage or other
evidence which may not be meaningful to police but which is significant to expert investigators.
Officers should be nominated to liaise with each of the experts during their investigations.

                                                                                                        XR 292
It will be valuable if a tour is made of the site area using a tape-recorder to record impressions
and salient details. Binoculars may be useful to view contaminated areas or parts where access is
difficult. The scale of the incident might suggest that a helicopter should be used to do aerial
reconnaissance and obtain aerial photographs of the site. A plan drawer will be sent to the site
and if practicable he should accompany the officer concerned in order that he may produce a
rough working plan if appropriate and include on any plan details of significance. As well as iden
tifying relevant material evidence, ultimate positions, extent of damage, etc., evidence should be
considered which might indicate speed, direction travelled, wind direction, obstruction to view,
etc.

It is essential that the Site Commander is kept informed of significant evidence obtained which
may require to be preserved by taking special measures.

Details should be obtained of all police, fire and ambulance and civilian personnel who may be
witnesses in relation to the incident.




                                                                                                        1386
                                                      Document No. 2 0 6         CONT’D
                                                                                           SECTION 11

                                                                                              CARD L




IN S T R U C T IO N C A R D - W E L FA R E A N D C A T E R IN G L IA IS O N O F F IC E R

                                                                                                         XR 293
The appointed officer should liaise with the Force Catering Officer as to what feeding arrange­
ments can be made.

In consultation with the Site Commander, the liaison officer will arrange for officers at the site to
be relieved of duty in order to take refreshments. Dependent upon the feeding arrangements
made, it may be necessary for officers to be transported to a nearby police station for more sub­
stantial refreshments.

It is better to locate refreshment points at different locations rather than one central point
although a central refreshment centre will be needed near the Assembly and Welfare Centre and
the Police Incident Post.

Refreshment points should be signed.
                                                                                                         X R 294
The Liaison O fficer should make provision at each refreshment point fo r .—

      (a ).   taking details of any welfare problems concerning officers engaged at the site;
      (b)     recording and taking possession of found property,
      (c)     providing minor first aid to persons working on the site;
      (d)     supplying small items of equipment.

It may be expedient to do this using one or more police vehicles, which will provide accom­
modation for equipment, property and stationery as well as giving communications and emer­
gency transport facilities.

Sub-Divisional Control and Force Operations Room will broadcast information concerning the
location of refreshment points as instructed by the liaison officer.




                                                                                                        1 3 8 7
                                                      Document No.       ^-06    CONT’D        se ctio n   11


                                                                                                   CARD M




IN S T R U C T IO N C A R D - V E H IC L E C LE A R A N C E O FFIC E R
(Motorways and Multiple Accidents)
                                                                                                                 XR 298
The 'Vehicle Clearance Officer' is responsible to .he Site Commander fo r all i            re'a' ^ “
vehicles A T T H E SITE which are actually involved. He will nominate ms^ru
teams of officers in the re c o r d in g of vehicles and drivers involved. These teams wH also searc
vehicles and deal with property found in or forming part of them; such.property b e m g p i*
suitable bags and labelled prior to storage. When veh.cles have been parched a lab.lm dicat.ng
that this has been done will be com peted and affixed to the vehicle. (The p r o ^ r * ^
property tie-on labels and 'searched vehicles' gummed labels are in major me dent boxesand
should be collected together with the 'Vehicle Record Book' and the 'V eh .d e
armband.) The 'Vehicle Clearance Officer' will not normally approve the removal f r a r t h e * e n e
until the vehicle has been colour photographed and where necessary, searched and labelled.

The Vehicle Clearance Officer will consult Accident I n v e s t i g a t i o n Branch officers and Ministry
Examiners on their arrival regarding the question of inspection and removal of vehicles from
scene.

If a Casualty Enquiry Bureau has been activated, the Vehicle Clearance Officer should, a s s o o n a s
p r iS b f e notify the Bureau of the make, colour and, if possib.e the registration number of the
vehicles involved.

Drivers of civilian breakdown vehicles will be instructed to report to the Police Incident Post on
their arrival The 'Vehicle Clearance Officer' should designate officers to receive these drivers and
d t « t "hem a lS ttteir vehicles to a convenient place on the motorway clear of the mam crash area
until their services are required by the 'Vehicle Clearance O ffic e r.

The 'Vehicle Clearance Officer' will maintain a composite record of             th e   details of despatch and
disposal of all vehicles at the scene in accordance w ith the Vehicle Record Book .




                                                                                                                   1 3 8 8
                                                    Document No.   206    CONT’D
                                                                                       SECTION 11

                                                                                          CA R D N




IN S T R U C T IO N C A R D - V E H IC L E PO U ND O FF IC E R
(Motorways and Multiple Accidents)
                                                                                                     XR25S
It is expected that if a major incident occurs on a motorway there will be a large> number of
vehicles involved and it will be necessary to set up one or more Recovered
which all broken down, accident damaged, etc. vehicles will be removed from th .scen ealo n g
with other vehicles required to be stored for safe-keeping or mspection. T h e<Veh.c te Pound
Officer will obtain the Vehicle Pound Book a n d the'Recovered V e h i c l e s Area signs from t e
major incident box and go at once by police vehicle to the area indicated to him by the S.te
Commander. His duties will be as follows:—

     1        Establish the 'Recovered Vehicles Area' ensuring that it is signed.


     2        Receive vehicles from the incident.

     3        Record details of vehicles in accordance withe the instructions contained in the
              Vehicle Pound Book.

     4        Ensure that the 'Recovered Vehicles Area' and its contents are secure.

     5        Ensure that no vehicles are removed from the 'Recovered Vehicles Area' except
              with his authority.

The Vehicle Pound Officer will seek whatever assistance he requires in the way of additional man­
power or equipment via Force Operations Room.




                                                                                                      1389
                                                 Document No.    Z jo     CONT'D
                                                                                      S E C T IO N 12




                                    POLICE IN C ID E N T POST

                                         (Staff and Duties)


                                                                                                        XR 2 99
Initially the f i r * radio equipped police vehicle « the scene will act as the police Incident Post
However as soon as possible and in order that the Site Commander can assume e f f e c t o p e r
ational control and coordinate activities at the scene, it is essential that he > » « » P r0P 'rl.
lished and rea d ily identifiable Police Incident Post situated in a strategic position on the site.

The Post will be a reporting and briefing point for Police s u p e r v i s o r y ranks ,<p«U
officers of other services and persons in charge of other organisations. It will also be the on-site
administrative and communications centre for Police control purposes.

The Site Commander will assign particular tasks to supervisory officers in charge of teams; of
personnel. These tasks are detailed on the "Instruction Cards" contained in the major incident
boxes. (See SEC TIO N 11, Cards A to N).




                                                                                                        1390
                                                                Document No.         t l O o CONT’D       S E C T I O N 13




                                    D U T IE S O F R O A D T R A F F IC D IV IS IO N


                                                                                                                             X R 300
Where a ma,or me,dent occurs anyw here in the Force area, responsib,lit.es of this departm ent
will include the fo ilo w in g :-

1     K E E P T R A F F IC R O U T E C L E A R

      (a)     O n receipt of instructions fro m Force Operations R oom , they w ill establish and
              m aintain traffic routes in the vicinity of the site. Regular inspection and super­
               vision will be necessary to ensure that routes are kept clear fo r emergency vehicles.


      (b)     During daylight hours, where tra ffic problems are likely to be greater, the use of
               Police motorcycles fo r supervision of routes should be considered. Such vehicles
               have obvious advantages fo r m any purposes — eg dispatch.


2     E S C O R T D U T IE S

      Where civilian vehicles have been em ployed as ambulances and life is in danger. Police
      vehicle escort will be undertaken.

                                                                                                                             X R 301
3     R A D IO L IN K W IT H O P E R A T IO N S R O O M

      One m obile will be directed to the site, the crew will be responsible fo r establishing a te m ­
      p o rary base station. This can be achieved by utilising the V H F / U H F repeater radio U H F
      Channel 2 5 should be used and com m unication to Operations R o o m w ill be on Force
      Channel 2. A telephone link should be established if possible.


4     T R A N S P O R T A T IO N O F M A J O R IN C ID E N T B O X E S

      On receipt o f instructions fro m Operations Room , will transport the Force m ajor incident
      boxes fro m Force Headquarters to the site.

5      S E C U R IT Y O F T H E S IT E

      T o g eth er w ith other available personnel will seal o ff the site fo r reasons of safety, security
       or in the interests of the investigation. Such action will be carried o u t under the direction of
       Operations Room.


6      TRANSPORT

       T h e supply of suitable transport         ( i n c l u d i n g   drivers where available) fo r persons, property or
       e q u ip m e n t is a prim ary responsibility of the departm ent.




                                                                                                                             1391
                                                     Document No. ^ 0 6           CONT’D
                                                                                                 S E C T IO N 14




                 D U T IE S O F T H E C R IM IN A L IN V E S T IG A T IO N D E P A R T M E N T


                                                                                                                   X R 302
In any M ajor In c.aen t members of this departm ent w ill have a role to |P 'aV                    n^f
w ill be called upon to fulfil w ill of course depend upon the nature of the incident, in the event of
the incident being caused by terrorist activities, then it would clearly be the ^ p o n s .b .l. y o the
departm ent to carry out a full scale investigation w ith the aim of bringing the perpetrato
justice.

In other types of incident such as a rail or air crash, their role w ould be entirely d ' ^ e n t . The
exact nature of it w ould be decided by the senior officer in charge of the incident T h e depa -
ment w ould probably be involved in the interrogation of witnesses and the ta ing o statemen s,
being responsible fo r lost and fo u n d property and its docum entation.

                                                                                                                    X R 303
When it is know n that a m ajor incident has occurred, and that the M ajo r Incident Plan has been
im p le m e n te d /a ll detectives should im m ediately report to the senior detective m their respective
sub-division. T h e y w ill form a small reserve available fo r d ep loym ent by the Operations Room in
liaison w ith the Site Com m ander.

A d d itio n a lly , w hen such an incident occurs, all members of the H O L M E S Incident Room staff
and operational detectives attached to Headquarters will report to Force Headquarters. The
senior officer in charge will rep ort to the o fficer in charge of Operations Room the fact that this
team is ready fo r d ep loym ent.

In the event o f this incident being non-crim inal, some detectives m ay be usefully em ployed at the
Police Incident Post, etc.




                                                                                                                   1392
                                                                Document No. 2 0 6          CONT'D
                                                                                                     S E C T I O N 15




                                D U T IE S O F TH E C O M M U N IC A T IO N S D E P A R T M E N T


                                                                                                                        X R 305
The Communications Department will be responsible for providing an adequate communications
system both on and off-site.

O n   r e c e iv in g   information of a major incident, the officer in charge of Operations Room will
contact the duty Communications Officer who will then be responsible fo r.—

        (a)             the collection, delivery and set up of the mobile police station at the site;
        (b)             the provision of radios and ancillary equipment;
        (c)             liaison with British Telecom for the provision of a permanent telephone link,
                        if required.




                                                                                                                        1393
                                                             Document No.       20 6     CONT'D         S E C T I O N 16


                                                                                                                      Page 1




                                           PRESS LIA IS O N D E P A R T M E N T



PRESS C O N F E R E N C E S

A senior o ffic e , should address a press conference, a , , he e      a                         r             ,        ■>“         * * ”
conference w ill be held at a convenient place arranged by the Force Press O                   c .

Operations Room w ill be responsible fo r inform ing the Superintendent Cjommunity L iaiso n an d
the d u ty Press Liaison O fficer that a m ajor incident has occurred T h e Press O fh c e r w . m o
Operations Room of the tim e and place of the conference and                                     arrangements and
the conference. T h e Press O fficer will inform the media, m ake the                                 9 ^ ^    ^
attend the conference. A n y requests for inform ation received fro m the pres
referring enquirers to the initial press conference.

The circumstances o f the incident w ill dictate the need to hold fu rth e r press conferences which
will be arranged by the press liaison officer.


PRESS R E L E A S E




the Operations R oom .

T R A F F IC C O N G E S T IO N

 Details of tra ffic congestion should be released as soon as possible by the Operations R o om

Senior O fficer.

 C A S U A L T Y E N Q U IR Y B U R E A U A R R A N G E M E N T S

 o n the a u th o rity o f th e officer in charge of the          O p « * « R ~ " . <*• - M - " .                  " u m b e r to
 Which members of the public should direct enquiries w ill be published.


 PRESS A T T H E S IT E

 A Press O ffic e r w ill attend the site and afford such facilities for the media as           a p p e a rs   appropriate.
 They should be afforded some privilege access under the auspices o f th e Press O

 The Sup erin ten d en t C o m m u n ity Liaison D ep artm en t is responsible fo r press liaison at a m ajor
  incident including arrangements at the site.

                         •   i         ♦     roioacoH at the site w ill be recorded by the press o ffic er and dis-
  tHbutecTby i T o f ^ r ' T o         all interested parties including Senior O fficers and Operations R o om .


  IN C ID E N T S I N V O L V I N G R A D IO A C T IV IT Y

                      u •        i   attorc m av be referred d irect by the police, as appropriate, to such estab-                     X ft 30 9

  uSSUS                                        A u th o rity , the Centra, E.ectricity Generating B oard, or r e ,« a n t

  government or other departm ent.




                                                                                                                                    1394
                                                      Document No.       2 0 6     CONT’D     S E C T I O N 18




                           R E S P O N S IB IL IT IE S OF A R E A A U T H O R IT IE S


                                                                                                                 X R 314
1   A R E A H E A L T H A U T H O R IT Y

    (a)      To provide for the care and treatm en t of casualties, and the provision of adv.ce on
             environmental health dangers.

    (b)     T o provide medical teams at the site.


2   D IS T R IC T C O U N C IL S

    (a)     T o provide tra ffic diversions/cordonning in conjunction w ith the Police.

    (b)     T o carry out such civil engineering measures as m ay be required           by the emergency -
             eg road clearance, excavation, d em olitio n , etc.


    (c)      T o arrange accom m odation of the homeless.

    (d)      T o provide equ ipm en t and adm inister Emergency Rest Centres, to ile t facilities, etc.


    (e)      T o arrange transport fo r persons to be evacuated.


    (f)      T o provide emergency feeding.

    (g)      T o liaise w ith Em ergency and V o lu n ta ry Services as necessary.




                                                                                                                 1 3 9 5
                                                   Document No.       206    CONT’D
                                                                                      S E C T IO N 19



                               V O L U N T A R Y O R G A N IS A T IO N S



The W omen's Royal V o lu n tary Sen/ice and the Salvation A rm y may assist in the staffing            X R 315

and operation of Emergency Rest Centres, and the provision of emergency feeding.


The British Red Cross Society and the St John's Ambulance Brigade may provide support
in a variety of fields - eg casualty handling, care of the distressed and bereaved, etc.

" B E C O N " , " R E A C T " and " R A Y N E T " may assist w ith radio com m unication facilities —
" c o -o r d in a te d by the P O L I C E " - and assist in area searches.




                                                                                                    1396
                                                            Document No.            20 6    CONT’D
                                                                                                          S E C T IO N 2 0


                                                                                                                   Page 1




                             T R A F F IC C O N T R O L A N D R O U T E S T O H O S P IT A L S


                                                                                                                             XR 3 16
In order to ensure th a t ambulances are unhindered in transferring casualties from the site to
hospitals it w ill be necessary for sub-divisions to provide traffic control, where necessary, at the
follow ing points:—

(a)         D O N C A S TE R R O Y A L IN F IR M A R Y

                                                                          Typ e              Remarks
S /D iv.                   Junction

                                                                          Crossroads         Hospital entrance on
A1          A rm th o rp e R o ad /T h o rn e Road
                                                                                             A rm th o rp e Road

A1          A rm th o rp e Road/Leger W ay                                R oundabout
A1          Thorne Road/Leger W ay                                        R oundabout
A1          Thorne R oad/B arnby D un Road                                T-junction
A1          T ra ffo rd W ay/C ollege Road                                R oundabout
                                                                          T -junction        T ra ffic lights
A1          College R oad/W aterdale
A1          W aterdale/W ood Street                                       R oundabout
                                                                          Crossroads         T ra ffic lights
A1          W aterdale/South Parade
A1          T h o rn e R oad/East Laith Gate                              Roundabout
                                                                          Crossroads         T ra ffic lights                 XR317
At          M a rk e t R oad /S u nn y Bar
A1          Church W ay                                                   R oundabout
A1          Church W a y /W e n tw o rth     Road                         Crossroads
A1          W e n tw o rth R o ad /B e ck ett Road                        Crossroads          Give way
A1          W e n tw o rth R o ad /T h o rn e Road                        Crossroads

                                                                                                                              X R 318
(b)          B A R N S L E Y D IS T R IC T G E N E R A L H O S P IT A L


                             Junction                                     T yp e              Remarks
S /D iv .

             Old M ill L an e/E ld on Street N o rth                      T -junction         T ra ffic lights
B1
             Eldon S tre e t/M a rk e t H ill/Peel Street                 T -ju nctio n       T ra ffic lights ■
B1
                                                                                              one-way
             Church Street/H u d dersfield Road                            Roundabout
B1
             V ic to ria R o ad /O ld M ill Lane                          Crossroads          Give way
B1
             G aw ber R oad/P ogm oor Road                                Crossroads          T ra ffic lights
 B1
             A 6 3 5 / A 6 3 7 , Redbrook                                 R oundabout
 B1
             W iltho rp e R o ad /R e d b ro o k Hill                     Y -ju n ctio n
 B1
             D o d w o rth R o ad/B roadw ay                              Crossroads          T ra ffic lights, Fire &
 B1
                                                                                              A m bulance Stations
                                                                                              on Broadway
             B urton R o ad/W akefield Road                               T -ju nctio n       T ra ffic lights
 B1
             R otherham R oad/W akefield Road                              Y -ju n ctio n     Give way
 B1
             R o th erh am R o ad /B u rto n Road                          Crossroads         T ra ffic lights
 B1
             Grange L an e/W om bw ell Lane/Doncaster Road                 R oundabout        S tia rfo o t
 B1
             C em etery R oad/D oncaster Road                              T -ju nctio n      T ra ffic lights
 B1
             T o w n E n d /R a ce co m m o n Road/Peel Street             5-junction         T ra ffic lights
 B1




                                                                                                                             1397
                                                              Document No.        2 0 6     CONT’D
                                                                                                            S E C TIO N 20


                                                                                                                     Page 2



                                                                                                                              X R 319
(c)       S H E F F I E L D R O Y A L H A L L A M S H IR E H O S P IT A L

                                                                      Typ e                   Remarks
S/Div.                      Junction

                                                                      T junction              T ra ffic lights
D1         Glossop R o ad /U p p er Hanover Street
                                                                      Roundabout
D1        Ecclesal! R o ad/U pper Hanover Street
                                                                      Crossroads             T ra ffic lights
F1        Glossop Road/Ciarkson Street
                                                                      T -ju nctio n          T ra ffic lights
F1        Glossop Road/Clarkehouse Road

                                                                      T -ju nctio n           Am bulance access
F1        Glossop R o ad /C larem on t Place
                                                                       Crossroads             T ra ffic lights
F1        Glossop R o ad /N ew b o uld Lane
                                                                      T -ju nctio n           T ra ffic lights
F1        F u lw o o d Road/Glossop Road
                                                                       Crossroads             T raffic lights
F1        F u lw o o d Road/Manchester Road
                                                                       Crossroads             T ra ffic lights
F1        F u lw o o d Road/Crookes Road

                                                                       Roundabout             T ra ffic lights
D1        Park Square
                                                                       Crossroads             T ra ffic lights
D1        C om m ercial S treet/F itzalan Square
                                                                       Roundabout
D1        Castle Square
                                                                       Bus gate
D1        Church Street                                                                                                       X R 320
                                                                       Roundabout
D1        West S tre et/L eo p o ld Street
                                                                       T -ju nctio n          T ra ffic lights
D1        West Street/C arver Street
                                                                       R oundabout
D1        B rook H ill/N e th e rth o rp e Road
                                                                       R oundabout
D1        Broad L a n e /T en ter Street
                                                                       Y -junction            T ra ffic lights
D1        T h e W ick er/S p ital Hill
                                                                                                                               XR321
 (d)       S H E -F F IE L D N O R T H E R N G E N E R A L H O S P IT A L

                                                                       Type                    Remarks
 S/Div.                      Junction

                                                                        T -ju nctio n          Give way
 F1         Herries R oad/H erries Road South
                                                                        Roundabout
 F1         Penistone Road N orth/Leppings Lane
                                                                        T -ju nctio n          Give way
 F1         Herries Road/Penistone Road N o rth
                                                                        Roundabout
 F2         Herries R oad/M oonshine Lane
                                                                        T -ju nctio n          Give way
 F2         Herries R o a d /N o rw o o d Road
                                                                        T -ju nctio n          T ra ffic lights
 F2         N o rw o o d Road/Barnsley Road
                                                                        Crossroads             T ra ffic lights
 F2         Herries Road/Barnsley R o a d /F irth Park Road
                                                                        T -ju n c tio n        T ra ffic lights
 F2         Barnsley R o ad /S tu b b in Lane
                                                                        Crossroads             T ra ffic lights
 F2         Elm Lane^Barnsley Road

                                                                        Crossroads             T ra ffic lights
  F1        Leppings Lane/Catch Bar Lane
                                                                        Crossroads             T ra ffic lights
  F1        Leppings Lane/W adsley Lane
                                                                            Crossroads          T ra ff ic lights
  F1        Langsett R o a d /H o lm e Lane                                                                                     X ft 3 2 2
                                                                            Crossroads          T ra ffic lights
  F1        Langsett R oad/W ood Street
                                                                            Crossroads          T ra ffic lights
  F1        Penistone R oad/W ood Street
                                                                            M ultiple           Give way
  F1        R ivelin V a lle y R o a d /L o x le y R o ad /
                                                                            junction
            Stann ing to n Road
                                                                            T-ju nctio n        Give way
  F2        A 6 1 / A 6 2 9 C row n Inn
                                                                            T -ju nctio n       T ra ffic lights
  F2        Penistone Road N orth /C layw h eels Lane
                                                                            T -junction         T ra ffic   lights
  D2        A tte r c liffe C om m on/W eedon Street
                                                                            T -junction         T ra ffic   lights
  D2        W eedon Street/B rightside Lane
                                                                            Crossroads          T ra ffic   lights
  D2        Brightside L an e/U p w ell Street
                                                                            Crossroads          T ra ffic   lights
  D2        U p w e ll S tre e t/H o ly w e ll Road

                                                                                                                              1398
                                                              Document No.     £0 6     CONT’D       S E C T I O N 20


                                                                                                               Page 3



                                                                                                                         X R 3 23
(e)          R O T H E R H A M G E N E R A L H O S P IT A L

                                                                     T yp e              Remarks
S,Div.                        Junction

                                                                     T-ju nctio n        T ra ffic lights
C1           Sheffield Road/O ld Sheffield Road
                                                                     T-junction          T ra ffic lights
C1           Old Sheffield R oad/C anklow              Road
                                                                     T -ju nctio n       T ra ffic lights
C1           C an klo w R oad/A lm a Road                                                T ra ffic lights
                                                                     Crossroads
C1           A lm a Road/Hollow gate                                                     T ra ffic lights
                                                                     T-ju nctio n
C1           Mansfield Road/M oorgate Street
                                                                     T -ju nctio n       T raff ic lights
C1           High Street/M oorgate Street
                                                                     T -ju nctio n       T ra ffic lights
C1           W estgate/M ain Street                                                      T ra ffic lights
                                                                     Crossroads
C1           Doncaster R oad/C lifton Road
                                                                     R oundabout
C1           B a w try R oad/C anklow Road
                                                                     T -ju nctio n
C1           W ellgate/H ollow gate                                                      Give w ay — entrance
                                                                     T -ju nctio n
C1           St Anns Road/Erskine Road
                                                                                         to Fire Station
                                                                      R oundabout
C1            F itz w illia m Road/St Anns Road                                                                           X R 324
                                                                     T -ju nctio n       T ra ffic lights
C1            Doncaster R oad/St Anns Road
                                                                      R oundabout
C1            H erringthorpe Valley R o a d /F itz w illia m Road
                                                                      R oundabout         "Stag Island"
C1            H erringthorpe Valley R oad/W ickersley Road
                                                                      T-ju nctio n
C1            Badsley M oo r R oad/Broom Road
                                                                      R oundabout
C1            C entenary W ay/Sheffield Road
                                                                      R oundabout
C1            C entenary W ay/M ain Street
                                                                      Roundabout
C1            C en ten ary W ay/College Road
                                                                                                                           XR325
       a d d itio n t o the aforementioned iunctions. it m ay b ., necessary- f o r » m e of th e foHowin,,
 ju n ctio n s to be manned, depending on the location o f the M ajo r Incident.

                                                                      Type                 Remarks
 S /D iv .                     Junction

                                                                       Crossroads
 A1           Sandford R o ad /S t Johns Road
                                                                       Crossroads          T ra ff ic lights
 A1            C arr H ill/V ic to ria Road
                                                                       R oundabout
 A1            Cleveland S tre et/T ra ffo rd W ay
                                                                       Crossroads          T ra ffic lights
 A1            S t SepuIchre G ate/B axter G ate
                                                                       T -ju nctio n       T ra ffic lights
 A1            A 6 3 8 / A 1 8 Thorne Road

                                                                       T -ju nctio n       Give way
  A2           A 1 8 / A 6 14 H atfield Woodhouse
                                                                       T -junction         Give way
  A2           A 1 8 /A 1 1 4 6 Hatfield
                                                                       T -ju nctio n       Give way
  A2           A 6 3 1 / A 6 0 T ickh ill to B aw try
                                                                       T -ju nctio n       Give way
  A2           A 6 3 1 / A 6 0 T ic kh ill to M altb y
                                                                       T -ju nctio n       Give way
  A2           A 6 1 4 / A 1 146 Thorne
                                                                        Crossroads
  A2           A 6 14 / B 139 6 B laxton
                                                                                                                            X R 326
                                                                        Crossroads          Give way
  A3           A 6 3 5 / B 6 4 1 1 H ickleton
                                                                        T -junction         Give way
  A3           A 6 3 8 / A 6 3 5 Barnsley Road

                                                                        Crossroads          T ra ffic lights
  B1           S h e ffie ld R oad/Park Road
                                                                        Crossroads          T ra ffic lights
  B1           S h e ffie ld R o ad /T a ylo r R o w

                                                                        Crossroads
      B2       A 6 2 8 / A 6 1 6 Flouch Inn
                                                                        T -ju nctio n
      B2       A 6 2 9 /B 6 0 8 8 W o rtley
                                                                        Crossroads          T ra ffic lights
      82       A 6 2 9 /B 6 4 9 9 Thurgoland

                                                                                                                        1399
                                                                      Document No.   2 0 6 C O N T ’D
                                                                                                            S E C T IO N 2 0


                                                                                                                    Page 4




                                                                             T ype            Remarks
S'D iv.                     Junction

                                                                                                                               X R 326
          A ld w a rke L a n e / ' H e r r i n g t h o r p e V a lley Road   Roundabout
Cl
                                                                             Crossroads       T ra ffic lights
Cl        Moorg 2 te Road/Pleasley Road
          East Baw try Road/W ickersley Road                                 Roundabout       "Brecks"
Cl
                                                                                                                               X R 327
C2        A 6 3 3 /A 6 0 2 3 W ath-upon-Dearne                               Roundabout
C2        A 6 3 3 /B 6 0 9 2 Warren V ale Road                               Roundabout
C2        A 6 3 3 /B 6 0 9 0 W e n tw o rth Road                             Roundabout
          Greasborough R o ad /A ld w a rk e Road                            Crossroads       T ra ffic lights
C2

                                                                             Crossroads       T ra ffic lights
C3        A 5 7 /B 6 0 5 3 Swallownest
          A 6 3 1 /A 6 3 4 M altb y                                          T-junction       Give w ay
C3
                                                                             Crossroads       T ra ffic lights
C3        Grange Lane/M uglet Lane
                                                                                                                               X R 328
D1        M oore S tre e t/F itzw illia m Street                             Roundabout
                                                                             Crossroads       T ra ffic lights
D1        Penistone R o ad /R u tlan d Road
                                                                             T-junction       T ra ffic lights
D1        Shalesm oor/H oyle Street
                                                                             Crossroads       T ra ffic lights
D1        H oyle S tre et/M ea d o w Street
                                                                             Crossroads       T ra ffic lights
D1        Penistone R o ad /R u tlan d Road
                                                                             Crossroads       T ra ffic lights
D1        R utland Road/Neepsend Lane

                                                                             Crossroads       T ra ffic lights
D2        N o rfo lk B rid g e/A tterc liffe Road
          S tan ifo rth R o a d /A tte rc liffe Road                         T-junction       T ra ffic lights
D2
          New hall R o a d /A tte rc liffe C om m on                         Crossroads       T ra ffic lights
D2
          Janson S tre e t/A tte rc liffe C om m on                          T-junction       T ra ffic    lights
D2
          Broughton L a n e /A tte rc liffe C om m on                        Crossroads       T ra ffic    lights
D2
          N ew hall Road/Brightside Lane                                     Crossroads       T ra ffic    lights
D2
          Carlisle Street East/U p w ell Street                              Crossroads       T ra ffic    lights
D2
                                                                             Crossroads       T ra ffic    lights
D2        R utland R oad/M inna Road
                                                                             T-junction       T ra ffic    lights
D2        Orgreave Lane/H andsw orth Road
          Laverack S treet/H an d sw o rth Road                              T-junction        T ra ffic lights
D2

                                                                             Crossroads        T ra ffic lights
El        Hollinsend R o ad /N o rto n Avenue
          W oodhouse R oad/M ansfield Road                                   T-junction        T ra ffic lights
E1
                                                                             T-junction        T ra ffic lights opposite
E1        M ansfield R o a d /H u rlfie ld Road
                                                                                               Fire Station

E1        Ridgew ay R oad/M ansfield Road                                     Roundabout

                                                                                                                                 XR329
E2        Woodseats Road/Chesterfield Road                                   Crossroads        T ra ffic lights
E2        Scarsdale Road/Chesterfield Road                                   Crossroads        T ra ffic   lights
E2        Queens R o ad /L o n d o n Road                                     Crossroads       T ra ffic   lights
                                                                              Crossroads       T ra ffic   lights
E2        Bramall L a n e /M y rtle Road
                                                                              Crossroads       T ra ffic   lights
E2        C h a rlo tte Road/Queens Road
E2        A b b e y L an e/A bbeydale Road South                              Crossroads       T ra ffic lights
                                                                              Crossroads       T ra ffic lights
E2        Bannerdale R o ad /A b b eyd ale Road
                                                                              Crossroads       T ra ffic lights
E2        B ro ad field R o ad /A b b eyd ale Road
                                                                              T-junction       T ra ffic lights
E2        A b b e y Lane/Ecclesall Road South
                                                                              T-junction       T ra ff ic lights
E2        S u m m erfie ld Street/Ecclesall Road


FI        Rustlings Road/Ecclesall Road                                       Y-junction
F1        Brocco Bank/Ecclesall Road                                          Roundabout       Hunters Bar
FI        Clarkehouse R o ad /N e w b o u ld Lane                             Crossroads       T ra ffic lights
                                                                                                                           1 4 0 0
                                              Document No.    2 06   C O N T ’D
                                                                                  S E C T IO N 20


                                                                                          Page 5




                                                     Type              Remarks
S /Div.                 Junction
                                                                                                    X R 329
                                                     T -junction       Give way
F2        A 6 1 6 Vaughton H ill, Deepcar
                                                     T -junction       G ive way
F2        A 6 1 /B rac ke n Hill, Grenoside
                                                     T -junction       T ra ffic lights
F2        Deeriands Avenue/Barnsley Road




                                                                                                1401
                                                                                          Document No.           2 06        C O N ro j              SECTION 27

                                                                                                                                                            Page   1


                                                                                     FATALITIES
               G E N E R A L P R IN C IP L E S

              Dealing   with fa t s l i t i




          ™      carefully. H M c 0rone"               t ?   ?         ”   « '   ™ "««                                                             < *• ^
           Possible should be done to e n a h ^ T " 3re rese °™ f> le fo r deal,no >>? I * * " ’ W " h m eth°d ic a lly
          dance w i , h the UJUa( p         ' « w n ,o carry o u t th e ir tasks as „ n l   dead and everything
          require a „ v type o f            T h ey have been asked to c o n i ?


      HM C O R O N ER                                                                                                        V


      Where a m ajor incident                 occur, ;           , ■




    rT E'MiP O
             r RARYMORTUARy a r r a n                                                 r       ~   —       s - ., t'er o*f , ,o
                                                                                                                            he -, nci,« en,"                v

    Xf)




t          f            s           s              s         s                   s        s           ^         ^            ^            ,
As far as possible, tem porarv m                                                                  em porary mortuaries.
b y members o f H M r          m o rtuaries and premises usprt f




                            r   I °     S      ^                                                  -       Prepared and ^                       „




                                                                                                                                                        1 4 0 2
                                                   Document No.      2 06    CO NT’D
                                                                                        S E C TIO N 21


                                                                                               Page 2




UNDERTAKERS

                                                                                                         XR 336
It w i l l be the responsibility of Operations Room to arrange for undertakers to assist in the trans­
port of bodies fro m the site to m ortuary accommodation, should such service be appropriate. It
is desirable th a t bodies should be accompanied by a police o fficer, but circumstances may make
this impossible.

The Coroner may request Operations Room to arrange for the assistance of undertakers to
provide accommodation, personnel or transport.

                                                                                                         X R 337
J H Kenyon Ltd are a firm of international undertakers able to attend the scene of a major
incident in less than four hours. Further information concerning this firm is given at Appendix
'A'. In consultation with HM Coroners and the police, the firm will deal with all matters relating
to the dead, including the removal of bodies, identification, the return of property to relatives,
funeral arrangements, etc. The firm is retained by all the large civil aviation companies and will
deal with all air disasters involving those companies. Clearly the firm s expertise would be
invaluable in dealing with any type of incident where there are particular difficulties or the
number of fatalities is large.

                                                                                                         X R 333
HM Coroners for South Yorkshire have agreed that the police should call upon the services of this
firm if the circumstances of the incident justify this course. In the event of such a major incident
occurring the officer in charge of Operations Room, after consulting w ith the Site Commander,
wjll be responsible for asking the firm to attend. It must be stressed that HM Coroner or his rep­
resentative must be consulted before this action is taken unless undue delay is likely to be
occasioned. In cases of doubt, however, J H Kenyon Ltd should be called even w ithout prior con­
sent from HM Coroner, since the firm have stated that they w ill attend a major incident even
though their services may ultimately not be used and that having arrived they will consult w ith
the Coroner prior to taking any action.

L A B E L L IN G OF B O DIES A T SITE

                                                                                                         X R 339
Bodies and parts of bodies should not be removed without first being labelled and the position in
which the body was found being marked. Photographs will be taken. Every body and every part
will have a separate label.

It is extremely important that only ONE person should be charged with the responsibility of
allocating numbers to bodies, although the labelling, marking of location, dispatching, etc. will be
done by a team using the specialist disposable clothing contained in the major incident boxes.
The person allocating numbers will maintain a record of every body which is labelled, showing
details of its condition and position at the site and the place to which it is taken. Contained in
the major incident boxes is a 'Body Book' designed for this purpose.

Body labels are contained in all major incident boxes and should be fixed as securely as possible
to the body or part. If practicable the number should be marked on the body using indelible
crayon.

The location where the body lay should be marked with a stake or other suitable object and the
stake labelled using the same reference number as the body.




                                                                                                     1403
                                                                    Document No.          c.   06   C O N T ’D
                                                                                                                 S E C T IO N 21


                                                                                                                         Page 3




P E R S O N A L IT E M S F O U N D W IT H B O D Y A T T H E SITE

Bodies should not be searched. It rr.ay be feasible to enwrap the body com pletely in plastic                                       XR

sheeting or in a plastic bag or place it in a coffin before removal and thus keep all personal items
and effects together w ith the body to which they belong.

An item o f personal property (eg a handbag) found lying near a body, should^not be assumed to
belong to th a t body. Such property should be secured in a bag labelled                                   Found near body
la b e lle d ..................................'. This property will go w ith the body.

Larger items o f p ro p erty such as luggage will not go w ith the body b u t after labelling w ill be dealt
w ith as detained pro p erty (see instruction card 'Lost and Found Property Office .)


D O C U M E N T A T IO N O F B O D IE S F O U N D A T T H E S IT E

A ll bodies and parts of bodies should be labelled as set o u t above. A ll bodies should be made the                               XR
subject o f a 'casualty record fo rm ', books o f which are contained in the m ajor incident boxes.
This applies to bodies which are incomplete but does not apply to parts. In cases o f d o u b t a
'casualty record fo rm ' should be com pleted. As far as possible a 'casualty record fo rm ’ should be
com pleted at the m o rtu ary accom modation as the body is being dealt w ith there. Property an
effects may give valuable inform ation as to identity.

Where circumstances indicate th a t it is desirable to com plete a casualty record form before a
body is removed to m ortuary accom modation this should be done but the body should n o t be
searched. A ll 'casualty record forms' should include the body label number and any othere
reference to the body, and details forwarded to the Casualty Enquiry Bureau.

R E M O V A L O F B O D IE S F R O M S IT E T O M O R T U A R Y A C C O M M O D A T IO N

When it is necessary to move bodies fro m the site, they will be taken to the local m o rtu ary or to                               XR

a te m p o ra ry m o rtu ary. Where possible bodies shou’ld be accompanied by a police o fficer b u t
circumstances may make this impossible.

A t the request o f the Site Com m ander, Operations R oom w ill m ake the necessary arrangements
fo r transport to be used to move bodies.

Coroners have made arrangements w ith local undertakers fo r them to stand by in the event o f
emergency.

Before a body is allowed to be removed fro m the site, a check will be made to ensure th a t
sufficient accom m odation is available at the place to which it is being sent.


D O C U M E N T A T IO N O F B O D IE S A T H O S P IT A L S

Where a person is involved in a major incident and is removed to hospital but subsequently dies,                                    XR

it is a nticip ated th a t the body will be lodged at the hospital m o rtu ary from whence it w ill be
removed o n ly on the direction o f H M Coroner.

 It is im p o rta n t fo r purposes o f identification that all clothing and property accompanying th e
 body should be retained w ith it. T h e police officer acting as liaison w ith the hospital should p o in t
 this o u t to the staff and will com plete a 'casualty record fo rm ' fo r every such body. T h e fo rm
 should include all hospital, ambulance and other references.
                                                                                                                               1   40'
                                                              Document No. 2 0 6            C Q N T ’D
                                                                                                           S E C T IO N 21

                                                                                                                   Page 4


 special m o r t u a r y a r r a n g e m e n t s



d iffic u lt   or H p r^ tra a e c ^ t^ 'm a 3/ 6 b e ^ h ^ t h e W^ re investi* » ' ° n or identification is likely to be   XR

       at mortuar.es, hospitals or u n d e r t a ^ r s ' ^ h i - 1!
a va ila ble                                                        aCCOmmoaat,on ” hich « norm ally
make whatever arrangements are necessarv , L “ *abllshn* n“ ls '"sufficien t, The Coroner will
                                  necessary regarding such accom m odation and preservation.




                                                                                                                     1405
                                                          Document No.   206   C O N T ’D
                                                                                              S E C T IO N 21


                                                                                            A P P E N D IX 'A '

                                                                                                     PA G E 1




                                                    F A T A L IT IE S


J H K E N Y O N L IM IT E D , F U N E R A L D IR E C T O R S

This C om pany, w ho act on behalf o f all m ajor British Airlines and several foreign Airlines, have             XR 347

proved to be invaluable at the scene o f m ajor air disasters. T h ey w o rk closely w ith the pat
ological team, and th e ir wide experience dating fro m the R 38 airship disaster has enabled them to
perfect their procedures.

T h e Com pany is based at 8 3 Westbourne Grove, London W 2 4 U I. Telephone 0 1 - 2 2 9 - 3 8 1 0 .
T elex num ber 2 6 5 8 4 6 .

T h e y w ill arrive quickly at the scene w ith a field team, having been inform ed by the airline
involved, and should have w ith them a w ritte n auth o rity to act on behalf o f the airline to deal
w ith funeral arrangements and w ith any property handed over to them . T h e field team ™>rma Y
consists of five members, but where the total num ber o f casualties exceeds fifty an additional
tw o members are attached.

Am ongst the major problems facing Police at the scene o f an air disaster are those related to                   X R 34 S

pro p erty, identification, and the disposal o f the bodies. Kenyon's procedure is divided into five
main operations:

       1         recovery of the remains;
       2         identification;
       3         arrangements fo r disposal;
       4         removal to the place o f disposal, and fin ally disposal by burial or crem ation,
       5         recovery, renovation, cleaning and identification of personal and other effects.


So far as the recovery of the remains is concerned, Kenyon's are well aware th a t this w ill
n o rm a lly be carried o u t by the local Police and Am bulance Services w h o w ill remove twd.es to a
m o rtu a ry , but they stress th a t every e ffo rt should be made to prevent personal effects and
clothing being moved fro m the bodies prior to the arrival o f the investigation team . Kenyon s
 staff are aware that permission must be obtained fro m the local Coroner and the Police before
 any e xam in atio n can be carried out.


 ID E N T I F I C A T I O N OF T H E R E M A IN S

 M uch distress can be caused to relatives by delay in the identificaiton o f the bodies o f the                   X R 349

 victim s particularly where bodies are badly m utilated , and in nearly all cases, even m relatives are
 available to view the remains, it is undesirable. However, relatives and friends w h o do travel to
 the site w ill be dealt w ith very ta c tfu lly by Kenyon's field team, w h o base their identification on
 the fo llo w in g :


        (a)       dental;
        (b)       documents;
        (c)        clothing;
        (d)        jew ellery;
           (e)     physical;
           (f)     photographs;
           (g)     fingerprints.
                                                                                                            1406
                                                         Document No.       l   Q 6   C O N T ’D
                                                                                                     S E C T IO N 21


                                                                                                   A P P E N D I X 'A'


                                                                                                              Page 2




A R R A N G E M E N T S FOR T H E D IS P O S A L OF T H E R E M A IN S

                                                                                                                          X R 350
Although Kenyon's are prim arily Funeral Directors, they will make arrangements w ith relatives
w h o wish to use their own Funeral Directors, but as a first step 150 m etallic lined coffins are
always held in readiness by Kenyon's in London and Birmingham for im m ediate despatch to the
scene o f the accident.

R E M O V A L T O T H E P LA C E O F D IS P O S A L

This is dealt w ith entirely by Kenyon's a fte r a meeting w ith the local Coroner.

RECOVERY,        R E N O V A T IO N ,   C L E A N IN G   AND   ID E N T IF IC A T IO N   OF   PERSONAL AND
O TH ER EFFECTS
                                                                                                                          XR351
Before   leaving the scene o f operations,            Kenyon's obtain possession o f all personal effects
removed frn m the bodies, or salvaged fro m the wreckage, where this is p ro p erty o f a non-
contentious nature. (Non-contentious in the sense th a t matters related to H M Customs or
suspected crimes do not arise.) T his relieves the Police of the task o f retaining and disposing of
p ro p erty, and dealing w ith the heavy bolum e o f correspondence in connection w ith the same.


In the m atter of identification, K enyon's field team quite often kno w the pathologists concerned,
and the field team are equipped w ith form s which assist in obtaining medical or dental evidence.
It is advisable at an early stage to have a meeting between the Police O ffic e r in charge of the
incident, a m ember o f Kenyon's field team , the pathologist, and H M C oroner, in order that
arrangements for the disposal o f the remains can be made.
                                                                                                                           X R 352
From the foregoing it will be seen th a t the arrival o f the Com pany at the scene o f an air disaster,
to act on behalf o f the affected A irlin e, can result in the relieving of the Police fro m many
otherwise burdensome tasks. H owever, it must be stressed th a t this does n o t remove from the
Police the task o f making initial arrangements relating to the safeguarding, labelling and preser­
vation of bodies and pro p erty, providing tem porary mortuaries, and having available property
lists fo r H M Customs and Excise.

It is advisable to have a Police O ffice r o f supervisory rank available to liaise w ith Kenyon's
representative throughout the incident. Kenyon's are well aware o f the need to m aintain a close
and frie n d ly relationship w ith the local M edical/Legal and Police A u th o rities and n aturally th e y
w ill reouire advice in localities where they have not previously w o rked .




                                                                                                                         1407
                                                      Document No.       206    C O N T ’D
                                                                                               SE C T IO N 22




                                 M O R T U A R Y L IA IS O N O F F IC E R S

                                                                                                                 X R 354
!n the event of a Major Incident occurring which justifies the establishment o f the Cas^ al*Y
Enquiry Bureau and whicn involves many dead persons, arrangements have been made with me
coroners for the areas of South Yorkshire that a police sergeant w ill go to each mortuary
receiving bodies and there report to the coroner's officer. (Separate arrangements           have   been ma e
with regard to hospital mortuaries, which will be the responsibility o f the Hospital Liaison
Officer).

Kept at each coroner's o ffice is a reserve of necessary equipm ent w h ich includes a wallet con­
taining casualty record form s, deceased person's property forms and a copy of this Section o the
manual.

T h e M ortu ary Liaison O fficer will consult w ith the Coroner and Coroner's O ffic e r to establish the
number o f additional police personnel necessary to attend to carry o u t the police tasks at the
m ortuary. He w ill inform Force Operations Room , w ho w ill make th e necessary arrangements for
staff to attend. He should also indicate to Operations Room any items o f equipm ent needed and
they will make the necessary arrangements.

                                                                                                                 X R 355
It is intended th a t the Coroner's staff and the police staff should w o rk together dealing w ith each
body in turn. T h e Coroner's staff w ill strip, search and otherwise deal w ith the body. A po ice
o fficer w ill com plete a casualty record fo rm in respect o f all bodies. This applies to bodies whic
are incomplete, but does n o t apply to parts. However, in cases o f d o u b t a casualty record form
should be completed. T h e m o rtu ary staff w ill be completing th e ir ow n records which will
necessarily contain specialist details o f medical or forensic im portance. T h e casualty record form
should not include such details but should contain inform ation w h ich m ay enable identification
to be established.

Depending on the circumstances, it has been found of great benefit in previous m ajor incidents to
assisgn an individual police o fficer to each body. In this case the teams w ould attend a t the
m o rtu ary and an officer w ould be allocated a body to try and establish its iden tity.

                                                                                                                  XR356
The o fficer w o u ld familiarise himself w ith the body and any p ro p erty on or w ith it. He-would
accompany the body through the post m o rtem stage, gathering fu rth e r in fo rm atio n . T h a t o ff icer
w ould then liaise closely w ith the Casualty Enquiry Bureau in an e ffo rt to com plete identific­
ation.

It is appreciated that it is not always practicable to fo llo w this procedure and the decision to do
so w ill lie w ith the M o rtu a ry Liaison O fficer is to transmit the details fro m the completed
casualty record form to the Casualty En q u iry Bureau, so the relatives and friends may be enabled
to id e n tify and trace injured and deceased persons as soon as possible. Thsi w ill be done by tele­
phone, the telephone num ber o f the Casualty Enquiry Bureau being obtained fro m Operations
 Room .

T h e second, b u t equally im p o rtan t task is to provide a line of com m unication between the m or­
 tuary and Force Operations R oom , and hence to the scene of the incident.




                                                                                                                1408
                                                        Document No.           2 06     CONT'D
                                                                                                       S E C T IO N 23


                                                                                                               Page 1




                                    C A S U A L T Y E N Q U IR Y B U R E A U


GENERAL

If a M ajor Incident occurs w ithin the South Yorkshire Police area, or if an incident occurs w ith in                    X R 358

another police area and numbers o f casualties are received at hospitals w ith in the South
Yorkshire Police area, it w ill be the responsibility of the police to trace the relatives or friends o f
persons injured or killed and inform them o f their condition and whereabouts. Allied to this
responsibility is the general police d u ty to investigate or assist in the investigation o f circum
stances giving rise to death o r injury.

In order th a t these duties may be e ffic ie n tly carried ou t, the police w ill set up a Casualty En q u iry
Bureau to w h ich all enquiries and in fo rm atio n relating to persons involved in the incident w ill be
directed, in order that collation of this in fo rm atio n may be undertaken and, where required,
passed to relatives etc.

The establishment of the Bureau w ill also mean that m any telephone calls will be channelled to
it which w o u ld otherwise be made to Operations Room , hospitals, etc.


E S T A B L IS H M E N T

                                                                                                                          X R 359
It w ill be the responsibility o f the D u ty O ffice r in charge o f the Force Operations Room to
decide when the Bureau should be activated and each incident must be assessed individually. C on­
sideration should be given to the potential numbers o f casualties, a n d /o r enquiries regarding
casualties, and it should be borne in m ind that a long delay in im plem entation will cause
unnecessary pressure upon Operations Room personnel.

It w ill be the responsibility o f the Training D epartm ent to m ake the follo w in g arran g e m en ts:-


      (a)      Prepare the Bureau fo r use;
      (b)      Call o u t the necessary personnel;
      (c)      In fo rm the Hospital A dm inistrator(s)     o r other   responsible person th a t         police
                officers are attending the hospital(s) to act in th e ir capacity       asHospital Liaison
                Officers;
      (d)       Circulate by message switch, a message to all stations setting o u t the arrange­
                ments fo r the Casualty En q u iry Bureau and telephone num ber to be used by


                 i.   the public, and
                ii.   the police.

C O N S T IT U T IO N A N D F U N C T IO N OF T H E B U R E A U

T h e Casualty En q u iry Bureau is located w ith in the Force Training          D e p a rtm e n t   C om m unications    X R 360

School      Ecclesfield. The staff consists o f one inspector (officer in charge), tw o sergeants (next of
kin clerks) and ten o th er personnel w h o may be police constables or special constables
(operators). T h e staffing level o f the Bureau may be m odified dependent on circumstances.


T h e o ffic er in charge of the Bureau w ill be responsible fo r the effic ien t operation o f th e Bureau
and its staff. He w ill ensure th a t all enquiries are correctly dealt w ith and ail necessary records
and docum ents are com pleted and m aintained.




                                                                                                                         1409
                                                         Document No.       20 6   CO NT’D
                                                                                             S E C T IO N 23


                                                                                                     Page 2



                                                                                                               XR 360
He will also be responsible for the calling out of any relief personnel, bearing in mind the period
of duty that Bureau personnel may have completed prior to the activation of the ureau,
length of time they may reasonably be expected to operate effic iently . His responsi i ities
also include the liaison between C o m m u n ity Liaison and Crime Prevention staff at t e         osp
mortuaries and incident site and the Casualty Enquiry Bureau.

                                                                                                               XR361
He will also be responsible for informing the appropriate administrator(s) tha t police officers are
en route to act in their capacity as Hospital Liaison Officers.

Telephones on both the national and internal lines are provided in the Bureau. The national
number to be used by the public will be released by the o fficer in charge of the Operations Room
to pre-arranged locations, including the media, when he is advised by the o fficer in c arge o
Bureau that he is ready to receive calls.

External unpublished national exchange lines are also provided in to the Bureau fo r the exclusive
use o f hospital, m o rtu ary and incident site liaison staff. These numbers are held w ithin t e ocu
mentation which will be made available to officers responsible fo r hospital and m o r t u a r y recor s.
It is imperative th a t these latter numbers are not made public.

P R O C E D U R E S F O R P A S S IN G IN F O R M A T IO N T O T H E B U R E A U

                                                                                                                X R 362
Information regarding persons injured or killed in the incident w ill be passed to the Bureau fro
three main sources: —

      1       the incident site;
      2        the hospitals;
      3        the M o rtu a ry.


1     T h e Incident Site

      A casualty record form should be com pleted in duplicate fo r all persons treated a t the
      scene and allow ed to leave w ith o u t attending the hospital as a patient.

      T h e Site C om m ander w ill designate officers to undertake this task a t a convenient
      assembly p o in t. T h e casualty record forms are contained in the M ajo r Incident boxes
      w ith fu rth e r supplies available in the Casualty Enquiry Bureau. T h e in fo rm atio n on
      these com pleted forms should be passed by telephone to the Bureau T h e national
      num ber o f the Bureau fo r police use only is contained w ith in the M ajo r Incident boxes,
      b u t in th e event o f d iffic u lty it can be obtained fro m Operations R oom .

                                                                                                                 XR363
 2    T h e Hospitals and Mortuaries

30d   Inspectors in charge o f c o m m u n ity liaison departments a t divisions and their deputies
      w ill call o u t staff in accordance w ith pre-arranged procedures to man the receiving
      hospitals and mortuaries w hen they are advised by the Casualty E n q u iry Bureau that
      th e Bureau is being activated and this action is required.

      T h e fu ll duties o f these personnel are set o u t in Sections 2 2 and 2 4 , b u t b rie fly they
      w ill pass details o f all injured and dead persons, identified or otherwise, to the Bureau
       by telephone.




                                                                                                               1410
                                                         Document No.        20 6   CONTD     S E C T IO N 23

                                                                                                      Page 3




P R O C E D U R E F O R R E C E I V IN G E N Q U IR IE S F R O M T H E P U B L IC

Members of the public who telephone the Casualty Enquiry Bureau using the publicised numbers                    XR
will be asked to supply information to enable a casualty enquiry form to be completed. This
inform ation is matched up with the information relating to the casualties provided by officers at
the various receiving points.

Members o f the public w ho make a personal visit to Force Headquarters or any other police
station to enquire about a possible casualty should be given the fa c ility to telephone the Bureau.


If the Bureau is unable to im m ediately give them the in fo rm atio n they require such persons
should be advised n o t to w ait at police stations, b u t to return home where they will be told of
any in fo rm atio n which comes to police knowledge.

It can be anticipated that telephone calls w ill be received at police stations and Force Operations            XR
R oom and such calls should be channelled to the Casualty En q u iry Bureau either by divisional
or Operations Room staff, giving the Casualty E n q u iry Bureau public emergency telephone n u m ­
ber to callers. In the event of such callers being unable or un w illin g to m ake an additional call,
officers should take details and n o tify the Bureau via message switch.

It is fo r the o ffic e r in charge o f the Casualty En q u iry Bureau to decide whether or not a person
m aking an enq u iry should be given details o f a casualty. Where it has been decided to give details,
but it appears inappropriate to give them over the telephone, the person enquiring will be asked
to return to a fix e d address, when arrangements w ill be made fo r the in fo rm atio n to be passed by
telephone or message switch to the police station near to that address in order th a t personal con­
tact can be established.

N o details w ill be given o u t fro m the Bureau o th er than by telephone or message switch on the            XR
C om m and and C o ntro l com puter, to prevent members o f the public congregating at Force
Headquarters o r th e Casualty Enquiry Bureau, seeking inform ation.

Details o f persons dead or injured will not be issued d irectly to the media by any m ember of the
Bureau. A ll item s fo r publication will be issued through the Force Press O fficer.


A   detailed   plan o f w hat initial action is required by the Inspector, Operations Room , to
com m ence the Bureau is held by Operations R o om . W ith in this plan is a list o f personnel w h o
m ay be called upon to assist him set up the Bureau, and fu rth e r lists o f persons trained to operate
the system.

The   S u p e rin ten d en t, Training   D epartm ent, w ill   be responsible fo r m aintaining the lists in    XR

T ra in in g D e p a rtm e n t and Operations Room o f those personnel w h o m ay be called upon to set up
and arrange the Bureau. He will also be responsible fo r arranging fo r the training o f personnel in
the o p eratio n o f the Bureau system and m aintenance o f the lists o f persons so trained.

It is antic ip ate d th a t prior to the Bureau being activated m any calls w ill be received at Force
O p erations R o om fro m persons seeking in fo rm atio n regarding friends and relatives. Where it is
k n o w n th e Bureau w ill eventually be activated, callers should be requested to m o n ito r lo cal/
national radio a n d /o r BBC and IB A Television, where the appropriate B u r e a u telephone num ber
w ill be broadcast when the Bureau commences operation. This w ill assist to clear the 9 9 9 te le ­
phone lines and the British Telecom exchange lines in to the Headquarters switchboard enabling
O p erations R o om to attend to the requirements o f the incident. It is emphasised th a t th e
decision to activate the Casualty Enquiry Bureau m ust have been taken before persons enquiring
are given the above instruction.                                                                       1 41
                                                     Document No.     c.   0O   C O NT’D
                                                                                           S E C T IO N 23


                                                                                                   Page 4



                                                                                                              XR 363
    P'ior to the decision to activate the Bureau being taken, enquir.es will be recorded by Operations
    Room in accordance with normal procedures, obtaining sufficient details for an enquirer to be
    contacted later i f necessary, and arrangements should be made for all this documentation to be
    passed to the officer in charge of the Bureau if it becomes operational.




#




#




                                                                                                             1412
                                                        Document No.           2 0 6   C O N T ’D
                                                                                                    S E C T IO N 24


                                                                                                            Page 1




                                   H O S P IT A L L IA IS O N O F F IC E R S

                                                                                                                       XR 370
In the event of a M ajor Incident occurring which justifies the establishment of a Casualty Enquiry
Bureau, arrangements have been made w ith hospitals in the C o un ty that police officers, from
Divisional C o m m u n ity   Liaison and Crime Prevention Departmentss, w ill go to the Casualty
D ep artm en t of the hospital and there report to the person in charge of casualty docum entation.


O fficers attending will take w ith them the Hospital Liaison box which is kept at th e ir respec­
tive offices. T his box contains casualty record forms and stationery and protective clothing
required to administer the scheme.

T h e box also contains a copy o f this Section of the manual and the telephone num ber of the
Casualty     E n q u iry Bureau. Force Operations Room will supply this num ber in case of any
d iffic u lty . A lthough there may be a delay in the call being answered w hilst the bureau is being set
up, the officers need take no furth er action to establish com m unications, other than to ring this
num ber fro m tim e to tim e. A t some hospitals there may not be a telephone available fo r police
use and in these circumstances officers w ill have to use telephones at adjacent premises.

                                                                                                                       X R 371
A casualty record form will be com pleted in duplicate fo r every casualty involved in the incident,
w h eth er the casualty is discharged, detained, moved to another hospital, fou n d to be dead and
moved to another m ortuary etc. T h e in fo rm atio n required to com plete the fo rm is largely self
evident b u t every effo rt should be made to obtain as much accurate detail as possible.

This in fo rm a tio n will be supplied by th e hospital staff although it m a y be possible fo r an officer
to obtain in fo rm atio n fo r himself. T h e w o rk o f the police officers is o f a secondary importance
to th a t o f the hospital and officers must use th e ir discretion so th a t th e y o btain inform ation
w ith o u t causing disruption to the w orking of the hospital.

Particular a tte n tio n should be paid to the dead and to unconscious persons so th a t all details
w h ich m ay assist in the identification are obtained and preserved. This includes tryin g to ensure
th a t hospital staff do not destroy clothing, p ro p erty, etc., no m a tte r h o w insignificant it may
appear.

                                                                                                                       XR372
It is also im p o rtan t that details of the whereabouts o f the casualty at the tim e the incident
occurred be obtained, if possible -      ie w h e th e r'h e was the occupant o f any vehicle involved, etc.


Inspectors in charge of divisional c o m m u n ity liaison departments are responsible fo r maintaining
liaison w ith their respective receiving hospitals, and the m aintenance o f th e boxcontam ing the
required documents. T h ey are also responsible for the training o f th e ir staff in their respective
roles at receiving hospitals. T h ey may call upon the Force Training D ep a rtm en t to assist in this
m a tte r.

T h e p rim e task o f the hospital liaison o ffic e r at the hospital is to obtain and transm it inform ation
fro m the hospital to the Casualty E n q u iry Bureau so th a t relatives and friends may be enabled to
id e n tify and trace injured persons as soon as possible. T h e second, b u t equally im p o rtan t, task is
to provide a line o f com m unications between th e hopsital and Force Operations R o om , and
hence to th e scene o f the incident.

These are vital links in the organisation and under no circumstances w ill th e officers be diverted
                                                                                                                        Xft 373
fro m th e ir tasks to deal w ith public order problems or any other incident occurring in th e vicinity
o f the hospital.

                                                                                                                      1413
                                                                 Document No.           2 . 0 6    CONT’D          S E C T IO N 24


                                                                                                                           Page 2



                                                                                                                                     XR 373
The hospital        officers win retain                casua.ty
information has Deen t r a n s m i n e c t o t h e C a s u a l t y E n q m r y B          ^ ^ ^         ^      ^    ^
t o o b t a i n u p d a t e d i n f o r m a t i o n - eg t ra n s fe rs , d ea th s, d sc g r o iaTi\/PS etc                 This
f o r m a t i o n concerning casualties will come to hand from other casua, ,es. relati.es, etc,
a d d i t i o n a l i n f o r m a t i o n sh o ul d be t r a n s m i t t e d to the Casualty Enquiry Bureau.

                                                                                                                                      X R 374
D I V I S I O N A L C O M M U N I T Y L I A IS O N D E P A R T M E N T R E S P O N S I B I L I T IE S


' A ’ Division          Doncaster Royal Infirm ary
'B' Division            Barnsley District General Hospital
'C' Division             Rotherham District General Hospital
'D ' Division           Royal Hallamshire Hospital
'F ' Division           Sheffield Northern General              Hospital

Officers from 'E ' Division C o m m u n ity Liaison Departm ent w ill assist at
Legal Centre. W a tery Street, Sheffield and additionally assist at both m ajor Sheffield hospitals.




                                                                                                                                     1414
                                                     Document No.        2 06    C O N T ’D
                                                                                                S E C T IO N 25




                                 M A J O R I N C I D E N T E Q U IP M E N T

                                                                                                                  XR 376
Because of its importance, ail property stored, either ,n Maior Inc,den, boxes or separately wUI
be cnecxed at intervals of at least six months and any deteriorating items replacea.

Sub-Divisionai   Superintendents      will   be   responsible    for   Major    Incident      boxes   held   on
Sub-Divisions. (See Appendix 'A ').

Superintendent Operations will be responsible for the Force M ajo r Incident boxes held at Force
Headquarters. (See Appendix 'B').

The Force C om m unications O ffice r will be responsible for the M obile Police Station, the C o m ­
munications vehicle and all associated equipment. (See Appendix 'C ').




                                                                                                                  1415
                                                       Document No.        20 6       CQMT'D
                                                                                                 S E C T IO N 25


                                                                                               A P P E N D I X ’A ’


                                                                                                          Page 1



                                                                                                                      X R 37
                              S U B -D IV IS IO N A L M A J O R IN C ID E N T B O X

                                                                                                  2 copies
M ajo r Incident Scheme Manual
                                                                                                  1
Sub-Divisional Map
                                                                                                  1
Site C o m m an d er’s Tabbard
                                                                                                  2
Police Press A rm band
                                                                                                  1 roll
Indicator Tape
                                                                                                  4 pairs
Protective Gloves — heavy d u ty rubber

IN S T R U C T IO N C A R D S F O R USE A T T H E S IT E A S L IS T E D B E L O W : -

                                                                                                  Card A
Parking Arrangements
                                                                                                  Card B
T ra ffic Routes at Site
                                                                                                  Card C
Police Incident Post
                                                                                                  Card D
Site Security
                                                                                                  Card E
Medical Arrangements at Site
                                                                                                  Card F
Assembly and Welfare of Persons Involved
                                                                                                  Card G
Lost and Found Property O ffice
                                                                                                  Card H
Press Liaison
                                                                                                  Card I
Search of Scene     '
                                                                                                  Card J
Fatalaties
                                                                                                   Card K
Incident Investigation
                                                                                                   Card L
Catering Liaison O fficer
                                                                                                   Card M
V e h icle Clearance O fficer (M o to rw a y and M u ltip le Accidents)
                                                                                                   Card N
V e h icle Pound O fficer (M o to rw a y and M u ltip le Accidents)

                                                                                                                      X R 37
S IG N S : (The reverse of these signs are direction arrows)

                                                                                                   2
Police Incident Post
                                                                                                   2
Police Parking Area
                                                                                                   2
Fire Parking Area
                                                                                                   2
A m b u lan ce Parking Area
                                                                                                   2
A m bulance Loading Area
                                                                                                   1
A m b u lan ce C ontrol
                                                                                                   1
 Fire C ontrol
                                                                                                    1
 F ound Property O ffice
                                                                                                   2
Danger Keep O u t
                                                                                                   4
 N o E n try

 M A J O R IN C ID E N T PO ST S T A T IO N E R Y

                                                                                                      200 {2 pads)
 G E N /2 1    Incident/Message Reports
                                                                                                      4 pads
 S U P /1      Ruled A 4 paper




                                                                                                             1416
                                                        Document No.   '-3 6   CONT'D     S E C T IO N 25


                                                                                        A P P E N D I X 'A '


                                                                                                         Page 2



                                                                                                                  X R 379
M A J O R IN C ID E N T POST - E Q U IP M E N T

                                                                                            1
Incident Log Book                                                                           1
Personnel Log Book                                                                          1
12" rule                                                                                    12
Pencils                                                                                     6
Ball p o in t pens                                                                          6
Coloured crayons                                                                            1 box
Indelible crayons
stapler and staples                                                                         1 pair
Scissors                                                                                    1 roll
Sellotape                                                                                   1
Eraser                                                                                      1 box
Elastic bands                                                                               1 packet
Pins                                                                                         1 packet
Paper clips
Graph paper                                                                                  1
Ball of string
                                                                                                                   X R 380
E Q U IP M E N T F O R D E A L IN G W IT H B O D IE S
                                                                                                1
 Body book                                                                                      25
 Body labels                                                                                    1
 D etained p ro p erty book
 Graph paper                                                                                    2
 C halk block (yellow )                                                                         1
 M arker pen                                                                                    1
 Ball of string                                                                                 1
 A x-i-pax                                                                                      3 pairs
 Protective gloves (disposable polythene)                                                        1
 C lip board                                                                                    50
 F ound p ro p erty labels                                                                       25
  F ound p ro p erty bags
                                                                                                                    XR381
  M O T O R W A Y A C C ID E N T E Q U IP M E N T
                                                                                                    1
  V e h ic le Clearance Officers arm band                                                           1
  V ehicle record book                                                                              50
  Searched vehicle labels                                                                           10
  M o to rw a y accident sheets                                                                     1
  V e h ic le pojnd b ook                                                                           1
  D etain ed p ro p e rty book                                                                      50
  F o u nd p ro p erty labels                                                                       25
   F ound p ro p erty bags                                                                           1
  C lip boards                                                                                       2
  C h alk blocks (ye llo w )




                                                                                                             1417
                                                     Document No.   ^ 0 6   CONT’D
                                                                                       S E C T IO N 25


                                                                                     A P P E N D I X 'A '


                                                                                                Page 3



                                                                                                            X R 382
W E L F A R E A N D ASSEMBLY CENTRE

                                                                                        1
Persons involved book
                                                                                        1
Lost property book
                                                                                        1
Detained p ro p erty book
                                                                                        1
SUP/1 - ruled A 4 pad
                                                                                        2
Casualty record forms book
                                                                                        1
Clip board
                                                                                        50
Found property labels
                                                                                        25
Found property bags
                                                                                         1
D etained property book

L O S T A N D F O U N D P R O P E R T Y O F F IC E

                                                                                         1
Lost p rcoerty book
                                                                                         1
D etained pro p erty book
                                                                                         100
Found pro p erty labels
                                                                                         50
F ound p ro p erty bags (polythene 11' x 16 )
                                                                                         1
Clip board




                                                                                                    1418
                                                       Document No.       20 6   CONT D
                                                                                            S E C T IO N 25


                                                                                          A P P E N D I X 'B'


                                                                                                      Page 1



                                     F O R C E M A J O R IN C ID E N T B O X

                                                                                            2 copies            XR 384
Major Incident Scheme Manual
1" x 1 mile Ordnance Survey Map of South Yorkshire Police Area                               1
Geographia large scale detailed street plan (w ith street index and national grid)
for each of the below districts: —
      Barnsley                                                                               1 copy
      Doncaster                                                                              1 copy
      Rotherham                                                                              1 copy
     Sheffield                                                                               1 copy
Police Press Armbands                                                                       2
Protective Gloves: —
     Heavy d u ty rubber                                                                    6 pairs
      Debris gloves                                                                         6 pairs
Indicator Tape                                                                              2 rolls
B o oklet 'Rescue from Crashed A ircraft'                                                    1
BT telephone directory                                                                       1
Force telephone directory                                                                    1
                                                                                             2 packets
Paper towels

S IG N S : (The reverse of these signs are direction arrows)                                                    X R 385



Refreshment Point                                                                            6
Danger Keep O u t                                                                          12
N o E n try                                                                                12
Recovered Vehicles Area                                                                      6
W elfare Centre                                                                              6
Police Parking Area                                                                          6
Fire Parking Area                                                                            6
A m bulance Parking Area                                                                     6
Police Incident Post                                                                         6
Found Property O ffice                                                                       6

M A J O R IN C ID E N T POST - S T A T IO N E R Y

G E N /2       General Report Form                                                        200                   X R 386

G E N /4       Standard Statem ent Form                                                   200
G E N /5       C JA Statement Form       (plain)                                          200
G E N /6       C JA Statem ent Form      (plain continuation)                             200
G E N /7       C JA Statem ent Form      (lined)                                          200
G E N /8       C JA Statem ent Form      (lined continuation)                             200
G E N /1 1     S tatem ent Form plain    (no t CJA)                                       200
G E N /1 2     S tatem ent Form lined (n o t C JA )                                       200
G E N '21      Incident/Message Reports                                                   200 (2 pads)
RT 7           A ccident Report B ooklet                                                  100
                                                                                            12 pads
S U P /1       A 4 Ruled Pads
S U P /6       Carbons fo r ty p e w rite r — A 4                                          25
S U P /3 2     Envelopes manilla 4 .3 " x 8 .7 "
                                                                                           75
S U P /3 5     Envelopes manilla 12" x 1 0 " plain                                          25
S U P /6 3     Paper — A 4 w h ite wove bond
                                                                                          5 00 sheets
                                                                                          500 sheets
S U P /6 9     Paper — w h ite copy
                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                1419
S U P /5 0     M anilla folders
                                                                      Document No.   2 0 6   CO NT ’D
                                                                                                          S E C T IO N 25


                                                                                                        A P P E N D I X 'B '


                                                                                                                      Page 2




                                                                                                                               XR 337
MAJOR            IN C ID E N T PO ST -          E Q U IP M E N T


I n c id e n t L og B o o k
P e rs o n n e l Log B o o k
P o lic e V e h ic le s R e c o r d B o o k
M em o Books                                                                                               4

G rap h paper
C l i p b o a rd s                                                                                        4

P la in labels                                                                                          200

B u lld o g clip s                                                                                       10

1 5 " ru le                                                                                                1

P encils                                                                                                 24

B all p o i n t pens                                                                                     12

M a r k e r p en s                                                                                        8

C o lo u re d cray o n s                                                                                  6

In d e lib le cray o n s                                                                                   1 box

S ta p le r a n d staples
                                                                                                           1 p a ir            XR 388
Scissors
S e llo ta p e                                                                                             2 ro lls

B all o f s trin g
Erasers                                                                                                    6
                                                                                                           1 box
E la s tic b a n d s
D r a w in g p in s                                                                                        1 box

S t r a ig h t p in s                                                                                      1 packet
                                                                                                           1 box
P a p e r c lip s
P a p e r fa s te n e rs                                                                                   1 box
                                                                                                           1 packet
C h a lk s

                                                                                                                               XR 389
E Q U IP M E N T F O R D E A L IN G W IT H B O D IE S


Body Book
                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                        100
B o d y lab els
D e ta in e d P ro p e rty B o o k
                                                                                                           1
G rap h paper
C h a l k b lo c k s ( y e ll o w )
                                                                                                           6
B all o f s tr in g
                                                                                                           1
M a r k e r p en s
                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                           8 sets
A x -i-p a x
P r o t e c t iv e g lo v e s — p o l y t h e n e d is p o s a b le                                        6 p airs

C l i p b o a rd s
                                                                                                          2
F o u n d p r o p e r t y labels                                                                        100
F o u n d p r o p e r t y bags ( p o l y t h e n e bags 1 1 " x 1 6 " )                                  50




                                                                                                                          1420
                                                                        Document No,   2 0 6   C O N T ’D
                                                                                                              S E C T I O N 25


                                                                                                            A P P E N D I X 'B '


                                                                                                                       Page 3




                                                                                                                                   XR 390
M O T O R W A Y A C C ID E N T E Q U IP M E N T

                                                                                                               1
V e h ic le R e c o rd B o o k
                                                                                                               1
D e ta in e d P ro p e rty B o o k
                                                                                                               1
V e h ic le Pound B ook
                                                                                                            100
S e a r c h e d v e h ic le labels
                                                                                                            100
M o t o r w a y a c c i d e n t sheets
                                                                                                              2
M a r k e r p en s
                                                                                                              2
C l i p b o a rd s
                                                                                                              6
C h a l k b lo c k s ( y e ll o w )
                                                                                                            100
F o u n d p r o p e r t y labels
                                                                                                             50
F o u n d p r o p e r t y bags ( p o l y t h e n e bags 11      x 16     }
X
                                                                                                                                   XR 391
W ELFA R E AN D ASSEMBLY CENTRE

                                                                                                               1
P e rso n s I n v o lv e d B o o k
                                                                                                               1
Lost P ro p e rty B ook
                                                                                                               1
D e ta in e d P ro p e rty B o o k
                                                                                                               2
C a s u a lty R e c o rd F o rm s B o o k
                                                                                                               2
C l i p b o a rd s
                                                                                                                1
F ir s t a id k i t
                                                                                                            100
F o u n d p r o p e r t y labels
                                                                                                             50
F o u n d p r o p e r t y bags ( p o l y t h e n e bags 11       x 16     )


 L O S T A N D F O U N D P R O P E R T Y O F F IC E

                                                                                                               3
    Lost P ro p e rty B ook
                                                                                                               3
 D e ta in e d P ro p e rty B o o k
                                                                                                             100
    F o u n d p r o p e r t y labels
                                                                                                              50
    F o u n d p r o p e r t y bags ( p o l y t h e n e bags 1 1 " x 1 6 " )
                                                                                                               2
    C lip b oa rd s




                                                                                                                              1421
                                                                               Document No.               206          CQNT’D I
                                                                                                                                     *     S E C T IO N 2 5


                                                                                                                                         A P P E N D I X ‘C ’


                                                                                                                                                     Page 1




                     C O M M U N IC A T IO N S C O M M A N D C A R A V A N /G O M B A S T O N E F IE L D
                                                   A N D A S S O C IA T E D E Q U IP M E N T



                                                                                                                                                                  XR 392
L O C A T IO N O F C A R A V A N


C l a y w h e e ls L a n e :    M o b i l e P o lic e S t a t i o n -   f u l l y e q u ip p e d a n d c e n t r a l l y h e a t e d c a ra v a n t o w e d b y
G o m b a S t o n e f i e l d ( C o m m u n i c a t i o n s e a r l y re s p o n s e v e h ic le ) a n d u sed as a c o m m u n i c a t io n s c e n t r e
a t th e scene o f a n y m a jo r i n c id e n t w h e r e a s ta t ic c o n t r o l p o i n t is r e q u ir e d f o r lo n g e r p e rio d s .


C A R A V A N C O M M U N IC A T IO N S E Q U IP M E N T


(a)         R A D IO


               i.       10 channel b ro ad b a n d             VHF
             ii.        UHF         R a d io Base S t a t i o n ( N o t e -     p o c k e t f o n e s a n d b a tte r ie s h e ld a t H Q in
                         C o m m u n ic a tio n s S to re )
            iii.        Pan d a a d a p t o r
            jy_          P o r ta b le r a d io t e l e p h o n e a v a ila b le ( f i t t in g s a n d a e ria l in C o m m a n d S e c tio n
                         o f v e h ic le )
              v.        P u b lic ad d ress s y s te m
             v i.       3 5 fe e t p u m p u p m ast

                                                                                                                                                                  XR 393
(b )        L IG H T IN G A N D PO W ER


             P o w e r ca n b e o b t a in e d b y use o f P o r t a b l e H o n d a G e n e r a t o r c a rr ie d in C a ra v a n o r
             le a d f r o m C a ra v a n p lu g g e d i n t o a n y n e a r b y 2 4 0 v s u p p ly . I m m e d i a t e p o w e r s u p p ly
             b y b a t t e r y f it te d in C a ra v a n .


             F i t t e d c u p b o a r d s a n d d ra w e rs
             F ix e d seatin g
             Paper punch
             S t a p l in g m a c h in e a n d staples
             G as s to ve a n d C a lo r Gas
             K e t t l e a n d c r o c k e r y f o r six p e rs o n s
             F ir s t a id k i t
             S in k w ith h o t/c o ld w a te r
             W a te r c o n ta in e r
             W e l li n g t o n s
             H a n d la m p
             A w n i n g a n d s u p p o rts (c a n be f i t t e d e i t h e r sid e o f C a ra v a n )
             T o o l k it
             T a b le
             S m a l l sp ad e
             D o u b l e lo c k e d F ir e a r m s C a b i n e t
             P r o j e c t o r m a p s a n d screen
             S t r e e t i n d e x o f S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e a re a




                                                                                                                                                            1422
                                                                                     Document No.                206           C O N T ’D

                                                                                                                                                S E C T IO N 2 5


                                                                                                                                             A P P E N D I X 'C '


                                                                                                                                                            Page 2



                                                                                                                                                                         X R 394
G O M B A S T O N E F IE L D - F O R W A R D R E S P O N S E C O M M U N IC A T IO N S V E H IC L E

L O C A T IO N           OF      GOMBA          S T O N E F IE L D :          C la y w h e e ls Lane -            5 . 2 lit r e , f o u r w h e e l d r iv e , a u t o
tra n s m is s io n , f r o n t m o u n t e d w i n c h . S e l f - c o n t a i n e d c o m m u n i c a t io n s v e h ic le f o r q u i c k re sp on s e to
in c id e n ts o r re q u e s ts          fo r c o m m u n ic a tio n s        at    lo c a tio n s n o t r e a d i ly acce ssib le t o c o n v e n t i o n a l
ve hic le s.       L i m i t e d space a v a ila b le . M a y b e u sed i n d e p e n d e n t ly o r in c o n j u n c t i o n w i t h C o m m a n d

C a ra v a n .


G O M B A S T O N E F IE L D E Q U IP M E N T


(a)         R A D IO

                  i.         1 0 channel V H F / U H F              R e p e a te r
                 ii.        U H F R a d i o Base S t a t i o n ( p o c k e t f o n e s a n d b a tt e r ie s            h e ld a t H Q
                             C o m m u n ic a tio n s S to re )
               iii.         Panda a d a p to r
               iv.          P o r t a b l e r a d io t e l e p h o n e a v a ila b le ( f i t t in g s a n d a e ria l as C a r a v a n )

                 v.         4 0 fee t p um p up m ast

                                                                                                                                                                         XR 395
(b )        L IG H T IN G A N D PO W E R


                 I m m e d i a t e p o w e r s u p p ly a v a ila b le f r o m a d d it i o n a l b a t t e r y f i t t e d in v e h ic le o r b y
                 use o f le a d p lu g g e d i n t o a n y c o n v e n i e n t 2 4 0 v s u p p ly .


                 F o l d a w a y seatin g
                 S i n k f i t t e d (c o ld w a t e r -     hand d ra w n )
                 F itte d d raw e rs
                 L i m i t e d s t a t io n e r y a v a ila b le
                 W e l li n g t o n s
                 H a n d la m p
                 T o o l k it
                 N o t i c e b o a rd s
                                                                                                                                                                          XR 396
 C L A R K S T R A IL E R M O U N T E D M A S T


  L O C A T IO N :            C la y w h e e ls Lane


 8 0 f e e t ( p e t r o l e n g in e d r iv e n ) p n e u m a t i c m a s t, t r a il e r m o u n t e d a n d t o w e d b y S t o n e f i e l d w h e n
 feq u fred            M a s t w o u l d b e u sed in c o n j u n c t i o n w i t h U H F Base S t a t i o n s f i t t e d e i t h e r in C a r a v a n
 S t o n e f i e l d o r i n d e p e n d e n t l y w h e r e lo n g e r p e r io d s o f s ta tic c o m m u n i c a t io n s a r e r e q u i r e d . F i t t e d

  w i t h t o o l b o x f o r g u y ro p es, s ta k e s , h a m m e r , e t c .




                                                                                                                                                                     1423
                                                                                    D ocu m en t No. 2 0 6                    C Q N T ’D
                                                                                                                                                   S E C T IO N 26


                                                                                                                                                            Page 1




                                          C R A S H E D A IR C R A F T -                  S P E C IA L M E A S U R E S


T h e fo llo w in g        m i c t i o n . are in a d d i t i o n , 0 an d n o , in s u b s t . t u t . n o . t h e g en eral s e c o n s o f

th is m a n u a l.


F O R C E O P E R A T IO N S R O O M

,       B roadcast           th e     fo llo w in g      in fo rm a t,o n       and      w a r n in g s t o     p ers o n n el    a tte n d in g    th e s c e n e : -


        (a )            if t h e a i r c r a f t is a m i l i t a r y a i r c r a f t a n d is o n f ir e o r an'
                       N O - O N E s h o u ld a p p r o a c h clo ser t h a n 5 0 0 y a r d s e x            p                o r t h e r e is n o
                       f i r e , u n t i l it is c o n f ir m e d t h a t a n u c le a r w e a p o n ,s n o t in v o lv e d , o r th e r e

                        f u r t h e r d an ger fro m e x p lo s io n ;


                        if an a p p r o a c h is n ece ss ary , it s h o u ld be m a d e f r o m u p w i n d ;
        (b )

                        n o - o n e s h o u ld s m o k e a n d t h e s m o k e f r o m fire s s h o u ld b e a v o id e d ;
        (c)

                        a n y p e rs o n w h o a p p r o a c h e s w i t h i n 5 0 0 y a rd s o r passes t h r o u g h s m o k e sh o u ld
         (d )
                         h ave a m e d ic a l c h e c k - u p as s o o n as p ossible;
                                                                                                                                                                           XR 400
                         t h e d is t u r b a n c e o f w r e c k a g e m a y release m o r e               a llo w ^                                " ° to
         (e
                         c e a le d s o u rc e o f i g n i t io n . D i s t u r b a n c e o f w r e c k a g e s h o u ld                 be    lim ite d
                         w h a t e v e r is n ecessary t o e x t r i c a t e o c c u p a n ts a n d / o r e x t in g u i s h fire s .



         (f )



                         a p p r o a c h t o th e fu sela g e s h o u ld b e a lo n g th e w .n g su rfa c e s ,




                          t i g a t i o n a u th o r itie s .

          O p e r a t i o n s R o o m h o ld a f i l e c o n t a i n i n g f u l l in s tr u c tio n s f r o m t h e D e p a r t m e n t o f T r a d e a n d

          t h e R A F o n th is s u b je c t.
                                                                                                                                                                               XR401
           C lo s e th e cras h s ite f o r a ra d iu s o f 4 0 0 t o 8 0 0 y a r d s t o a ll b u t e s s e n tia l services.
    3

           I , a n u c le a r w e a p o n o r o t h e r n u c le a r m a t e r ia l is in v o lv e d m a k e r e f e r e n c e t o t h a t s e c tio n o f
    4
           t h is m a n u a l .                                     *

               I n f o r m t h e A c c i d e n t I n v e s t i g a t i o n B r a n c h o f t h e D e p a r t m e n t o f T r a d e w i t h as m u c h i n f o r -

               m a t i o n as p o s s ib le . T h e i n f o r m a t i o n r e q u .r e d . s t -


               la )        t y p e , n a t i o n a l i t y a n d r e g is tr a t io n   m a r k o f th e a i r c r a f t ;

               (b )        th e n a m e o f th e o w n e r;
               (c)         t h e p e rs o n in c o m m a n d ;

               S                                                                                            p o in t -       i n t e n d e d l e n d in g o , t h e


                            S    o    n      o f t h e a c c i d e n t in r e la t i o n t o s o m e e a s ily d e f i n e d g e o g r a p h ic a l l o c a t i o n             »       «

                             a n d a s ix f ig u r e m a p r e f e r e n c e ;                                                                                           I 4        4
                                                                                D ocum ent No.          2 0 6       CONT’D

                                                                                                                                    S E C T IO N    26

                                                                                                                                              Page 2


                                                                                                                                                              XP 402
                    th e n u r . b e - o f p ersons o n             fo a ro    i n c u d i n g t h e n u m b e r s k ille d an d s e n o u s l,
      ( g )

                    i n ju r e d ;
                    th e n a t u r e o f th e a c c id e n t as fa r as is k n o w n ;
      ( h )

                    b r ie f p a r tic u la r s o f d a m a g e t o th e a ir c r a f t.
      (i)

6     I n f o r m th e C iv il A v ia t io n A i r T r a f f i c C o n t r o l, W e s t D r a y t o n .

7     M IL IT A R Y A IR C R A F T                 - In addition to the above, i n f o r m :


      (a)           M in is try       of     D e fe n c e   A ir   F o r c e O p e r a ti o n s   R o o m .( B R IT I S H    M IL IT A R Y


      (b )          U S A A F , A lc o n b u ry , H u n tin g d o n . ( U N I T E D S T A T E S A I R                   FORCE

                     A IR C R A F T );                                                                       .    .
       (c)           I m p h a l B a rra c k s , Y o r k , f o r m i l i t a r y assistance t o s e c u re t h e site.
                                                                                                                                                              XR 403
8      C IV IL A IR C R A F T -                In a d d it i o n t o p o in t s 1 t o 6 a b o v e , i n f o r m :


       (a)          H M C u s to m s & E x c is e
       (b )         H M I m m i g r a t i o n In s p e c to r .


9      Contact the Airline Operator or the Handling Agent fo r-th .^ p p ly o l'                                                     P ^ n g e r and

        ^              "              ’t l ^         n      *      t£ “                ^          M       and obtain details o. the Airline
         R e p r e s e n ta tiv e .

,0       C o n ta c t R A F         F in n in g le y . D o n c a s t e r . w h o h ave t r a in e d s p e c ia lis ts a n d w i l l assist in c iv il a n d

         m i l i t a r y a c c id e n ts .


11        In f o r m th e C o ro n e r.


12       W h e r e th e r e are m a n y d e a d , c o n t a c t t h e f i r m o f :


                       J H KENYON LTD
                        8 3 W e s tb o u rn e G ro ve
                        LONDON                  W2 4UL

                                   x          e c h n u iH              h e s u o o lie d t o th e P o lic e I n c i d e n t P o s t a n d C a s u a lt y       XR404
13        W ritte n        lists o f passengers s h o u                       ^ should not be a„ owed t o leave t h e scen e, e x c e p t

              f0? Z i L 7 t —                      . u n T th e arrival of Immigration, and Customs & Excise Officers.


    RESCUE PROCEDURES



    d^gns^nd'type^of^aircraft'that'it wc^ld^^m p^Ktotetoljive^ch deflate rescue procedures.

    Adv,ce should be sought from the Military or Civil Aviation Authorities at an early sage.




                                                                                                                                                         I 425
                                                                                        Docum ent No.                   2 0 6       CONT’D
                                                                                                                                                        S E C T IO N 26


                                                                                                                                                                  Page 3



S IT E C O M M A N D E R
                                                                                                                                                                                 X R 405
,        A r r a n g e f o r l o u d h a t e s o r p u b lic address e q u ip m e n t t o b e u sed t o b ra o d c a s t t h e f o ll o w , n g

         s a fe ty m e a s u re s , w h e r e a p p lic a b le , t o persons at th e site:


         (a)            N o p ers o n s h o u ld r e m a in close t o th e a i r c r a f t lo n g e r t h a n necessary.


         (b )           O n l o o k e r s m u s t r e m a in a t least 5 0 0 y a rd s f r o m t h e a i r c r a f t .


         Ic l           S m o k e f r o m t h e a i r c r a f t m u s t b e a v o id e d . A ll p e rs o n s w h o h a v e b e e n s u b je c te d
                         t o su ch s m o k e s h o u ld seek m e d ic a l assistance.


                         W h e r e r a d i o a c t iv it y is k n o w n o r suspected t o b e p r e s e n t, all p ers o n s w h o have
         (d)
                         b e e n w i t h i n 5 0 0 y a rd s o f t h e a i r c r a f t o r d e b ris s h o u ld r e p o r t t o t h e ^                       ^
                         a n d W e l f a r e C e n t r e (g iv e l o c a tio n ) u n t i l in d iv id u a l r a d i a t i o n c h e c k s h ave b een
                         m a d e . T h e r e s h o u ld b e n o s m o k in g , e a tin g o r d r i n k i n g .


         (e)            A n y p e rs o n lea vin g t h e s ite a re a m u s t s u p p ly his n a m e a n d ad d res s t o t h e P o lice

                          I n c i d e n t Post.
                                                                                                                                                                                  XR 406

         s        r     s         s      n            s         r    j r . s                 s       s       s      ’f        - “        S          j    E        S      :
         b e s w it c h e d o f f a n d d o m e s t ic fire s e x tin g u is h e d . D e ta ils o f ev a c u e e s s h o u ld b e r e c o rd e d a n d

          passed t o t h e P o lic e I n c id e n t Post.

          C o n s id e r       th e    d e s i r a b il i t y   of   u s in g   a       h e l ic o p t e r   to    in s p e c t   th e   dam age        p a th   a n d g iv e
          in s t r u c t i o n s t o O p e r a ti o n s R o o m w h o w ill m a k e t h e n ece ss ary a r r a n g e m e n ts .


          P r i o r i t y s h o u ld b e g iv en t o s e c u rin g t h e s ite f r o m o n l o o k e r s a n d p r e v e n t a n y t a m p e r i n g w i t h

          w r e c k a g e o r d e b ris .

          W h ™ a t a la te r stage t h e search o f t h e site a n d crash p a t h is o rg a n is e d , te a m s s h o u ld b e p a n

          t i c u lia r l y b ri i e f h
                                       e rd'p tfp
                                                hHa t t hhey^
                                                          a t t hme v
                                                                    u * m«u s t a v o id t o u 9c h^i n ^
                                                                                                        g a n y w r e c^k a g^e , e x c efae
                                                                                                                                          p t .|fnofro rtm
                                                                                                                                                         h ee dp uwrh
                                                                                                                                                                    pao ts e o


           r d                e                                          b°e“ t a k e n if i« « W                 d .    I . n o m o r e a c c u r a te d e s c r ip t io n ,s

           a v a ila b le , i t s h o u ld b e d e s c rib e d as b e in g p a i n t e d “ D a y g l o * " re d o r o ra n g e .
                                                                                                                                                                                   XR 407
    P O L IC E A T T H E S IT E

    1        C rash ed        a i r c r a f t p re s e n ts d a n g e r f r o m          f i r e , e x p lo s io n s a n d p o s s ib le r a d io a c tiv e m a t e r ia ls




             carry out its firefighting and rescue operations. As soon as possible an area of at least 500
             y a r d s ra d iu s s h o u ld b e c le a re d .

                                             ■ „ th o u i r i n i t v t o keeD u p h i ll a n d u p w i n d o f t h e a i r c r a f t i f pos sible . M o v e -
    2        inform peraons, m th , wonKy^to                                        P                                   P naturally, be avoided. Keep clear
             c ^ t h e a irc ra ft         e n g in e      - ^ " b e w          a r e            o f e r o d i n g c a n n o n shells. e tc . P r e v e n t p e rs o n s

             s m o k in g a n d ensure th a t v eh ic le engines are s w itch ed o f f .

    3        Prevent              any inspection or tampering with the bodies, wreckage or property unless it is
                n e c e s s a ry t o save life.

     4          A s s is t t h e A c c i d e n t In v es tig a tio n B r a n c h b y c o m p ilin g lists o f w itn es se s a n d in itia lly t a k i n g ^ ^

                s t a t e m e n ts .
                                                                          Document No.              2 0 6          CONT D
                                                                                                                                      S E C T IO N 27




                                                        C O L L IE R Y A C C ID E N T S

                                                                                                                                                                XR411
T h e fo llo w in g      in s tr u c tio n s are in a d d it i o n t o t h e ones c o n t a i n e d in th e g en era l s e ctio n s o f th is

m a n u a l.


F O R C E O P E R A IT O N S

        B r o a d c a s t t o S u b -D iv is io n a l C o n t r o l a n d p e rs o n n e l a t t e n d i n g t h e scene t h a t t h e senio* p o lic e
1
        o f f i c e r p r e s e n t s h o u ld liaise w i t h   t h e s e n io r c o l li e r y o f f i c i a l p re s e n t as to. w h a t a c tio n
        p o lic e w i l l t a k e t o assist in t h e o p e r a t i o n o f t h e " B r it i s h C o a l E m e r g e n c y S c h e m e


        O p e ra tio n s     Boom      h ave a c o p y o f th e " B r i t i s h C o a l E m e r g e n c y S c h e m e ';             ^     e ,h E rp " ! ' he
        d e t a i l e d p la n s o f e a c h c o l l i e r y in t h e S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e a r e a . E ac    p

        C o n t r o l P o in t .
                                                                           Document No. 2 0 6                     CONT’D
                                                                                                                                    S E C T IO N 28




                                                                   EXPLOSIVES

                                                                                                                                                              XR 412
T h e s e : o w t e e d ( m ^ c B o n , are in a d d i ti o n to and no, in ^ s t i t u t i o n • « * • » £ *
c o n ta in e d in t n is m an u a l. T h e y a p p iy to M a j o r Incidents caused b y                      e
p la ce d e x p lo s iv e s .


F O R C E O P E R A T IO N S R O O M


,       Operations           Room will inform Sub-Divisional Control and
        is n ece ss ary t o l o o k o u t f o r o t h e r d e v ic e s w h i c h m a y h ave b e e n p o s .t . o n e d t o d e t o n a t e w h e
        r e s c t ie   operation^       are taking place. If any are found the vicinity must be cleared and
        O p e ra tio n s R o o m in fo rm e d .

2       In fo rm       th e J o in t   S e r v ic e E x p lo s iv e O r d n a n c e D is p o s a l O r g a n is a t io n o f f u ll d e ta ils o f t h e
         Inadent and                          them « report to the Police Incident Post. Arrange rendezvous and
         e s c o rt t h e t e a m t o t h e site.
                                                                                                                                                              XR 413
3       If further devices or suspected devices are found. Operations Room win ensure that Sub-
         Divisional Control and personnel at the site are aware of emergency procedures.

         In particular there must be a warning against the use of radio equipment within 100 metres
         o f t h e i n c i d e n t s ite. C o n s u lt F o r c e S t a n d in g O r d e r   23F.

 4       I n f o r m C r im in a l In v e s tig a t io n D e p a r t m e n t p e rs o n n e l, in a c c o r d a n c e w i t h t h e list m a in t a i n e d

         in O p e r a t i o n s R o o m , w h o w i l l in v e s tig a te t h e i n c id e n t.


 5      C o n s id e r    c a llin g   fo r    th e   assistance o f         F o r e n s ic S c ie n tis ts a n d   e x p e rts fro m      th e   Royal
          A r m a m e n t R e se arc h a n d D e v e l o p m e n t E s ta b lis h m e n t.




                                                                                                                                                        1428
                                                                                   Document No. 2 0 6                  CO NT’D
                                                                                                                                           S E C T IO N 29


                                                                                                                                                      Page 1




                                                                           F L O O D IN G

                                                                                                                                                                     X R 415
F lo o d i n g    is r a r e ly     c o n f in e d    to    a sm all      area ;    it   is u su a lly   w id e s p re a d b u t th e r e j s
p r e v io u s w a r n i n g o f it, a n d r a r e ly d o e s it assu m e M a , o r I n c id e n t p r o p o r t i o n s j n t h , ;
f l o o d in g is m o s t lik e ly to o c c u r as a re s u lt o f h e a v y r a in fa ll (o r s n o w ) c                  a    u     s    m      of     ve
a n d / o r f l o o d i n g o f l o w ly in g areas w h e n n o r m a l d ra in a g e s y s te m s b K o m e 'n^                 a“ r ’
p o s s ib le t h a t E a s t C o a s t h ig h tid e s c o u ld re s u lt in a flo o d in g s i t u a t i o n in t h e D o n c a s .e r area.


T h e riv e rs l i k e l y t o f lo o d in o u r F o r c e a r e a a re th e R ive rs D o n . R o t h e r a n d S h « f . T h e r e a r e a
n u m b e r o f flo o d           level m o n i t o r i n g p o i n t s w h e r e t h e e x a c t w a t e r level c a n b e e s ta b lis h e d ,

p o i n t s a r e as f o l l o w s : —

                                                                                                                                                                     XR 416
R IV E R R O T H E R , C A T C L IF F E , R O T H E R H A M


T o a s c e rta in t h e w a t e r level, t e l e p h o n e           0246-450687.             A d d t h e n u m b e r o f b e lls     <f“ ^       ndbuzzes
(in c h e s ) t o 1 8 9 f e e t to a s c e rta in t h e c u r r e n t w a t e r level. A p r e l i m i n a r y w a r n i n g           w . be     * u e d by
Y o r k s h i r e W a t e r w h e n t h e level re a c h e s            198 f e e t a n d risin g. Ani         a c tio n w a r m n '                         ^
Y o r k s h i r e W a t e r w h e n t h e level re a c h e s           199.5 f e e t . O c c u p a n t s o f   hou ses a d | o i n i   g    g
a n d S h e f f i e l d L a n e sh o u ld b e w a r n e d o f p o s sib le f lo o d in g .


R IV E R D O N , N E E P S E N D , S H E F F IE L D


T o a s c e rta in t h e w a t e r level t e l e p h o n e S h e f f i e l d             344404.    T h e a m o u n t o f w a te ^         boveI ™      ™      '*
in d i c a te d   b y b e lls ( f e e t ) an d b u z z e s ( in c h e s ). I f t h e h e ig h t a b o v e n o r m a l e x c e e d s         2   fe e t n o t . f y

Y o rk s h ir e W a te r.

                                                                                                                                                                      XR417
 R IV E R D O N — R IV E R S H E A F , B L O N K S T R E E T , S H E F F IE L D


T h e r e is a m a r k e r o n t h e w a ll v i e w e d f r o m B l o n k S t r e e t ac ro ss t o w a r d s C a « l e g a t e i n d ic a tin g t h e
w a t e r le v e l. T h e d a n g e r level is 1 4 7 . 5 f e e t . W h e n i t e x c e e d s t h is , n o t i f y Y o r k s h i r e W a t e r .


 R IV E R D O N , C H A N T R Y B R ID G E , R O T H E R H A M


 T h e r e is a m a r k e r o n t h e w a ll a g a in s t C h a n t r y b rid g e i n d ic a tin g t h e w a t e r le v e l. I n f o r m Y o r k s h ir e
 W a t e r w h e n t h e level re ac he s 7 5 f e e t a n d t h e r e a f t e r a t in te rv a ls o f 6 in c h e s


 R IV E R D O M , L O N G S A N D A L , D O N C A S T E R


 W h e n t h e r i v e r level is 3 0 f e e t a t S t M a r y ’s B rid g e , Y o r k s h i r e W a t e r w i l l n o t i f y t h e P o lic e , g iv in g

 o n e o f t h e f o l l o w i n g w a r n in g s : —

          1            R iv e r s te a d y ,         no    ris k   o f f l o o d in g    unless p re v a ilin g    c o n d itio n s w orsen o r a

                       b r e a c h o c c u rs in t h e f l o o d b a n k .


          2            R iv e r risin g , gives a m a x i m u m o f s ix h o u rs w a r n i n g b e f o r e o v e r t o p p in g o f th e

                        f l o o d b a n k s o cc u rs .

                                                                                                                                                                       XR418
  P o lic e A c t i o n :



  r   nPtheClevef8re^hes^35 feet Yorkshrie Water will inform the Police and Doncaster
  Metropolitan Borough Council giving one of the following warnings:
                                                                                                                                                                 1429
                                                                               D ocu m en t No. 2 0 6                     C O N T 'D
                                                                                                                                              S E C T IO N 29


                                                                                                                                                         Page 2



                                                                                                                                                                   XR 418
        1           R i v e r s te a d y -       a o e n e ra l a c tio n w a r n in g w ill n o t be given unless c o n d it io n s
                                    „     a b re a c h o c c u rs in th e f l o o d b a n k , in w h , c h case flo o d                     ,m m ,n e n ,

                    w a r n in g s w ii! be g iv en .

        2           R iv e r rising -         issue f l o o d i m m i n e n t w a r n in g t o areas a t ris k (using loc al press,

                    ra d io , p u b lic ad d res s in m o b ile s , e tc .)
                                                                                                                                                                   XR 419
R IV E R S H E A F , H E E L E Y B R ID G E , S H E F F IE L D


T h e level w i l l b e m o n i t o r e d b y t h e c o u n c il d e p o t a t                      o ^ c e w in rece'ive t h e f o l l o w i n g
Y o r k s h i r e W a t e r ra in gauge a t D o r e . I f f l o o d in g is i m m i n e n t t h e p o lic e w i l l re c e iv e

w a rn in g s :—

        1            P r e l im in a r y W a r n i n g      -    R iv e r S h e a f a t 5 4 . 9 0 m e tr e s         a n d rising.       F lo o d i n g a t

                     H e e l e y B rid g e i m m i n e n t .

        2           A c t i o n W a r n in g -        R i v e r S h e a f a t 5 5 . 0 5 m e tre s a n d risin g . F l o o d i n g a t H e e le y

                     B r id g e a n d B r o a d f i e l d R o a d c o m m e n c i n g .


        3           Cancel M e s s a g e - R iv e , Sheaf a t                 ..............   m e tr e s a n d fa l l in g . F l o o d i n g a , H e e l e y

                      B r id g e u n l i k e l y u n les s f u r t h e r ra in .
                                                                                                                                                                    XR 420
 GRANGE LANE, BARNSLEY


 I f f l o o d i n g o c c u rs a t th is p o i n t i n f o r m : —


            1         Y o rk s h ir e W a te r
            2         H ig h w a y s D e p a r t m e n t
            3          B a rn s le y C le a n s in g D e p a r t m e n t


 P o lic e A c t i o n :

            1         C h e c k o n t h e w a t e r le v e ls a c c o r d in g t o t h e m e t h o d s                 o u t l i n e d in t h i s s e c tio n .


            2         W hen       flooding is imminent o r o cc u rs , i n f o r m Y o r k s h i r e W a t e r .


            3         M a i n t a i n a log.


            4              I n f o r m lo c a l press a n d r a d i o .


            5           inform t h e a p p r o p r i a t e H ig h w a y s .

                6          C o n s u lt t h e Y o r k s h i r e W a t e r R iv e rs D iv is io n " F l o o d W a r n i n g S e r v ic e "
                        d o c u m e n t , a c o p y o f w h i c h is h e ld in O p e r a ti o n s R o o m .


   O p e r a t i o n s R o o m h a v e a s t a n d b y c a ll o u t lis t f o r t h e S o u t h e r n A r e a o f Y o r k s h i r e W a t e r d u r in g

   p e r io d s o f f l o o d in g .




                                                                                                                                                                  1430
                                                                                       Document No. l.              0 6           CONTD 1               S E C T IO N 30


                                                                                                                                                                      Page 1




                                               R A IL A C C ID E N T S -                  S P E C IA L M E A S U R E S

                                                                                                                                                                                   XR 423
T h e b e lo w       lis te c in s tr u c t io n s are in a d d it i o n , an d n o t in s u b s t i t u t i o n o f t h e in s tru c tio n s c o n ­

t a in e d in t h e g en era l s e c tio n s o f th is m a n u a l.


The      o rim e     r e s p o n s ib ilit y    in c o n n e c t i o n , w i t h a c c id e n ts o n t h e r a i l w a y rests u p o n t h e r a il w a y
o p e ra tin g     sta ff an d        th e     B r itis h    T ran sp o rt          P o lic e   in a c c o r d a n c e w i t h       th e ir o w n         ms r u c t r o      ^
How ever           it is l i k e l y t h a t m e m b e r s o f o u r F o r c e w i l l b e f . r s t o n sc e n e a n d t h e y m u s t as su m e

c o n t r o l u n t i l r e lie v e d b y a re s p o n s ib le r a i l w a y o f f ic ia l.


F O R C E O P E R A T IO N S R O O M


,        in fo rm      th e    S h e ffie ld       Power Box                S u p e r v is o r o f B r itis h      R a il        S h ,A f ie ld or
         C o n t r o l o f t h e B r itis h T r a n s p o r t P o lic e a t L ee d s a b o u t t h e m c i d e n t . e v e n th o u g h p r o b a b l y

         u n c o n firm e d .

2        S u b -d iv is io n a l c o n t r o l a n d o f fic e r s a t t e n d i n g t h e sc en e s h o u ld b e m a d e a w a r e o f t h e f o l ­

         lo w in g :—
                                                                                                                                                                                   X R 424
                      A c tio n       m ust       be     tak en          im m e d ia te ly      to    p rev en t fu r th e r danger b y                   w a r n in g
          (a)
                      a p p r o a c h in g tr a in s . I n a d d i t i o n t o re d flags a n d h a n d la m p s c a n .s to rs o f d e t o n ­
                      a to r s a r e c a r r ie d (u s u a lly in a b la c k le a th e r h a v e rs a c k ) b y a ll f ^ t P la te ^ re^                            and
                       r a i l w a y g u a rd s . D e t o n a t o r s a re also s to re d in signal b o x e s a n d s o m e p la t e la y e r

                       c a b in s .

                       A l l o b s tr u c t e d lin e s m u s t b e p r o t e c t e d O N T H E A P P R O A C H S I D E o f t h e scene

                       b y p la c in g d e t o n a t o r s as f o l l o w s : -


                          i.     o ne d e to n a to r a q u a rte r o f a m ile fro m th e o b s tru c tio n ;
                         ii      o n e d e to n a t o r h a lf a m ile fr o m th e o b s tru c tio n .
                        iii.    th re e d e to n a to rs 2 0               ya rd s a p a rt, o ne m ile             fro m         th e    o b s t r u c t io n .


                       T r a c k c i r c u i t o p e r a t in g c lip s a re c a r r ie d in e v e r y d r iv e r 's c a b . T h e y c o m p ris e
                        t w o m e t a l c lip s w h i c h are w i d e e n o u g h t o c lip o n t o t h e l i n e a n d areJ ° ,n ^                                 bY
                        p ie c e o f y e l l o w p la s tic c o v e re d w ir e . W h e n fa s t e n e d t o t h e t r a c k it in d ic a te s ,
                        t h e signal s y s te m , t h a t t h e r e is a n o b s tr u c t io n o n t h e t r a c k .

                                                                                                                                                                                    X R 425
                        W h e n t h e r a i l w a y t r a c k co n sists o f d o u b le lin es , t h e a d j a c e n t lin e is n o r m a l l y
                         used b y t r a in s t r a v e llin g in t h e o p p o s ite d ir e c t i o n . L in e Pr o t e ^ ° "                            s b o u ld ^
                         c a r r ie d o u t f i r s t o n t h e a d j a c e n t lin e (s ) b ecau se t h e l i n e o n w h i c h t h e t r a m
                         its e lf     w as     ru n n in g       w o u ld      n o rm a lly      be p r o t e c t e d       by     th e   s ig n a llin g s y ste m .
                         H o w e v e r , in t h e case o f d e r a i l m e n t th is t r a c k s h o u ld also b e p r o t e c t e d .


                         A lth o u g h         B r itis h       R a il   s t a ff   are     re s p o n s ib le   fo r      c a rry in g    out       th e s e      s a fe ty
                         m e a s u re s , t h e f i r s t p o lic e o f f i c e r a t t h e scene s h o u ld e n s u re thait a n y
                         s a f e t y a c t io n is t a k e n , in c lu d in g t h e is o la tio n o f o v e r h e a d e l e c t r i f i e d lin es . S u c h
                         o f f ic e r s m u s t k e e p a s h a rp l o o k o u t f o r a p p r o a c h in g t r a in s .


                          In    each         g u a rd s v a n      or    c o m p a rtm e n t         is a   la d d e r ,     a   to o l    cup bo ard           and an
            (b )
                          a m b u l a n c e b o x s u i t a b ly m a r k e d w i t h w h i t e le t t e r s o n a re d b a c k g r o u n d . T h e
                          t o o l c u p b o a r d c o n t a i n s h a n d t o o ls a n d c r o w b a r s .


                          D e t a i ls o f t h e b e s t access r o u te s s h o u ld b e o b t a in e d as a m a t t e r o f u rg e n c y .
             (c)

                                                                                                                                                                               143
                                                                          Docum ent No. 2 0 6                   C O N T 'D
                                                                                                                                   S E C T IO N 30


                                                                                                                                              Page 2



                                                                                                                                                           XR 426
3    N o t i f y Br i ti sh Tr a n s po r t Police.

4    S p e c ia l s a f e t y m easures m a y b e necessary a t t h e site if th e t r a in                     was c a rr y in g a d a n g e ro u s
      lo a d such as p e tr o l o r ex p lo s iv e s . N o m i n a t e an o f f i c e r t o a s c e rta in d e ta ils o f t h e load c a rr ie d .


5     N o m i n a t e an o f f ic e r t o r e p o r t t h e p o s itio n o f t h e n e a re s t b r id g e a n d / o r signal b o x in r e la t io n
      to t h e crash p o i n t t o g e t h e r w i t h t h e i d e n t i f i c a t i o n n u m b e r m a r k e d o n such b rid g e o r signal

      box.

                                                                                                                                                           XR 42?
S IT E C O M M A N D E R


1    E n s u re t h a t th e scene has b e e n p r o t e c t e d f r o m o t h e r tra in s .


2    E s ta b lis h c o n t a c t an d lia iso n w i t h t h e s e n io r B r itis h R a il o f f ic ia l     a n d t h e B r itis h T r a n s p o r t

      P o lic e o f f ic e r .


3    A r r a n g e f o r a s e n io r d e t e c t iv e o f f i c e r t o in v e s tig a te t h e i n c i d e n t in lia is o n w i t h t h e B r itis h
     T r a n s p o r t P o lic e , b e a rin g in m i n d t h e p o s s ib ility o f s a b o ta g e , e tc . S u c h in v e s tig a tio n m u s t n o t
      in t e r f e r e w i t h t h e rescue o p e r a t io n s o r t h e c le a rin g o f t h e lin es f o r r e s u m p t io n o f n o r m a l

      services.


4    W h e r e a l t e r n a t i v e t r a n s p o r t a r r a n g e m e n ts h ave b e e n m a d e , d e t a i l o f fic e r s t o o b t a in n a m e s
      a n d addresses o f A L L u n i n ju r e d passengers a n d t h e i r in t e n d e d d e s t in a t io n s b e f o r e t h e y leave
      t h e scene. A l l such i n f o r m a t i o n t o b e passed t o t h e C a s u a lty E n q u i r y B u re a u .




                                                                                                                                                     1432
                                                                                  Document No.                2 0 6       CONT’D
                                                                                                                                             S E C T IO N 30


                                                                                                                                                        Page 3



                                                                                                                                                                      XR 428
S A F E T Y O N O R N E A R R A I L W A Y L IN E S


1     F o r s a f e t y reason s p o lic e o f f ic e r s ( i n c lu d in g B r itis h T r a n s p o r t P o lic e o ffic e rs ) m u s t n o t go

     o n o r n e a r r a i l w a y lines unless a b s o lu t e ly nece ss ary .


2     If i, b e c o m e s n ecessary t o go o n o r n e a r r a i l w a y lines, p o lic e o f f ic e r s s h o u l d ' a l w a y s * . a w a r e
     o f t h e h a z a r d s w h i c h c a n a ris e f r o m t h e m o v e m e n t o f tr a m s ; e l e c t r i f i e d “                 nducw r n » l °
     o v e r h e a d p o w e r lines; r e m o t e l y o p e r a t e d p o i n t s a n d r e s tr ic te d c le a ra n c e s o n b ridg es a
     c u ttin g s . It       is esse ntial t h a t o f f ic e r s m a i n t a i n c o n s t a n t v ig ila n c e a n d a v o id tra in s a n d e le c

     t r ic a l e q u i p m e n t w h e n o n o r n e a r t h e r a il w a y .


3    W h e n e v e r p o s s ib le p e rm is s io n m u s t b e o b t a in e d f r o m t h e r a i l w a y             a u th o ritie s   b e f o r e g o in g o
     o r n e a r ra“ w a y lin es a n d a d e c is io n m u s t b e t a k e n in c o n j u n c t i o n w i t h t h e r a il w a y a u t h -

     o r i t ie s c o n c e r n e d w h e t h e r tr a in s n e e d t o b e s to p p e d .


4    W h e n e v e r c ir c u m s ta n c e s p e r m i t , t h e p o lic e o f f i c e r m a k i n g t h e i n i t i a l c ^ t a c |                                   * R429
      R a il m u s t a r r a n g e f o r a l o o k o u t m a n t o b e p r o v i d e d . T h i s c a n b e                                w ,th th e
      local r a i l w a y o f f i c i a l , o r in case o f d i f f i c u l t y w i t h t h e n o m i n a t e d r a i l w a y c o n t a c t p o in ts

      le

      B A R N S L E Y /S H E F F I E L D /R O T H E R H A M /                                             Leeds O p e ra tio n s C e n tre

      M E X B O R O U G H areas                                                                                            ^
      D O N C A S T E R a re a                                                                            D o n c a s te r O p e ra tio n s C e n tre


      C o n ta c t s h o u ld b e m a d e w it h               F o rc e O p e ra tio n s R o o m             who w i l l m a k e                        co n ta^
      w i t h t h e n o m i n a t e d r a il w a y c o n t a c t p o i n t as a b o v e , a ll o f w h i c h a re m a n n e d 2 4 h o u rs . T h e
      c o n t a c t p o i n t s h ave d ir e c t t e l e p h o n e l in k s w i t h signal b o x e s a n d e le c t r ic t r a c t i o n p o w e r

      c o n tro l ro o m s.

      T h e n o m i n a t e d c o n t a c t p o i n t w i l l n e e d t o b e g iv e n a b r i e f o u t l i n e o f t h e
      t o g e t h e r w i t h reason s w h y it is e s se n tial f o r t r a in s t o b e s to p p e d                     or e l e c t r . c t r a c t , o n p ° ^
      t o b e s w i t c h e d o f f , o r w h y p o lic e o f f ic e r s n e e d t o b e o n t h e lin e . O n r e c e ip t o f

       m a tio n th e c o n ta c t p o in t w il l : —

                                                                                                                                                                        XR430
       (a)        b e a b l e t o m a k e su ch a c t io n as is n ecessary t o f a c il i t a t e t h o s e re q u e s ts ,
       (b )       c o n fir m       to O p e ra tio n s R o o m            w h e n tr a in s h a v e b e e n s t o p p e d , e l e c t r i c p o w e r

                   s w itc h e d o f f , etc ;                                                                .
       (c )       a d v is e B r itis h T r a n s p o r t P o lic e H e a d q u a r t e r s I n f o r m a t i o n R o o m .


       T h e f o l l o w i n g p r e c a u t io n s m u s t b e t a k e n w h e t h e r o r n o t a B r itis h T r a n s p o r t P o lic e O f f i c e r
       or     a   ra ilw a y      e m p lo y e e      is p r e s e n t, as it          is a p p r e c i a t e d   th a t th e re   a re o c c a s io n s w h e

       i m m e d i a t e access is v it a l:

       (a )       I f p r a c t ic a b l e , o f f ic e r s s h o u ld w a l k a t t h e sid e o f t h e l in e f a c in g t h e d i r e c t i o n
                    o f o n c o m i n g t r a in s w h e r e k n o w n . I f i t b e c o m e s n ecessary t o cross o v e r a lin e ,

                    t h e o f f i c e r s h o u ld


                       i.      a v o i d crossin g a t p o i n t s a n d j u n c t i o n s ;
                     ii.        m a k e su re t h e lin es a r e c le a r;
                                c ro s s q u i c k l y a v o i d i n g s te p p in g o n a n y ra ils as o n s o m e lin e s a t h i r d
                    i ii .
                                ra il c a rrie s a n e l e c t r i c c u r r e n t .


                                                                                                                                                                      1433
                                                                D o cu m en t No. 2 0 6                       D        S E C T IO N 30


                                                                                                                                 Page 4



                                                                                                                                          XR 430
             M o d e r n tra in s can a p p r o a c h , p o s s ib ly f r o m e ith e r d ir e c t i o n , a t h igh speed w it h
             ve ry   tinie   noise. Even a f t e r b ra k e s are a p p lie d , tra in s m a y tra v e l u p t o a m ile
             b e f o r e c o m in g to a h a lt. A l t h o u g h m o s t tra in s are f i t t e d w it h h e a d lig h ts , th e re
             are still s o m e f i t t e d w it h d im lig h ts o n l y .

                                                                                                                                          X R 431
     (b)     Vigilance must be maintained at all times and special care exercised in areas of
             restricted clearance —eg bridges, cuttings, etc.

     (c)     Officers should not enter tunnels or cross viaducts etc. unless satisfied that
             train movements have been stopped, or lookout protection has been provided
             by the railway.

     (d)     When it becomes necessary for a police officer to go on to or in close proximity
             to railway lines, he should (if necessary) call for the assistance of a police unit
             carrying a high visibility tabard, in addition to asking for the assistance of rail­
             way staff.
                                                                                                                                          XR 432
     A police officer must not question or distract any signalman, driver or guard who is on duty.
     A police officer must not enter any signal box except in instances of extreme danger as
     disturbances of concentration might lead to further complications. If it is not possible to
     wait until that person concerned has finished duty, the police officer must arrange for the
     person to be properly relieved. At the scene of an incident the officer must contact the
     senior railway official present or, in other circumstances, the British Rail Area Manager
     responsible for the person concerned.

     Following an incident on or adjacent to railway lines, it wHI take several m i n u t e s after the
     request for train movements to be stopped a n d electrical supplies isolated. Cutting off the
     electric traction power will not stop all trains, as some trains using the same l i n e may use
     diesel traction. Trains may also continue to coast after power hasJieen cut off. Therefore
     it is essential that adequate lookout protection be maintained and necessary precautions
     taken against electrocution.

     Before taking further action it must be assumed that the electrical supply will still be 'live'                                       XR433
     and that train movements are likely to continue until assurance is received from the nomin­
     ated railway contact point that the current is off and (if necessary) all trams on that sect(on
     of line have been halted by the railway authorities.

10   If it is necessary to rescue an injured person on rolling stock close to overhead electric
     power lines, an officer should not allow (because of the dangers of arcing) any part of his
     body to come within TWO FEET of any live electrical equipment, broken or displaced
     wires or foreign matter such as rope that is in contact with overhead electrical equipment.
     Officers should not climb above the interior floor level of locomotives or carnages, or into
     wagons or freight vehicles unless the overhead electrical power lines have been isolated.
                                                                                                                                           XR434
      If trains have been stopped, or electrical traction power switched off, it is essential that.all
11
      D arties involved are left in no doubt when trains are likely to b e moving again or electrical
      power is to be restored. Before any police officer Subsequently tells the senior railway
      officer at the scene, or the nominated railway contact point (when a railway official is not
      p re s e n t), that trains may restart and/or the electrical traction power be restored, the police
      off icer must ensure that everyone who has been involved is clear of the lines and is told that
      normal working is being resumed. If British Transport Police are in attendance, the senior
      officer present of that Force is responsible for ensuring that these procedures are carried
      out The officer responsible for requesting the restoration of services must also ensure that
                                                                        D ocu m en t No. 2 0 6                  C O N T ’D
                                                                                                                                    S E C T IO N 30


                                                                                                                                               Page 5



                                                                                                                                                            X R 434
Operations R o c m                is i n f o r m e d t h a t n o r m a l w o r k i n g .s b e m g r e s u m e d . W h e n e l e c t r i c t r a c t i o n
p o w e r has be en s w i t c h e d o f f , t h e r e q u e s t t o resto re p o w e r M U S T be f r o m t h e per son w h o

r e q u e s t e d it t o be s w i t c h e d o f f .

                                                                                                                                                            X R 435
How ever          if t h e re q u e s t t o s w itc h o f f t h e e le c tr ic t r a c t i o n p o w e r c a m e f r o m a p o l i c e o f f ic e r ,
b u t t h e p o w e r is u n l i k e l y t o b e r e s to re d f o r a le n g t h y p e r io d -                  eg a s e rio u s in c id e n t
b e f o r e t h a t p o lic e o f f ic e r leaves t h e scene f o r a n y reason h e m u s t r e p o r t t o t h e p o l i c e o t t i c e r
in c h a rg e o f t h e i n c id e n t . T h e p o lic e o f f i c e r in c h a rg e o f t h e i n c id e n t m u s t t h e n liaise w i t h
t h e s e n io r r a i l w a y o f f ic ia l p r e s e n t in o r d e r t o a l l o w t h e o f f i c e r t o lea ve t h e sc en e w i t h o u t
t h e e l e c t r i c p o w e r h av in g b e e n r e s to r e d . W h e n a p o lic e o f f i c e r leaves an i n c i d e n t in c i r c u m ­
s ta nc es d e s c rib e d a b o v e h e s h o u ld e n s u re t h a t O p e r a ti o n s R o o m is a d v is e d .

                                                                                                                                                            XR436
U n le s s t h e r e is g o o d re as o n t o s u s p e c t t h a t a c r im e is in v o lv e d , a d e a d b o d y o n t h e lin e m u s t
b e m o v e d as q u i c k l y as p o s sib le in o r d e r t o e n a b le rail services t o b e r e s u m e d a n d tb u s m i n i ­
m is e    d is r u p t i o n .   If,   fo r a n y     re a s o n   o th e r th a n    c r im e   b e in g s u s p e c te d ,   it   is c o n s id e re d
n e c e s s a ry t o p h o t o g r a p h a b o d y a t t h e scen e, it s h o u ld b e m o v e d c le a r o f t h e lin e a n d n o t
l e f t in p o s it i o n , p e n d in g t h e a r riv a l o f a p h o t o g r a p h e r . I f c r im e is n o t s u s p e c te d , a p o lic e
o f f i c e r s h o u ld n o t r e q u ir e a b o d y t o b e l e f t in p o s itio n o n t h e r u n n in g lin e .


B y t h e v e r y n a tu r e o f fa ta l a c c id e n ts o n r a i l w a y lines, b o d ie s a re o f t e n d is m e m b e r e d a n d
p a r t s o f t h e b o d y sp read o u t o v e r c o n s id e r a b le d is ta n c e s . W h e n b o d ie s o r l im b s are m o v e d
c le a r o f t h e lines, t r a in w il l o f t e n r e s t a r t a n d ru n n o r m a l l y .


A L L PERSONS ON THE TR A C K M UST                                       R E M A IN V IG IL A N T A S T O T H E IR O W N A N D

O TH E R PERSONS' SA FETY.
                                                                                   D ocum ent No.          £ 0 6         CONT’D                  S E C T IO N 31


                                                                                                                                                              Page 1




                       IN C ID E N T S IN V O L V IN G N U C L E A R /R A D IO -A C T IV E M A T E R IA L S

                                                                                                                                                                              XR A
ACTION BY REPORTING OFFICER

1       IM M E D IA T E L Y             info rm      a p p r o p r ia t e c o n t r o l w h o w ill a r ra n g e f o r t h e n ecessary te c h n ic a l

        a d v ic e a n d h e lp . I n c lu d e in t h e r e p o r t : —


        (a)          t h e lo c a t io n a n d n a t u r e o f t h e in c id e n t;
        (b )         as m u c h i n f o r m a t i o n as c a n b e o b t a in e d a b o u t t h e n a t u r e a n d q u a n t i t i e s o f th e
                     r a d io a c t iv e     m a t e r ia ls a n d      th e   n a m e , address a n d         te le p h o n e      num ber         o f th e

                     c o n s ig n o r.                                                                         . .
                     N O T E - T h e d r i v e r o f a n y v e h ic le c o n c e r n e d a n d a n y e s c o rt m a y b e a
                     assist.       In      a d d itio n ,      m any      v e h ic le s are      m arked      e x te r n a lly     to    in d i c a t e     th e
                     su b s ta n c e c a r r ie d a n d t h e asso ciated dan gers. O t h e r v e h ic le s m a y h a v e c a rd s
                     d is p la y e d in th e c a b g iv in g d e ta ils o f t h e su b s ta n c e a n d t h e a c t io n t o b e t a k e n
                       in t h e e v e n t o f an a c c id e n t ;
        (c )           A m b u l a n c e a n d F i r e S e r v ic e t o b e i n f o r m e d , b e a r in g in m i n d t h a t t h e F ir e
                     S e r v ic e p e rs o n n e l are t r a in e d in t h e i d e n t i f i c a t i o n o f t o x i c a n d o t h e r d a n g e ro u s

                       su b stan ces.

                                                                                                                                                                              XR
2       T ry     t o re s c u e a n y o n e t r a p p e d in t h e w r e c k a g e a n d r e m o v e a n y o n e in j u r e d w i t h as l it t l e
        p h y s ic a l c o n t a c t as p o s s ib le . T a k e a n y m e as ures necessary t o save l if e , in c lu d in g t h e re m o v a l
        of     S E R IO U S L Y            IN J U R E D       t o h o s p ita l. ( I n f o r m   th e a m b u la n c e d riv e r o f th e n a tu re and
        q u a n t i t y o f t h e ra d io a c tiv e m a t e r i a l , if k n o w n ) . M i n o r c a s u a ltie s a n d p ers o n s w h o m a y b e
        c o n t a m i n a t e d b u t are n o t in j u r e d s h o u ld b e is o la te d a n d r e m a in a t t h e sc en e u n t i l e x p e r t

        assista n c e is o b t a in e d .


3        D o n o t a t t e m p t t o o m u c h u n t i l e x p e r t h e lp o r a d v ic e is o b t a in e d .


4        K e e p t h e g en eral p u b l ic as fa r f r o m t h e scene as p o s s ib le u n t i l a q u a l i f i e d p e rs o n                         has m a d e a
         s u rv e y a n f in d ic a te d d e m a r c a t i o n b o u n d a rie s . T h i s area a r o u n d j h . iin cid en t s h o u ld b e a t
         lea st 5 0 y a r d s ( 4 5 m e tr e s ) a n d a n y o n e n e a r t h e sc en e s h o u ld b e U P W I N D .


5        Do      not     a llo w    anyone          to      e a t,   d rin k   o r sm oke        in th e a re a b e ca u se o f            t h e p o s s ib ilit y       of
         in g e s t io n o f r a d io -a c tiv e p a r t ic le s a n d t h e d a n g e r o f e x p lo s io n .


6        D o n o t r e la x s u p e rv is io n o f t h e s ite u n t i l t h e e x p e r ts h ave g iv e n c le a r a n c e .

                                                                                                                                                                               XR
A C T IO N A T S U B -D IV IS IO N A L C O N T R O L


    1    I m m e d i a t e l y d ir e c t w h a t e v e r assistance is r e q u ir e d t o t h e scen e.


    2    Im m e d ia te ly         in fo rm        F orce        O p e ra tio n s    Room         of   th e    i n c id e n t    g iv in g t h e i n f o r m a t i o n

          o b t a i n e d f r o m t h e r e p o r t i n g o f f i c e r , v iz .


          (a )          t h e lo c a t io n a n d n a t u r e o f t h e in c id e n t ;
          (b )          as m u c h i n f o r m a t i o n as c a n b e o b t a in e d a b o u t t h e n a t u r e a n d q u a n t i t i e s o f t h e
                         r a d io - a c tiv e m a t e r i a ls a n d t h e n a m e , a d d res s a n d t e l e p h o n e n u m b e r o f t h e c o n ­

                         s ig n o r, if t h e m a t e r i a l is in t r a n s it .


    3    I n f o r m t h e D iv is io n a l O f f i c e r a n d a p p r o p r ia t e S u b -D iv is io n a l O f f i c e r .


    4    Maintain a precise log of the action taken, using the Extended Incidentfacility                                                                           of the ^ ^
           C o m m a n d and C o n tro l c o m p u te r.
                                                                                   D ocu m en t No.              2 0 0          CQNT ^ j              S E C T IO N 31


                                                                                                                                                                  Page 2




A C T I O N A T FORCE O P E R A T I O N S ROOM

 1    D i r e c t a m o b i l e t o t h e scene f i t t e d w . t h personal address e q u i p m e n t f o r use as t h e c o m ­                                               XR443
      m u n i c a t i o n s ve h i c le a n d        t o assist in c r o w d c o n t r o l . I n s t r u c t t h e d r i v e r t o set u p t h e c o m ­
      m u n i c a t i o n s p o i n t U P W I N D o f t h e site o f t h e in c id e n t .


 2    I n f o r m th e A m b u l a n c e a n d F i r e Service s. If th e in c id e n t in v o lv e s a n u c le a r f u e l fla s k w h i c h
      has b e e n in v o lv e d in a fi r e , ad vis e t h e F ir e S e rv ic e t o c o o l a ll a c ce ssib le su rfa ce s o f t h e fla s k

      b y s p ra y in g w i t h w a t e r .


 3    In fo rm        th e       A s s is ta n t   C h ie f     C o n s t a b le       (O p e r a t io n s )     and       th e        C h ie f    S u p e rin te n d e n t,

      O p e ra tio n s & T ra ffic .


 4    In fo rm       th e    Royal        H a ll a m s h i r e H o s p i t a l , S h e f f i e l d , o f t h e i n c i d e n t a n d i n f o r m             th e m th a t
      p a t i e n t s m a y b e c o n t a m i n a t e d w i t h r a d i o - a c t i v it y . A l l p a t ie n t s w h o a r e c o n t a m i n a t e d s h o u ld
      b e t a k e n t o t h e R o y a l H a ll a m s h i r e H o s p it a l as th is is t h e o n l y h o s p ita l in t h e a re a e q u ip p e d
      t o d e a l w i t h such i n c id e n ts . H o w e v e r , if t h e p a t i e n t is in i m m e d i a t e n e e d o f e m e r g e n c y
      m e d ic a l t r e a t m e n t , h e c a n b e t a k e n t o a n y c a s u a lty h o s p ita l.
                                                                                          «


 5    I f t h e i n c id e n t has o c c u r r e d o n B r itis h R a il p r o p e r t y , i n f o r m B r it i s h R a il c o n t r o l , a n d liaise                         XR 444
      w i t h t h e B r itis h R a il M i s h a p C o n t r o l l e r ( o r h is r e p r e s e n ta tiv e ) o n s ite.


 6    I f t h e r a d i a t i o n is l i k e l y t o a f f e c t an a re a b e y o n d t h e a f f e c t e d p re m is e s , o b t a in e x p e r t a d v ic e

      b y c o n ta c tin g :—

       (a )          F ir s t S ta g e c o n t a c t u n d e r t h e N A I R                  S chem e b y c o n ta c tin g e ith e r th e R o ya l
                     H a lla m s h ir e      H o s p ita l    or     W esto n          P a rk    H o s p it a l, S h e f f i e l d .    The       s w itc h b o a rd
                     o p e r a t o r s w il l g iv e d e t a ils o f t h e p e rs o n t o c o n t a c t .


       (b )          If   th e     p ers o n s n a m e d       c a n n o t assist, c o n t a c t s u r r o u n d i n g fo rc e s a n d a s k f o r
                     d e ta ils o f t h e F ir s t S ta g e c o n t a c t s u n d e r N A I R .                    (N a tio n a l A rra n g e m e n ts fo r
                      In c id e n t s in v o lv in g R a d i o - a c t i v i t y ) .


  7   I f r e q u i r e d , a rra n g e e s c o r t a n d / o r t r a n s p o r t f o r t h e e x p e r t w h o is a t t e n d i n g .


  8   In fo rm       t h e D i s t r ic t E m e r g e n c y P la n n in g O f f i c e r .


  9   O b ta in      a n y f u r t h e r assistance -               eg m a n p o w e r , services, e q u i p m e n t                     re q u ir e d a t    t h e scene.


 10   In fo rm       t h e F o r c e Press L ia is o n O f f i c e r .

                                                                                                                                                                                 XR 445
 11   If      th e   F ir s t    S ta g e c o n t a c t asks t h a t t h e S e c o n d S ta g e c o n t a c t                     b e in fo rm e d ,c o n ta c t         th e
        s w i t c h b o a r d s a t t h e R o y a l H a ll a m s h i r e H o s p it a l o r W e s t o n P a r k H o s p it a l a n d ask f o r d e ta ils

        o f t h e S e c o n d S tag e c o n t a c t s .


 12   A r r a n g e t r a n s p o r t a n d / o r e s c o rt f o r t h e S e c o n d S ta g e c o n t a c t .




                                                                                                                                                                               I 437
                                                                        ^D o cu m e n t      No. 2 0 6                ^ONT    D        S E C T IO N 31


                                                                                                                                                   Page 3


F u r t h e r assistance ca n b e o b t a i n e d f r o m a n y o f t h e f o l l o w i n g e s t a b l i s h m e n t s : -                                         XR445

    I.       C entral E lec tricity G enerating Board, H a rtlep oo l, Cleveland

   H.        C e n t r a l E l e c t r i c i t y G e n e r a t i n g B o a r d , H e y s h a m , L a n c a s h ir e

  iii.       B r itis h N u c le a r F u e ls L i m i t e d , S e lla fie ld , C u m b r i a                                                                        XR446
  iv.        A t o m i c W e a p o n s R e s e a rc h E s ta b lis h m e n t , A l d e r m a s t o n , B e rk s h ir e
   v.       M i n i s t r y o f D e f e n c e P o lic e
  v i.      C h e m ic a l E m e rg e n c y C e n t r e , H arwell
 vii.       H e a l t h a n d S a f e t y E x e c u t i v e , S h e f fie ld
v iii.      I C I , B illin g h a m
  ix.       IC I, H u d d e rs fie ld
   x.       N a t io n a l P o is o n s C e n t r e
  x i.       H a r w e l l H a z a r d o u s W a s te S ervice.


The      CEGB           and     BNFL          w ill    send     H e a lth    P h ys ic is ts a n d     F la s k       E m erg en cy T eam s         if t h e
i n c id e n t in v o lv e s a n u c le a r f u e l f la s k . W e w i l l assist w i t h es c o rts a n d t r a n s p o r t if r e q u ir e d .


I f a M i n i s t r y o f D e f e n c e h e l ic o p t e r is b ein g used t o t r a n s p o r t t h e H e a l t h P h y s ic is t a n d                   th e     XR 447
F la s k E m e r g e n c y T e a m , liaise w i t h th e B r itis h R a il M is h a p C o n t r o l l e r o n s ite                        ( i f in v o lv e d )
a n d t h e re s p o n d in g n u c le a r e s t a b lis h m e n t as t o w h e r e t h e h e l i c o p t e r is t o la n d a n d a r ra n g e
t r a n s p o r t o f t h e p e rs o n n e l f r o m t h e la n d in g site.


S ee k   a d v ic e o n t h e ra d io lo g ic a l risk a n d t h e p ossible n e e d f o r e v a c u a t io n f r o m                            t h e f ir s t
e x p e r t o n s ite a n d r e la y th is i n f o r m a t i o n t o t h e D i s t r ic t E m e r g e n c y P la n n in g O f f i c e r .


E n s u re t h a t        p e rs o n n e l   who       ao p ro ac h     t h e scene o f t h e i n c i d e n t o r m o v e i n t o areas i m ­
m e d i a t e l y d o w n w i n d o f t h e scene are n o te d f o r m o n i t o r i n g b y t h e H e a l t h P h y s ic is t.


 In fo rm      th e      H e a l t h P h y s ic is t if a n y o f t h e ca s u a ltie s h a v e b e e n r e m o v e d t o h o s p ita l a n d

 in c lu d e d e t a ils o f w h i c h h o s p ita l.


 D e t a ils o f        in c id e n ts i n v o lv in g ra d io -a c tiv e m a te r ia l a re r e p o r t e d t o t h e H o m e O f f i c e . T o                     XR 443
 e n a b le th is t o b e d o n e , F o r c e O p e r a tio n s w i l l : —


 (a)         o b ta in       d e ta ils o f d e b ris f r o m a cras h e d n u c le a r p o w e r e d s a te llit e a n d tr a n s m i t
              t h e i n f o r m a t i o n b y P N C t o N e W S c o tla n d Y a r d                    in t h e f o r m a t laid d o w n m
              S t a n d in g O r d e r 3 1 H , A p p e n d i x 'C ' . F in d in g s o f e a c h p ie c e o f d e b r is w il l b e
              n u m b e r e d c o n s e c u t iv e l y a n d a u n iq u e r e fe re n c e n u m b e r a l l o c a t e d w h i c h w il l b e
              ' S Y ' f o l l o w e d b y t h e a p p r o p r ia t e c o n s e c u tiv e n u m b e r ;


  (b )       d e t a ils o f o t h e r in c id e n ts in v o lv in g r a d io a c tiv e m a t e r i a l w i l l b e r e p o r t e d t o th e
              C h i e f C o n s t a b l e u n d e r t h e f o l l o w i n g h e a d in g s :—


                   i.     d a t e , t i m e a n d l o c a t i o n o f in c id e n t ;
                 ii.      n a t u r e o f i n c id e n t -      eg t r a f f i c i n c id e n t , lost p r o p e r t y , rail a c c id e n t ,

                          e tc ;
                iii.      b y w h o m w e r e P o lic e n o t i f i e d ;                                                                                             yojmi
                 iv.      f r o m w h o m r a d io lo g ic a l assistance a n d a d v ic e w a s o b t a i n e d ;                                                    X R449
                 v.        n a tu re    of    r a d io lo g ic a l   assistance -         eg a d v ic e b y t e l e p h o n e , a t t e n ­
                          d an ce o f e x p e rt, etc ;
               v i.       e ffe c tiv e n e s s o f a r r a n g e m e n ts f o r o b t a in i n g r a d io lo g ic a l assistance -
                           eg m a k e a n o t e o f t h e t im e s c o n c e r n e d a n d o f a n y d if f i c u l t i e s

                           e n c o u n te re d ;
               v ii.       a n y o th e r c o m m e n ts -           eg o n e n q u ir ie s f r o m t h e press, a t t e n d a n c e o f                           1 4 3 8

                           F i r e S e r v ic e , e t c .
                                                                                   D ocu m en t No. 2 0 6               CONT’D               S E C T IO N 32


                                                                                                                                                        Page 1




                             H A Z A R D O U S C H E M IC A L S — E M E R G E N C Y P R O C E D U R E S


T h e f o n o w in g g u id e lin e s a re based o n tr a in in g g iv en t o t h e P o lic e in such i n c d e n t s , a n d o n a d v ic e                               »450
f r o m th e C h e m i c a l I n d u s t ri e s A s s o c i a t i o n .


1       W h e n d e a lin g w i t h       h a z a r d o u s c h e m ic a ls it m u s t b e b o r n e in m i n d t h a t t h ® ‘ n h a la ^ "                     ° f
        fu m e s a n d v a p o u r f r o m , o r a n y p h y s ic a l c o n t a c t w i t h , a n y sp.Mage
        c a n h ave f a t a l o r s e rio u s c o n s e q u e n c e s . T h e F ir e S e rv .c e .s s p e c .a lly tr a .n e d a n d p i p p e d t o
        deal w i t h th is as p e c t a n d all r e la te d rescues, in c lu d in g t h e d e c o n t a m . n a t . o n a n d t h e h a n d .n g

        o v e r o f c a s u a ltie s t o t h e A m b u l a n c e p e rs o n n e l.


         S h o u ld p o lic e o f f ic e r s s u d d e n ly fin d th e m s e lv e s in t h e p a t h o f a V a p o u r c lo u d * t h e y s h o u ld
         t a k e c o v e r in e n c lo s e d p rem is es , i m m e d i a t e l y a d v s m g m e m b e r s o f t h e p u b lic t o d o hkeww se.
         I f in a v e h ic le all w i n d o w s a n d v e n ts s h o u ld b e c lo s e d , a n d t h e h e a tin g s y s te m s w it c h e d o                         .

                                                                                                                                                                           XR 451
2       O n re c e iv in g i n f o r m a t i o n o f such an i n c id e n t , F o r c e o p e r a t io n s R o o m m u s t b e i n f o r m e d

         i m m e d i a t e l y a n d t h e y w i l l c o n t r o l all such in c id e n t s .


         O p e r a ti o n s R o o m w il l e n s u re t h a t t h e F ir e S e r v ic e is r e q u e s te d t o a t t e n d i m m e d i a t e l y a n d

         t h a t t h e A m b u l a n c e S e r v ic e is a le r te d .


3        T h e O p e r a ti o n s R o o m In s p e c t o r w ill a s c e rta in t h e d ir e c t i o n a n d speed o f t h e w in d f r o m t h e
          L eed s M e t e o r o l o g i c a l O f f i c e . H e w ill i d e n t i f y a R o a d T r a f f i c m o b i l e w h o s e c r e w ,s f u l l y
         t r a in e d in d e a lin g w i t h such in c id e n ts a n d d i r e c t t h a t m o b i l e t o t h e scene v ia a safe r o u t e

          ie u p w i n d f r o m t h e i n c id e n t .

         T h i s m o b i l e w il l b e p a r k e d in a safe area a n d a m e m b e r o f t h e c r e w w i l l liaise w i t h t h e s e n io r
          F ir e O f f i c e r p re s e n t in an a t t e m p t t o i d e n t i f y t h e c h e m ic a l/s u b s t a n c e .n v o lv e d , a n d m a k e an

          im m e d i a t e s i t u a t i o n r e p o r t t o O p e r a tio n s R o o m .

                                                                                                                                                                           XR 452
          T h e c r e w w il l n o t lea ve t h e safe area a n d w il l n o t a t t e m p t a rescue. T h e c r e w w i l l be d e s ig ­
          n a t e d as t h e I N C I D E N T C O N T R O L L E R a n d w ill p e r f o r m n o o t h e r d u t ie s t h a n : -


           (a)         c o n t r o l o f t h e in c id e n t ;
           (b )        lia is o n w i t h t h e F ir e S e rv ic e ;                                                                          .
           (c)         lia is o n /a d v is o r t o t h e S e n io r         P o lic e O f f i c e r as s u m in g c o n t r o l o f t h e    i n c id e n t .


           S E N I O R O F F I C E R S W H O A R E N O T T R A I N E D I N H A Z C H ^ nP.R_ ° ^ E ° ^ pE[? r^ T H E
           n o t    G IV E  IN S T R U C T IO N S W H IC H C O N F L IC T W IT H T H O S E A D V IS E D B Y T H E

           IN C ID E N T C O N T R O L L E R .


    4      O t h e r a v a ila b le R o a d T r a f f i c m o b ile s w il l b e d ir e c te d t o s p e c ifie d safe ‘o p t i o n s t o e f f e c t
           n ecessary         ro a d    c lo s u re s , t r a f f i c    d iv e rs io n s a n d t o    k e e p t h e p u b l ic a w a y f r o m t h e scen e.


            IF T H E       IN C ID E N T        IS O N A M O T O R W A Y , O N L Y                      R O A D T R A F F IC P E R S O N N E L W IL L
            BE IN V O L V E D O N T H E M O T O R W A Y .

                                                                                                                                                                            Xft 453
    5       I f n o t a l r e a d y a w a r e . O p e r a ti o n s R o o m w i l l i n f o r m t h e a f f e c t e d s u b -d iv is io n a l c o n t r o l r o o m
            L       direct that a senior                o f f icer      attend the scene by a safe route and liaisei w,th the •IncKfent
            C o n tro lle r '      O t h e r s u b -d iv is io n a l p e rs o n n e l w il l o n l y a p p r o a c h t h e scene b y a sa e ro u
            ?hen only as far as the communications vehicle.                                     A ll   personnel at the scene w,U aw.it further
            in s tru c tio n s .
                                                                                                                                                                       1439
                                                                                  D ocu m en t No. 2 0 6                   CQNT’D
                                                                                                                                               S E C T IO N 32


                                                                                                                                                        Page 2



 6    O s e ra t i o n s     R o c t i wiii m a in ta in c o n stan t             liaison w i t h t h e         F ire Service c o n t r o i and o t h e r            X R 453
      agencies,        wno       w il l    attem pt        to    a s ce rt ai n   from     these sources such                 info rm ation         that    w il l
      id e n tify the chem ical/substance involved.


     T h is      in fo rm a tio n     w il l    u s u a lly     be a c h ie v e d    fro m       in fo rm a tio n     c o n t a in e d   in t h e h a z c h e m
     w a r n i n g p a n e ls o r labels d is p la y e d o n t h e t a n k e r o r c o n t a i n e r in v o lv e d . T h e d r iv e r s h o u ld b e
     p r o p e r l y t r a i n e d a n d i f a v a ila b le s h o u ld s u p p ly i n f o r m a t i o n a b o u t th is su b stan c e.


      I f n o su ch m a r k in g s are d is p la y e d                it d o e s n o t n ece ss arily m e a n t h a t t h e s u b s ta n c e is n o t                XR 454
     h a z a r d o u s . T h e F ir e S e rv ic e C o n t r o l a re in possession o f a ' H a r w e l l ' c o m p u t e r w h i c h h o ld s
     in fo rm a tio n         o n all      known         c h e m ic a ls ,   id e n tific a tio n     n um bers and           a c t io n t o b e t a k e n     in
     e m e rg e n c ie s .


 7   T h e s e m e t h o d s w i l l i d e n t i f y t h e f u ll e x t e n t o f t h e h a z a r d -            ie t h e p o s s ib ility o f e x p lo s io n ,
     th e e x te n t       o f t o x i c gas release a n d f i r s t a id i n f o r m a t i o n . O n c e th is is k n o w n , O p e r a t i o n s
      Room         w i l l pass th is i n f o r m a t i o n t o t h e S e n i o r P o lic e O f f i c e r a n d a ll p e rs o n n e l in v o lv e d .


     O p e ra tio n s        Room         In s p e c t o r w i l l   c o n fe r w ith     th e      F ir e   S e rv ic e c o n t r o l a n d    e n s u re t h a t
     s p e c ia lis t h e lp is r e q u e s te d a n d if n ece ss ary assist w i t h t h e c o n v e y a n c e o f such p e rs o n n e l t o
     t h e scen e.


8    If   th e    n a tu re     of   th e      c h e m ic a l   o r s u b s ta n c e ,   o r th e s itu a tio n        r e p o r t i d e n t if ie s a M a j o r     XR 455
     I n c i d e n t , o r p o t e n t i a l M a j o r I n c i d e n t , t h e n t h e f u ll M a j o r I n c i d e n t p la n m u s t b e p u t i n t o
     o p e ra tio n im m e d ia te ly .


9    O p e r a t i o n s R o o m m u s t en s u re t h a t safe r o u te s t o a n d f r o m t h e sc e n e a n d r e le v a n t h o s p ita ls
     a re w e l l p o l i c e d t o a l l o w f r e e passage f o r e m e r g e n c y ve h ic le s . I f t h e i n c id e n t is p r o t r a c t e d ,
     p e r i o d i c c h e c k s m u s t be m a d e w i t h t h e Leed s M e t e o r o l o g i c a l O f f i c e t o a s c e rta in a n y ch an g es
     in w i n d d i r e c t i o n a n d sp ee d .


10   The      F o r c e A u t h o r is e d      H a z c h e m O f f i c e r s are t h e       In s p e c to r a n d S e r g e a n t o f t h e A c c i d e n t
      In v e s t ig a t i o n B r a n c h . T h e y s h o u ld b e i n f o r m e d o f th e i n c id e n t a n d t h e i r assistance s o u g h t.


11   T h e O p e ra tio n s R o o m              In s p e c to r w i l l e n s u re t h a t a t e l e x message is s e n t t o t h e C le v e la n d
      C o n s t a b u l a r y , w h o are re s p o n s ib le f o r c o l la t i n g i n f o r m a t i o n o n all such i n c id e n ts o n b e h a l f

      of ACPO.




                                                                                                                                                                 1440
                                               D ocum ent No. 2 0 6                           C O N T ’D           S E C TIO N 33


                                                                                                                                Page 2



                                                                                                                                                 XR 463
                                               (c)      o n e t r a f f i c p a t r o l car s h o u ld be p o s itio n e d
D E P L O Y P E R S O N N E L (cont)
                                                        to sa feg ua rd th e t a ilb a c k o f t r a f f ic on the
                                                        a f f e c t e d c a rr ia g e w a y ;
                                               (d )     tw o       tra ffic       p a tro l      cars       to      th e   ju n c tio n
                                                        b e fo r e t h e a f f e c t e d a re a . T h e i r task b eing
                                                        t o d iv e r t t r a f f i c o n t h e a f f e c t e d c a rr ia g e w a y
                                                        of     th e       m o to rw a y        and         to    p re v e n t tra ffic
                                                        w a n t in g       to     jo in     th e      m o to rw a y            at     th at
                                                        j u n c t i o n f r o m d o in g so;
                                                                                                                                                 XR 464
                                               (e)      t w o t r a f f i c p a t r o l cars t o t h e ju n c t i o n a f t e r
                                                        t h e a f f e c t e d are a , t h e i r ta s k b e in g t o assist
                                                        em ergency              ve h ic le s t o       e n te r a n d e x it th e
                                                        a f f e c t e d c a r r ia g e w a y ;
                                               (f)      t w o t r a f f i c p a t r o l cars t o t h e scene t o c le a r
                                                        c o n g e s tio n a n d assist e m e r g e n c y ve hicles o n
                                                        site.


                                               O b t a i n f r o m o f f i c e r a t t h e scene o f f u ll e x t e n t o f
IN C ID E N T U P D A T E
                                               th e     i n c id e n t.     B r o a d c a s t r e le v a n t d e ta ils t o              all
                                               p e rs o n n e l in v o lv e d .


IN F O R M SUB D IV IS IO N S                  R e p o rt th e e x te n t o f th e in c id e n t an d o f d iv e r­
                                               s io n a ry       r o u te s       in      o p e ra tio n .         Request             any
                                               a d d it i o n a l m a n p o w e r r e q u i r e m e n t s .

                                                                                                                                                 XR465
U P D A T E E M E R G E N C Y S E R V IC E S   Pass o n all i n f o r m a t i o n t o t h e F i r e a n d
                                               A m b u la n c e           services.         Request              th a t    a        s e n io r
                                               o f f i c e r f r o m e a c h o f t h o s e services a tte n d s th e
                                               scene t o liaise w i t h t h e P o lic e S i t e C o m m a n d e r .


M A J O R IN C ID E N T B O X E S              E n s u re t h a t t h e F o r c e M a j o r I n c i d e n t b o x e s are
                                               t a k e n t o th e scene. A r r a n g e w i t h t h e s u b -d iv is io n
                                                in w h o s e a re a t h e i n c id e n t h as o c c u r r e d t o t a k e
                                               t h e i r M a j o r I n c id e n t b o x e s t o t h e scene.


                                                E s ta b lis h     who          is t h e      s e n io r    u n ifo rm e d            Road
S IT E C O M M A N D E R
                                                T r a f f i c o f f i c e r a t th e site a n d i n f o r m h im a n d a ll
                                                p e rs o n n e l      th a t    he      is t h e S i t e         C o m m an d e r.          If
                                                c o m m a n d passes t o a m o r e s e n io r o f f i c e r , t h e i r
                                                i d e n t i t y w il l b e b ro a d c a s t b y O p e r a t i o n s R o o m .

                                                                                                                                                  XR466
                                                C o n t a c t t h e C o m m u n i c a t i o n s O f f i c e r in re s p e c t
C O M M U N IC A T IO N S
                                                o f t h e m o b i l e p o lic e s ta t io n , p r o v is io n o f ra d io s ,
                                                te l e p h o n e , e tc .


I N T E R R O G A T E S IT E                    O b t a i n f r o m t h e S ite C o m m a n d e r t h e f o l l o w i n g

COMMANDER                                       d e ta ils :—


                                                 (a )     th e     lo c a tio n o f t h e            P o lic e     I n c id e n t P o st;
                                                 (b )     th e     lo c a tio n o f t h e P o lic e v e h ic le p a r k in g
                                                          area;
                                                 (c )     ro u te s f o r e m e r g e n c y services i n c lu d in g t h e
                                                          best        access.          Id e n tify     A m b u la n c e         lo a d in g

                                                           points;                                                                               1441
                                          D o cu m en t No. 2 0 6                         CONT D                 S E C T IO N 33


                                                                                                                           Page 3



                                                                                                                                         X R 466
                                           (d)      d e t a i l s o f a n y special h a z a r d s or pr o bl em s
I N T E R R O G A T E SI T E
                                                    -     eg gas, e x p l o s i v e s , e t c .
C O M M A N D E R ( c o m)

                                           In fo rm        local a n d n a t i o n a l ra d io s ta tio n s o f an y
                                                                                                                                         XR 467
MEDIA
                                           ro a d c lo su re s.           C a r r y c u t ca ll o u t p ro c e d u re re
                                           Press L ia is o n .


                                           C a ll o u t s e n io r o f f ic e r s a n d c o n s id e r increasing
CALL OUT
                                           th e     s ta ff     of       O p e ra tio n s        Room            if    necessary.
                                           A rran g e          fo r      A c c id e n t        I n v e s t ig a tio n    B ra n c h ,
                                           A u d io       V is u a l     A id s u n i t .       S c e n es o f C r im e and
                                           v e h ic le e x a m in e r s t o a t t e n d t h e P o lic e In c id e n t
                                           Po st.


                                           Broadcast to                 th e    F o r c e d e t a ils o f th e in c id e n t
A D D IT IO N A L M ANPOW ER
                                           and         e n s u re      a d d itio n a l       sta ff     a re     on    s ta n d b y .

                                                                                                                                         XR 468
                                           T h e n u m b e r o f c a s u a ltie s in v o lv e d a n d th e n u m ­
C A S U A L T Y E N Q U IR Y B U R EA U
                                           b e r o f e n q u ir ie s re c e iv e d w i l l i n d ic a te w h e t h e r o r
                                            n o t t o set u p t h e B u r e a u . (S e e ca ll o u t p ro c e d u re
                                           h e ld in O p e r a t i o n s R o o m ) .


                                            I n f o r m th e A A a n d R A C a n d t h e y w i l l give assis­
M O T O R IN G O R G A N IS A T IO N S
                                            ta n c e      w ith        th e    d iv e r s io n      of     tra ffic      and     th e
                                            signing o f ro u te s .


                                            A rran g e         fo r     r e c o v e r y v e h ic le s t o         b e d e p lo y e d
V E H IC L E   RECOVERY
                                            a lo n g d iv e r s io n a r y a n d e m e r g e n c y ro u te s re a d y
                                            t o assist in t h e c le a rin g o f a n y o b s t r u c t i o n . S o m e
                                            re c o v e r y ve h ic le s w i l l b e d e p l o y e d a t t h e scene.
                                            The         AA     and        RAC          m ay     g iv e assistance in th is
                                            o p e ra tio n .

                                                                                                                                          XR 469
                                             Liaise w i t h            A m b u l a n c e c o n t r o l c o n c e r n in g th e
C A S U A L T IE S
                                          ' d is t r i b u t i o n o f c a s u a ltie s t a k e n b y a m b u la n c e t o
                                             h o s p ita ls a n d m o r t u a r ie s .


                                             See        th e    In s t r u c t i o n    C ard       "J"         in S e c tio n    11.
 F A T A L IT IE S

                                             C o n s id e r c a llin g u p o n t h e f o l l o w i n g : —
O T H E R A S S IS T A N C E

                                             (a )       O t h e r F o rc e s — M u t u a l A i d ;
                                             (b )       M ilita r y A id ;
                                             (c)        U s e o f h e lic o p t e r ;
                                             (d )        F o r c e C a t e r in g O f f i c e r ;
                                              (e)       Plans D e p a r t m e n t .




                                                                                                                                         1442
                                                                                                      Document No.             2 0 6   C O N T 'D


                                                               M l .     K E Y          S H E E T .


                     #£Sr     Y O R K S H IR E




      Haigh
        3 8                                              A6J7



                                                                 66448

              A62G


                                                                          3 60 9 9
                     Oodworth
                            3 7




                      Tonktrtfty
                                                                            A6/JS


                                                                                      A 629



                                                                                              A629                        A6J/
                                          Thorpt
                                                 3 5




                                                 Tinsley Viaduct
                                                         3 4
                                                                                                                                  T h u r c r o ft
                                                       SHEFFIELD                                                                        3 2
                                                       PARKWAY                   Catchff*             i


                                                                               A6ta
                                                                               66067                                            A s to n


              Mil                                                                                                                      AS7
              Dirtrtion
                                                                                                  22eV,


                                                                       660S3




                                                                                                                                       1443

                                                                               A 6I6-                                 Bar/borough
| South n>rktf*irtPo/Kt                                                                                                          3 0
  PLANS DEPT.
                    7/P7                                                                                  n p o n Y S H i& E
                                                                               D ocument No. 2 0 6                           C O N T 'D               S E C T IO N 33


                                                                                                                                                                 Page 1



                                   M A J O R IN C ID E N T S IN V O L V IN G T H E M O T O R W A Y


    If a M a j o r I n c i d e n t occurs on a m o t o r w a y , o r in such close p r o x i m i t y t o a m o t o r w a y t h a t th e use                                  X R 460
o f such m o t o r w a y         is d i r e c t l y a f f e c t e d b y it, t h e n t h e S i t e C o m m a n d e r w il l be t h e senio r R o a d
T r a f f i c D i v i s i o n su p erv iso r on d u t y .


T h e f o l l o w i n g p ro c e d u re s sh o u ld be re a d          in c o n j u n c t i o n w i t h th e o t h e r g en era l p rin c ip le s o u t ­
lin e d in th is m a n u a l .


A      copy     of   th e   ‘M o to rw a y     M a n u a l ' a n d 'C h e m s a f e ' s h o u ld b e r e a d i ly a t h a n d a n d t h e F o r c e
O p e r a ti o n s   Room      s ta ff s h o u ld be r e a d y t o a d v is e p e rs o n n e l a t t h e site b y r e fe re n c e t o th e s e
d o c u m e n ts .


D U T IE S O F T H E          IN S P E C T O R , F O R C E O P E R A T IO N S R O O M                                                                                        X R 461



O n r e c e ip t o f i n f o r m a t i o n t h a t a M a j o r I n c i d e n t m a y h a v e o c c u r r e d , t h e f o l l o w i n g a c t io n s h o u ld
b e ta k e n :—


1           C O M M U N IC A T IO N S                                         S e n d a R o a d T r a f f i c v e h ic le t o t h e scen e to a c t
                                                                              as c o m m u n i c a t i o n s v e h ic le a n d m a i n t a i n c o m ­
                                                                              m u n ic a t i o n s       w ith     F o r c e O p e r a ti o n s          Room        on
                                                                              VHF        F o r c e C h a n n e l 1. A l l m o b ile s n o t l ik e l y t o
                                                                              be      c o n n e c te d       w ith e     th e        i n c id e n t    s h o u ld   use
                                                                              o t h e r F o r c e r a d i o c h a n n e ls . ( C o n s id e r t h e use o f
                                                                              a      m o to rw a y        te le p h o n e     if      one      is n e a r t o       th e
                                                                              s c e n e ).


2           A L E R T E M E R G E N C Y S E R V IC E S                        A l e r t t h e F ir e a n d A m b u l a n c e S ervice s, u sin g t h e
                                                                              cod ew ord " C A T A S T R O P H E " .


3           C O M M E N C E IN C ID E N T LO G                                U s in g       th e     E x te n d e d     In c id e n t       fa c ility      on     th e
                                                                              C o m m a n d an d C o n tro l c o m p u te r.


                                                                              O p e ra te        th e     M o to rw a y         M a tr ix        signals.        L im it     X R 462
4           M O T O R W A Y W A R N IN G S IG N A L S
                                                                              v e h ic le speeds p ro g re s s iv e ly t o a l o w m a x i m u m
                                                                              on      b o t h c a rr ia g e w a y s . I f n ecessary c o n s u lt t h e
                                                                              D e p a rtm e n t           of     T ra n s p o rt         b o o k le t       on      th is
                                                                              s u b je c t.


5           DEPLO Y PERSONNEL                                                 A s sig n o t h e r o f f ic e r s t o t h e scene e n s u rin g t h a t
                                                                              s u p e rv is o rs        are       a tte n d in g .         N o m in a te         o th e r
                                                                              o f f ic e r s t o t h e f o l l o w i n g p o i n t s : —


                                                                              (a )      one         tra ffic     p a tro l    car       to     a tte n d     on     th e
                                                                                        a p p r o a c h t o t h e sc en e a n d p la c e t h e nece s­
                                                                                        s a ry       p o lic e    " A C C ID E N T "            and         "S LO W "
                                                                                        signs          and       cones          in       p o s it i o n .     In fo rm
                                                                                        O p e r a t i o n s R o o m w h e n t h is has b e e n d o n e ;
                                                                              (b )      one         tr a ffic    p a tro l   car        to     a tte n d     on     th e     XR 463
                                                                                        o p p o s it e c a r r ia g e w a y t o assess t h e e f f e c t o n
                                                                                        t h a t c a r r ia g e w a y a n d r e p o r t t o O p e r a ti o n s
                                                                                         Room ;


                                                                                                                                                                            1444
     H        4   .%<\
                                r
                                r. A
                                                      r
                                                      LuP
                                                                          s                        r 0P PD0C
                                                                                                      ------ —
«        r        ^


                  l i o ' C - r i t i q H A r A           b       o l £ cr r              /              L     J       ^     f   a




    £)fg 0             r                                                  t)hMtJi7c                             r&M°                  ft-         t o *




    D ^ C j            r                                              C O M t ^ i^ t lo                               < 5 k /3 » y t          .



                                                                  J y ^       ik^p




    io<vo.             ^                         ^ U > { W    n       ^                                            a ?(/ &
                                                                                                                   <     ^       ^     A < t nk $ >        A       j
                                                                          .   * J '   /    1 '.^    .4       '4 ^ \        mAOiA d J l iVl f L
                                                                          u x u f o i V             c\       Ho            < s ^ 5 v \.d llW




    iOV>-
                                            L     -                                  u'A\/C
                                  S&Ut^Ss cA                                    1cru\V                         kA.^                                   ILOtftA  -




                                    2           Sf«UaV            e ^ W U ^                        «utyU-



     \ofe "                      i.% '                ^           ^                                CUr^S. ^                                                    /
     los ^        "           £ a i. % j \ \ .            0 ^         /(^ c M -           -W       ^ /o °^
                                 iffio to             r ^ o J V ^ W ^                 , le u f c / ^ W                                 ^              ^

                                ^t)                           '^ A        •




                  " "                 fcc        i K \        a           C £ ^ Y ) < J m ^ .                         /              «v.vutoccw\t.




      \{yy        ""            ^AvC            £tafc x

      U<£-




                                                                                                                                                          1445
                                                                                         Document     No. 2 0 7               CONT’D

                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                      i
                                                                                                          I


   '       aJ * :




           a ^ \              \^ M        •          F u .j \   ^      fc ^ A s .        I toA >U ua^             '0 4 v /.


                                                                          \\< y ^ y /     C _ *ju


       ^                          ^
                                          V tM A     W uJU                               \ *                      M i* * w Ip M




  L^J                 Wj^Of                         0^     ^ \ J ^ ( A               Loll                 U

  GcV 4 -^ 0 ^(M. ^.oa\                                    <X         m |u ^            &L&A                  V*u^

O-A- I/OqJ&Wa^ U^vJ ^                                                        csui^icf^. ^ I

< u - * '                 " 6cT           fvl^ui                      ^                         u^io

                              i > .



 PcniWrctl                        i^tkJ ( ^^ytlcj                                               —   o^LraJ-i^
                      ^eupU ci                                      ( c ^ \      -   <     10




   tiif-                      ^ 0 6 Y

   C o v C V & W \v M ^               t                  sy

   f       ^    ^                                               O W                                 O ^ t ^ )

       (^ ^ J > U    im   A           W       ) .




                                      ^                                                             iA'3t               V C o|

   W           w k            W       \              % s » i& \ i / | U              ^               v        7     v         i .


       L\uoa                                             " y4                                        I"
1^ - o C




14. n      .
