n ■w f r (




      y
    l<o
        t     V a i cLa -v f v £ . I      uo   fc j   ■~-5Ck
  *
              '~ & * r T ^ C .-r \J l^   C.O                           ^ <4-^


                U-C^ C- iC.t-vTTt-*-*®- SS^fc:                 -Po U Cfe   S 'T ^ 't i ^ ^




            I am a Detective Constable in the South Yorkshire Police stationed at Hackenthorpe
            police station. I have some 15 years experience in policing football matches within
            the South Yorkshire area. I sun also a follower of football and as such travel to
            many football matches.
            On Saturday 15 th April 1989 I was on duty at the semi final at Hillsborough between
            Nottingham For est and Liverpool in full police uniform. I attended a briefing in
            the North Stand which was taken overall by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield. The
            main theme of this was personal safetv of the public.
                                                    I <
            I was allocated Serial 10 to work with PS 1080 Hoyland our duties before the match
            were at turnstiles                    55     -     64 which were turnstiles N on Penistone Road.
            I was positionecT at these turnstiles with other officers in this serial checking
            supporters entering these turnstiles for prohibited items and to maintain order
            and ensure orderly queues were-formed
            The turnstiles were opened for fans to enter at 12 mid day and at that time although
            there were a large number of fans wandering around at no time was there any more
            than three or four queuing. The supporters were nearly all from Nottingham and they
            were well behaved and in good humour. I saw that there were a number of Liverpool
            supporters who were asking everyone who walked past if they had any spare tickets
            for the game. I did not seen anyone sell any tickets to the Liverpool supporters
            although they were very persistent.


GEN/5           Signad                                                       Signature w itn an a d by
                            STATEMENT OF WITNESS

          (C.J. Act, 1967, s. 9; M.C.A., 1980, 8. 102; M.C. Rules, 1981, r.70)

   Continuation of statement o£      Michael Dowling

At 3pm there were only a few supporters in the Penistone Road area who were hanging ;
around the turnstiles, some were going to the ti.imstilo gate men and attempting to
pay to gain entry to the ground. These persons v/ere moved from the turnstiles, the
only other incident which occured during these duties were that several cans of beer
and lager were talcen from persons entering the ground and placed in a black plastic
bin liner.
Between 3.05pm and 3•1Opm I was informed by PS Hoyland that assistance was required
inside the ground. I together with other officers entered the ground via the spion
Kop,went around the beck towards the South stand and then along the front of the Kop
to a- gate in the fencing. On reaching this point I could see that the game was not
in progress and that there was a large number of supporters on the playing area
at the Leppings Lane end of the ground. Together v/ith the other officers in the
serial I went across the pitch to the left of the goal to a gate or pen marked 3
On reaching this area there were other police officers in attendence who were
assisting persons in this area by leaning over the railings and pulling them up and
over the top and onto the playing area. At this time I was unaware of what the      .
problem was, I then looked along the fencing just above the hoarding boards and saw
that people were squashed against the fencing and against one another. I could see
that the situation was serious as many people were in pain and others dead. I was
unable to get to the dying and injured to assist because of the fencing around the
ground. It is difficult to give an accurate account of what took place in what order
as to my actions although I remember everything was happening in slow motion or
appeared to be. I gave assistance to several persons who were brought out of the
Leppings Lane end of the ground some of which were dead and others who v/ere injured
were either given comfort or attention. I also recall trying to stop supporters
who had come onto the playing area and were fit and well who kept going back to the :
front of gate 3 to look for friends in the crowd, these people were hindering
rescue of other persons in the crowd. I was trying to usher these people away but
I was threatened v/ith violence and had abuse such as *You’re murdering bastards*
I became aware that some of the Liverpool supporters who were on the playing area
were making threatening gestures towards the Spion Kop and the Nottingham Forest
supporters. As the result of this I was instructed v/ith other officers to form a
line across the pitch near to the centre line to. prevent any trouble between the
opposing supporters. I remained at this location until the ground had been cleared
and then I went outside onto Penistone Road to assist loading of busses*

   Signed..                                        Signature w itnessed by.,
