                                                                                       MIR.15
       Kr'
OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and time raised _         / V? f a             Number


T it le __
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions - urgent action - Yes/^fr'    U£L6{ tf
                                                     ..Osjj k    / I oHa   V           C&y      ,
                                                                                                                 Receiver
                                  $ nQ/&(Jr fyl UutC             SQM <£//} ftyuei'jt 9" ^ 'f
     M^eASOy__^ ITh*                                                                    /.'poof
Document registered/indexed as indicated
                                                                                       ~~T --                    Indexer


No(s) of actions raised            P\/+^7-2
                                                                                                             Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions          <2 S 2 ^ __


                                                                                                                 Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken




Further action No(s)                                                                                             Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
             DOCKLANDS HISTORY PROJECT     HILLSBOROUGH TFSTTMDNV




      Your name?



      And your address?

                          LIVERPOOL
      Are you employed?

      I work in the                        at the University.
      Did you have a ticket for the match?
      Yes.

      Where was this for?

      The terraces, Leppings Lane.

      What time did you leave Liverpool?

      We got the train at half-past nine from Liverpool and we
got   into Sheffield at about half eleven.

I     Did you stop at any time on the way?

      No, just stopped at intermediate stations.
I     What time did you arrive at Sheffield?

     We got to Sheffield at half-past eleven but we went round
the shops so I think we got to the ground about two o'clck.
I     How did you know what time it was?

     Well, I know I went in about twenty-past two because the
policeman on horse told us to go in and we'd been there about
half-an-hour. I think it was between about half-one when we
decided we were going to leave Sheffield. Because we were
walking round the town and I kept looking at my watch thinking
I didn t want to be late.

I     When you arrived at the ground, what was happening?
     Well, we got off a bus at the top of the Lane and walked
down Leppings Lane and we stood outside for a while. There were
just people walking too and fro, normal, and we just stood
around and waited for a while and then, about twenty-past,
there was a policewoman on a horse who told us to start going
in, so we started moving towards the entrance.

I    Did you see any police officers on your way to the ground?

     There was one policewoman on a horse. There was another
bloke on a horse because he was a bit behind us and he was
telling people to move on. We noticed that in particular
because he was shouting at them a bit. Probably no more than
normal, but it was my first away match so I was noticing it.

I    The policeman was shouting at some football supporters?

     Oh yes. Well they always do, like. He was saying, 'Just
get in.' you know.

I    He was anxious to get them down to the ground?

     Yes.

I   Did you have any direct contact with any of the police
officers you saw on your way to the ground?

     No, we didn't talk to any but when we went into the actual
ground I had a bag with me that I wanted to leave, so when we
got to the turnstiles, one policeman checked my bag and when I
went through another one checked my bag more thoroughly. The
first didn t check my bag because I was expecting him to
because he was checking other people's, he just let me through.
But the other one checked it quite thouroghly and I told him
that I wanted to leave it. And then I left it with the police
property store or something, that was inside the ground. There
was a policeman there.

I   Were you easily able to find the entrance to that part of
the ground you had a ticket for?

     Yes. Well, on the ticket there was a number, I think it
was LL2 or something, which was differnt to what my boyfriend
had. And then we were with another bloke who had a ticket for
the seated area in another part of the ground, I think it was
the North Stand. So, we knew vaguely and they had been there
before so they knew the entrance, well, the first turnstile,
where that was, so that was fairly easy to get to, yes.

I    When you got there, what were your feelings at that time?
When you got to the entrance before you went through?

     I wanted to make sure I dropped my bag off and nothing
particularly different, like.




                          2_
I    Was there a queue?

   ] Yes, we queued to get into the turnstile. It didn't take
us.that long. We were queueing, the gate that was opened, I
think, was to the left and we were queuing there. And while we
were actually going along, and I was looking at the policeman
infront, thinking that he was going to check my bag, there was
a steward on that gate... There was either a steward on the
gate but there was definately a policeman behind it, through
the gate. Because, I think it was a steward came up with a
bloke to let him through that gate and the policeman opened it
and then shut it straight away and he nearly shut the bloke
out. The steward got through but the bloke nearly got shut in,
he nearly shut his fingers in. So they opened it again. And
when I think back I remembered that. But we queued alongside
that gate and then went through the turnstile, but it wasn't
particularly... well, it was crowded but it wasn't anything
different.

I    What was the atmosphere like at that time?

     Just normal, everyone just waiting to get in, nothing
different. We started to go in about twenty-past, that would be
about half-past, something like that.

I    What were police officers doing in the area around?

     I saw one outside the turnstile who was checking bags,
because he frisked someone in fornt of me and I said, 'I wonder
if he's going to frisk me.' I remember that. And then when I
went in the one who was a bit more 'official', he looked right
through my bag and asked me what was in it. And after that, I
went round... I asked where I could leave my bag, if there was
a St. John's Ambulance or something because I usually leave it
in there. And he said there was a police property stall around
on the left. So I went there. There was apoliceman and a
policewoman in there.

I    Did you actually speak to the one outside the
turnstile?

    No, he just let me in?

I   What did the man on the other   side say to   you?

Z D He said, 'What's in your bag?'  And I said 'A file.'
because I'd just bought a file. And I said, 'is there somewhere
I can leave it?'

I   And that's when he directed you to the POlice ProPertv
Service?

     Yes.




                             3
I    Did you find that easily?

     Yes, fairly easily. There was a bloke selling photographs
in front of it and then behind that it said 'Police Property
Stall' or something and I just went to there.

I      Did you have a conversation with the police officers
there?

     Yes, they asked me what was in it as well. There was a
policeman and a policewoman. Ican't remember, one of them took
my name and address into this book and I think they asked what
was in it and I said, there was a mirror because there was a
mirror inside the file. But I didn't want to tell the policeman
on turnstile in case he told me off. But I told that bloke,
that was why I wanted to leave it there because I didn't want
it to get broken. He was quite nice about it and said I could
pick it up after.

I   Was your ticket torn off?

    Yes.

I    When you got through the turnstiles, apart from the police
officer who was searching you, and the ones at the property
station, did you see any other police officers around?
    No.

I   Were there any stewards inside the ground?

     No. I didn't see anybody. There was a bloke selling
programmes but I didn't see anyone else.

I   How were you directed to your own section then?

     We weren't because there was a bloke selling programmes on
my left when I went in through the turnstiles and behind that
was the property stall. There was something, I think it was
steps going up which, I think, was maybe for the stands with
seats in it, because I wondered if we should go in that. The
only entrance that we saw to go in was the 'B tunnel that we
went in. Because I remember thinking, when we first got the
tickets, the LL2 number on mine was different from my
boyfriends so I didn't know if we were going to be in the same
bit. But in the end, we just went through the same tunnel
because it was the only one that we saw.

I    Where exactly did you end up standing then? You went
through the tunnel?...

     We went through the tunnel. When we got through the
tunnel, there was loads of people standing so we went into the
middle of that and in front of me, the left goalpost of the



                           H-
goal, where we ended up standing, was sort of in front of me.
When it started getting a bit more packed, I wanted to move and
I looked over to my left and saw the next bit was empty. I
said, 'Can't we go over there?' But we didn't know how to get
there a ndby then it was getting too packed to move anyway. And
then I said, 'Can we go to the front? And my boyfriend said,
 No, stay at the back.' because you get pushed around more at
the front. So we were quite near... there were about two lines
of people behind us, right to the back of the terraces. But by
the time the match had started, we had moved over to the right
hand side of the goalpost was in front of me.

I    What time did you reach the place you were standing before
kick-off?

     We must have got in between half-two and twenty-to-three.
I    How did you feel at that time?

      I was panicking right from the start really. It's always
crowded but it felt different because I remember thinking,
 'It's just me.' And I also remember thinking, 'Well, once the
match starts you can see more anyway.' because that's what
usually happens. So, for a while, you just hold on, you think
it's alright, but I was getting a bit panicky. But I thought it
was just my first away match. But I remember thinking that if
anything happened I wouldn't be able to get out. But I just
thought ..oh... I was just panicking. I did ask my boyfriend to
move, he was looking at the programme and everything, but it
was getting a bit more packed. This was getting on to the time
the match started now. Once the match started, there was
someone leaning on my hair, I couldn't see a single thing.
Normally you can see a bit of it but I couldn't see anything,
because the next day I saw it, they were playing in white and I
hadn't even noticed it on the day, I just didn't see a thing,
there was somebody on my hair, so my head was sort of , up like
that (she demonstrates her head being pulled back so her face
is pointed up at the sky). I was sort of, looking upwards. I
remember getting angry and I said to my boyfriend, he couldn't
hear me then but I said, 'I can't move.' I was getting a bit
angry. He said afterwards, they weren't leaning on me, because
I thought someone was leaning on me. Because, sometimes, they
lean on you but he said they were just, like, pushed up against
me. But I was just starting to get panicky.


I   Were you aware of any police officers in the ground?

     Well, there's always the police there, so I knew they were
there but...

I   Were you aware of any stewards in the ground?
              wasn't looking out for any but I know they're normally


    like S o u S f y o S r y°U      f e e U n g ' What was the atmosphere


n ^ u 1 Jhi"k,°f U differently at different times. Once the
cmnll       f   everyone was looking at the match, 'cause I
couldn t see a thing and I knew I was missing it out. But as it
went on the atmosphere was changing. First of all I started
getting panicky but I didn't want to say inching tj my^
boyfriend to seem wimpy like, so I didn't say anything but I
was getting squashed. And then, I started saying to him 'I
want to move. There were people at that time starting to go
H«eer i f front and a few people were shouting at them to set
             WaS §?ttlng really panicky by then. I didn't know
what they were going over for, my first impression looking1*0**
ofCt h a H      re?e^ e r i n g I'd seen them. What I was more8aware
     ^       j PanicklnS and I wanted to get out. And I looked
behind me and there was a bloke being pulled up. That was the
thinking
thinking, 'Wei?6"!       ^ get
           Well, I want to   bloke
                                out 8oin8 UP*
                                     and if   AndupI remember
                                            I go     there     I don't
think anyone would  tell me off.' Because lot! of people       were
         there and  they were helping him. So I said, 'I      wantto
get out and my boyfriend said to someone and they're always
onto the°stands? y°U               t0 g6t °Ut’


L in g e r     l? 't                   t h a t SOmetM"8 " aS

   J Well, it wasn t normal to me because I have never been
pulled out of a match before. I was just panicky. I thought at
  ?i AXt           rae* 1 didn't know why the bloke had been
pulled up. But I realised when I got up there because I turned
around when I got up and everyone was climbing over the front
qtnrtPHry0i1f-WaS ®houtln§ ’ y°u could tell.. And everyone had
started pulling. Everyone where I was standing could see what
was happening and they were starting to pull people up and thev
was turning round and saying, 'Get back.? to S J t ha t we?e on Y
the stands. And most people were just standing there, in shock
watchmg what was happening cause I just stood for a while       ’
the frnn?    watching what was happening. And then the people at
          I
          ’k !         Vere
                     helPlng everyone out, were saying, 'Get
back, get back, so every so often, I was trying to clamber
further up the stands, but then I was stopping because I was
panicking that I was going to get crushed in there.

I       Can you describe, in as much detail as possible, what
left6the ground?              Wh6n thS 8ame W&S aband°ned and when you
             Well, when I got pulled up must have been around the time
  that they stopped the match. I think the game was still going
  on when I first started panicking and got pulled out. But there
  was a time between getting pulled up when I was just shaking
  really. So that must have been when they were taking them off.
  After that, I was standing on the stands looking down below and
  I saw people climbing over the front and then from then on
  until about... Most of the time I was standing there and not
  really... Imean, I could see things happening but I wasn't
  thinking straight. First of all, the first thing I thought was
  that my boyfriend was going to come up after me. And this woman
  said... I said, 'where’s my mate?' and she said, 'Oh, she'll be
  coming^up in a minute'. I couldn't even think to say, 'oh, it's
  a boy.' or anything. And then someone came up to me and said to
  me, |You dropped your purse.' I wasn't really thinking, I
  wasn't X bothered                     or—   anything.
                                                   j            o So I        was
                                                                        ^—-----v    standing.4.    there.
                                                                                                   w u w k w i    uEverv
                                                                                                                    v             oso




                                                                   -
                        ____ — J_ 1 • „ i * ______     ITT1_.  . •   I          L «                                       J
  often I was thinking,                     — O 7    'Where's“     w __________
                                                                     |          [' my“ V boyfriend.
                                                                                                iWltu •    But
                                                                                                           U U U     then
                                                                                                                     U11C         I
  was sort of really rational about it, I thought, 'He'll be
 helping people.' I could see people being pulled out over the
  front. There were people around me shouting things all the time
  that were affecting what you thought. Like, there was somebody
  on the pitch and I saw people trying to rescusitate people and
  I knew one person had died because there was something over his
  face but apart from that I was watching people being pulled
  out, people I thought had fainted. And then after a while, as
  it went on, every so often I was thinking about, 'Where's
I—    ------------------1 ' and I jjust              thought,
                                                            0      7  'He'll be helping people.'             p X C •      and
                                                                                                                          C l L1\_L
   He 11 be down there.' And then I heard, I can't tell the exact
 amount of time it was, but I think it was maybe half-an-hour to
  three-quarters of an hour before I got with him again, got back
 down onto the terraces. At one point, I heard them say, 'Will
 all fans clear the terraces?' So I started thinking, he must
 have gone out and I had arranged to meet him back where I was
 going to pick my bag up. So I rember thinking, 'Shall I leave?'
 I wasn't doing anything, I was just thinking all these things
 in my mind. At the same time I could see people going onto the
 pitch and I was trying to work out whether they were just
  taking people onto the pitch that were hurt, because there were
 other people who were, by then, as it gradually cleared, there
 were peopl climbing onto the pitch. And so I trying to work out
 whether he would have gone onto the pitch or stayed there. And
 I was trying to remember what he was wearing because there were
 lots os people being dragged out and everything. So I was
 looking out for him but then every so often, I wasn't thinking
 of him, I was just noticing all these people. Because people
 around me were saying... some were saying, 'He's dead. He^s
 dead.' And other people had been pulled up and were shouting
 about it. It was the people around me, the ones at the front
 that were pulling people out, knew what was happening because
 they were dragging everybody                                        up and they were telling
 everybody to get back. They saved loads of people, pulling them
 up, and they could see that it was all crushed at the front.
 The other thing I noticed was loads of fans running back and
 too and fro and everyhthing. Because, that night, I saw a bit
J




     on the news and they showed on bit of the fans taking people
     accross the field but they were doing that all the time. I was
    noticing that, that it was all the fans helping people, I
    didn t see the police helping people. The thing I saw most
     about the police was, after awhile, they came and stood accross
     the whole half of the pitch, that was after a few people had
    run towards the other end, and the police made a line accross
     the pitch, but that s the most 1 remember the police doing,
    really. And then after a while, I saw an ambulance come down by
     the goal, then you knew it was pretty bad. Most of all it was
    just confusion, nobody knew what was happening. You knew it was
    bad but I thought maybe five people might have died until I got
    onto the bus and somebody had a radio. I didn't realise it was
    that bad. The bloke next to me, he was really shaking still,
    because I stopped shaking and just went numb and he was
    shaking. And then there was all confusion and there were people
    saying things over the loud hailer but you couldn't hear it
    until I heard one bit were they were saying to clear the
    terraces, because I remember thinking maybe     1s gone. Then
    after maybe three-quarters of an hour or something, I started
    thinking a bit more, thinking that I would go down maybe.
    Because I was quite high up in the stands and the stands were
    getting full as well, and I remember thinking... I was
    panicking that maybe I wouldn't be able to get out of there.
    There were a whole load of people in front of me in the stands
    by then. Then I started thinking, 'Maybe     |s still down on
    the terraces. So, gradually, I went back down, and looked out
    over the terraces and saw him standing there. And quite a lot
    of the terraces were quite a lot emptier by then, and so I went
    down. I was scared to go down because somebody told me that
    somebody had just got their arm pulled off or something or
    somebody had hurt their arm. So I was still panicking, and I
    had to go down. So then I went down.

    I    Down the stairs behind the...?

         No, somebody let me down from the stand onto the terrace
    again. And then we just stood there for a while because they
    said nobody should leave. That was just before Kenny Daglish
    came on an said for everyone to stay calm. Another thing was,
    at the beginning, when I was being pulled out., it was either
    while I still on the terraces or when I'd been pulled up, the
    people round me knew that people were getting crushed because
    they were shouting, 'Shitty ground, shitty ground.' They knew.
    That was one thing that startled me, that the people who pulled
    me up knew what was happening and the police must have known
    what was happening and not doing anything. Because the fans
    were doing everything. So, they knew what was happening. The
    fans were really brilliant, they really were... And then after,
    I was standing there with f~ |, waiting, and there were dquite
    afew people still standing on the terraces and they said, over
    the thing, not to go, to stay until they'd cleared the area and
    everything. So, we stood there for a while and I did see one
    thing where, I didn't see what happened but on the terraces,



                                <3
there was a few policemen on the terraces and there was one,
and he didn t have his jacket on anymore and he didn't have his
helmet on, but something happpened... I didn't see the
incident, but you know when something happens in a crowd
because everyone around you shouts. So you might not see what
happens but you see the reaction of it. And I know he must
have got in a tussle or something with somebody. But,
spontaneously, everybody above started shouting at this
policmanand he started shouting back, something like... some
kind of justification for it. He was shouting back at the crowd
and there were other policemen around him, holding him. Like,
people were really tense, you know? And then, beside me,
because by the time I got back on the terraces, I was standing
next to the entrance to the tunnel, before went back down and
there were a few stewards by then, there were a couple of girls
as well, somebody came round with some water. And there were a
couple of policemen there and I saw someone shouting, just
shouting like... they are just things that I can remember
happening. I saw that at the front it had been cut out, the
fence at the front, but I never saw that before.

I    When did you leave the ground? Did you make any attempt to
leave the ground before most of the other people seemed to be
leaving?

     No. They came over the speaker and said don't leave the
ground yet. And there were dribs and drabs of people going out
after that, but we stayed for quite a long time. Because, I
think, when we were actually walking away from the ground, I
looked at my watch and it was something like a quarter-to... or
ten-to-five because I remeber thinking it was time when it
would have finished anyway.

I    When you came to leave the ground, did anybody try to stop
you?

   | No.

I    Did you see any police officers in the area around the
terraces?

     Do you mean the stands or outside the ground?

I    Behind were you were standing but while you were still
inside, before you got out into the street.

     When I got back on the terraces there was a couple of
policemen come through the tunnel, were standing in the tunnel
entrance, and there was a steward there as well because
somebody started shouting at him, the steward. They were having
an argument, you know, jsut a bloke who was a bit upset, like.

I    As you were leaving the ground, but were still inside, did
you see any police officers then.


                          ‘X
     I can't remember actually going back through the tunnel
but I remember getting outside through the tunnel. Once I'd got
outside the tunnel, I started making my way away police were
around then, I think.

I    Did you go back to the Property Office?

     Oh yes. I went back to the Property Office to get my bag
and the policeman there was really nice. He was saying,
 Alright love?' and everything... but in a nice way. I said
something like, 'I've come to get my bag' and he said, 'Oh yes,
of course. He was alright about it, he was a bit shook up. It
was just him on his own then and when I came out the woman was
going back in or something.

I    Did you see any stewards around at that time?

     No. While I was still on the terraces, there was one going
round with   some water but then I didn't see any others that I
can remember. I don't remember seeing the blokeselling the
programmes again, but then they're usually sold out by then
anyway.

I   When you left the ground, did you stay outside the ground?

     When we got outside the ground, I'd arranged to meet
somebody by this post, so we went straight over to where he
was. The look on his face... We went over there and met him.
And I think there was an ambulance still outside when we got
out, because I remember having to walk round it. ThenI saw a
bloke from   the corner shop, because I said, 'Ohthere's the
bloke from   the corner shop.' and they were goingin a different
way. A crowd always, when you get out, always dissipates. So we
got out and we went and met this friend. We didn't know where
we were going everybody was walking the same way so we started
walking off, which was the opposite way from which we come. But
it led onto this railway station, but I wasn't going back to
Liverpool, I was going to Chesterfield because we were staying
overnight with my boyfriends parents, so we just walked up that
way. Everybody was walking the same way.

I   Did you see any police officers outside the ground?

     Yes, as we gradually walked away there were. Because
people were saying things about them.

I    Did you have any direct contact with them.

_    Only when we got up to the station which was, like, a ten
minute walk away. I think it was either apoliceman or
stationmaster or something, all in black... but hesaid we
couldn't get this train. So then we went down and got on a bus
that was going back and they said we didn't have to pay and
everything, I thought that was really nice. They were really


                         10
this was quite a long time after, after I goet back in the
terraces, somebody shouted at the steward and everything. And
there was that one incident where there was a policeman and a
bloke that I didn't actually see but everybody was shouting and
the policeman was all. like, huffy and everything. But I didn't
see anyone actually violent.

I    Did you witness any trouble between groups of rival
supporters?

     No. In fact, when we were on the bus on the way to
Leppings Lane, we said, 'We must be coming in from the Forest
end.' because there were loads of Forest fans on our side. All
the people we saw walking along were Forest fans.

I    Did you see any violence against any individuals including
members of the public or the emergency services?

     No.

I    Against any police officers, apart from the incident you
mentioned?

     No.

I    Against any members of the press or media?

     No.

I    Against any football supporters, be they followers of
Liverpool or Nottingham Forest?

     When we got there, when we started going towards the
ground, the policeman on the horse sort of, he pushed the bloke
along. Because I remember turning round and saying, 'They
always have an antagonistic attitude.' I noticed it more that
day because it was my first away match. When we first to
Liverpool and went on the train, as the train sets out, there's
about three policemen in our carriage - it wasn't even a
football special train because there were old people, young
people at different stations, getting on at Manchester and
things like that. But when it first set out from Liverpool,
they were just standing on the train and walking up and down
and the guard was extra vigilent about seeing your railcard and
things lilke that. It was a sort of atmosphere all the time.
It's not violence, but it's an antagonistic atmosphere. And
when we got to Sheffield, when we got off the train, there's a
line of police between you getting off the train and going
towards a special coach but it was only half-past eleven so we
wanted to go round the town. But to get through the barricade
of police. They didn't ask me 'cause I'm a girl, you know,
never cause trouble, but they asked the two blokes I was with,
'Where are you going?' That's a form of violence, if you like.
But we got through that and then when we got to the ground,


                        u
nice, because they knew something bad had happened. There were
policemen standing outside that bus.

I    You say that people were shouting things at the police?

     No, no. They were talking about them but people weren't
shouting things out.

I    From the railway station, where was the bus...?

     We walked up this   hill and there was a train station on
the hill but we couldnt get the train from    there so we walked
back down this sort of   hill, it was agreat wide road, there
were a lot of people on it. And there was a whole line of buses
so we just got on one of them.

I    Were they private buses or were they coaches?

      I think they had 'Football' written on them, because I
remember thinking this must be a special.We didn't have to pay
and it was going straight back to the scheduled station. WE had
to wait until it filled up and then it took us back.

I    Did you see anyone who appeared to be drunk, either
before, during or after the match?

     Weel before the match, when we got there, we walked down
Leppings Lane and we stood for something like, twenty minutes
outside the ground. And we were standing next to a crowd of
blokes who were singing and they had obviously been drinking,
But quite jovial because I was standing right next to them. You
know, sometimes you're next to people that you wouldn't stand
next to because they're drunk. But they were, like, happy
drunk, all singing about winning and everything and I was
singing along with them. They were drunk, but it was nothing
new.

I    About how many?

     Six to ten, something like that.

I    Did you see anyone arrested by the police at any time
during the day?

     NO.

I    Did you at anytime, after arriving at Sheffield, witness
any violence; within groups of Liverpool supporters?

 ___ No*   1 saw, it's not violence, like when I got pulled up
into the   stands everyone was panicking, you don?t see it but
you feel   everybody moving. I don't even know what Ha3 happened,
somebody   could have fallen over or something, it wasn't
violence   it just made me scared. There was people shouting,
like I said, he pushed this bloke along. That's nothing new but
it creates... Later on, when I'd got back down to the terrace,
there was that incident on the terrace where there was a
policeman having some sort of confrontation with someone, a
fan. And then there was a fan shouting at a steward and two
other policemen standing there.

I    Is there anything else you wish to add to what you've
already said?

      This was my first away match so I noticed things that I'd
 seen a bit before but never experinced in the same way. Like,
 at the football match there's always police standing around and
 it always makes me a bit... Like in the match, about ten
minutes before the end, they always have a big line of police
 coming on and it stops you seeing the match. Because you see
 this big line of beetles coming out; it distracts you from what
you re watching. It always gets you a bit anyway, that's sort
of making you feel a bit put out, that kind of feeling. I felt
 that day that from the minute of getting on the train, there's
people watching you and from getting off the train at
 Sheffield, and having to explain why you want to go to the
shops. And when you got there, they always push you around with
 the horses, and things like that. I think that's significant.
Because the only way you ever see the police at a football
match is as there to control you and to stop you. They're
always checking your tickets, they're always stopping you, they
don t give you any credibility for anything. And I think that's
how they seemed to see themselves on the day, as well. They
were just ther to stop you doing anything. When we came out of
the ground, which is like always, like yesterday when I went to
the Derby, the police are just there they have a presence and
they try and look like they're making a presence. THey have
their vans. Like yesterday when I came out of the Derby, you
couldn t move and there was a police van stopping everyone's
way, because they just have to be there. And I think that made
everything worse on the day. Because the police were trying to
stop everybody and controlling them, they weren't helping
anybody. I found out later that the police are trained in first
aid and I didn't see them doing anything except standing round
in groups of two or three, or making a barricade accross the
whole ground. That's the lasting impression - that hey didn't
do anything except try and stop people who weren't doing
anything anyway. And the other lasting impression is what
people did. Like, someone pulled me out and pulled loads of
other people out. And I saw loads and loads of fans just
carrying people. And you have to remember that it was really a
exceptional situation people around you, spontaneously, you
were just hugging other people. And when we left, when I was on
the terraces at the end, a bloke came up, I'll never see him
again, and said, See you around.* and hugged you. Some people
got angry, but even when you're angry, you?re still shaking
from what you ve seen. It's something you're not going to see
every day so people arn't... People are frustrated but they


                          15
arn t angry in a way they've thought it out, they just express
it, shout or something. But mostly, people were shocked. They
were still shaking so they couldn't... Like I've heard people
say, 'They were all rushing towards the Forest fans when the
police came out.' But that s rubbish, there were a few people
running and everyone was shouting at them to get back. Everyone
was saying, from round where I was, 'Ah no! Don't!' It was the
same yesterday, at the Derby, at the end, about two or three
kids ran onto the pitch and everyone was shouting at them and
they came back. That's what people are like, they want... You
can tell that's right because of what people have done in the
weeks that followed.
If I had anything to say, I'd want to counteract the view that
the police were there to keep order and do things positive
because they didn't do anything positive. And the idea that the
fans were there to make trouble, because they saved people. I
really want to say that because of everything they said in the
few days after really got me. Like the whole Inquiry. And when
they blame the fans it 11 just prove to me that the police
don't do anything, they're just there to keep the order and
stop people enjoying it. They do, they stop people enjoying it.
Like yeserday, all I saw was bits of blue and red and then a
big black thing in front of it. There was black every so often,
because he was walking really slowly, purposefully. They do,
they smirk at you all the time when you're at the match, look
at you like you're nothing.




End of interview
