                              ROBERT   WALLACE   CREASER

                   CHIEF   INSPECTOR   - SOUTH   YORKSHIRE   POLICE




Chief Inspector CREASER was the officer with direct control of the concourse

area and the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end of the ground and performed

the same duty at the 1988 Semi-Final.       None of his evidence in relation to

this presentation is in the form of a C.J.A.Statement.




SUMMARY      OF   EVIDENCE   AVAILABLE




POLICE OFFICERS QUESTIONNAIRE - Of no evidential value, it was not made by the

officer himself and the maker is unknown.




R 252 & 2 5 2 (amended) - R 252 is the officers original recollection which is

signed only on the last page but not dated.       R 2 5 2 (amended) is a copy of the

previous document which has no significant amendments.        It appears to be a

photo-copy of the following document S 1840.       It is signed on evry page but

not dated.




S 1840 - West Midlands copy of document R 252(amended).        Typed on plain paper

it is signed but not dated.




TRANSCRIPT OF EVIDENCE GIVEN TO THE LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR INQUIRY - 70 pages




TRANSCRIPT OF EVIDENCE GIVEN TO THE RESUMED INQUEST - 93 pages




S.74 - INCIDENT 6 - A Criminal Justice Act Statement supplied for the

Discipline enquiry.
               POLICE OFFICERS QUESTIONNAIRE RE ACTION OR

                miTTKS AT HILLSBOROUGH SEMI-FINAL 15.4.89



To Ch Insp/Insp/Sex^BSJrtr/Comit/Special--Censt             ..............

Were you involved in any way with events leading up to, during, or
following the occasion of the Liverpool/Nottingham Forest Semi-Final at
Hillsborough on 15.4.89?      YES/183*

Were you engaged on pre-arranged duties on that date?          YES/B§fcf
If YES state what duties and where carried out.
                                   / <3.     DP M's?
                                                  a>/?h

Were you off duty and attending the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground
as a spectator?     —XiBs/NO

Were you off duty and attended either at the Ground or any Police
Station, Hospital, etc, in response to any police appeal or media
broadcast?     -I^/NO       If YES please specify




Did you attend at the Ground or any other location for any other
reason?      YES/NO      If YES please specify




 If involved in any way, give brief details of your input into the
 events of that day.



                   ■ W 'r '1/   oA . $               .    fi/& > <-

 Signature    ....................          - ........      flHs      T
 Name/Rank/No ............... .....................


 THIS QUESTIONNAIRE MUST BE COMPLETED AND RETURNED TO THE INCIDENT ROOM,
 HAMMERTON ROAD POLICE STATION, BY 18.4.89. THE QUESTIONNAIRES OF
 OFFICERS ON ANNUAL LEAVE MUST BE COMPLETED ON THEIR RETURN TO DUTY.
ROBERT WALLACE CRBASER,      LL.B.




39 YEARS




CHIEF INSPECTOR




SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE,      SNIG HILL, SHEFFIELD,   S3 SLR




I am a Chief Inspector in the South Yorkshire Police at present attached

to the Communications and Computer Development Department,     Police

Headquarters,   Snig Hill,    Sheffield.




I have been a Police Officer for twenty years and have considerable

experience of policing football matches.       I have performed duty at the

following five football league grounds in South Yorkshire:




Sheffield Wednesday (Hillsborough)

Sheffield United      (Bramall Lane)

Rotherham United      (Millmoor)

Barnsley              (Oakwell)

Doncaster Rovers      (Belle Vue)
                                                                 2


The bulk of this experience has been at Hillsborough,     where I have

worked at numerous football matches.    These have included Football

League and FA Cup matches including FA Cup Semi-finals.




Hillsborough is situated within the 'F'      (Sheffield North) Division of

the South Yorkshire Police.




The first time I performed duty at Hillsborough for an FA Cup semi-final

was as a uniform patrol sergeant in 1977.




In 1981 I was posted to 'F* Division   (Sheffield North) as a uniform

patrol Inspector and I remained within the Division until the end of

1987; during that time I frequently performed football duties at

Hillsborough,




I have been on duty at the Leppings Lane end of Hillsborough Stadium for

the FA Cup Semi-final matches held in the last three years.




I have performed duty at most places within the ground although the

majority of my experience has been at the Leppings Lane end of the

ground.




Shortly after Hillsborough was selected as the venue for the Semi-final

between Liverpool FC    and Nottingham Forest FC I was contacted by

telephone by    Chief Superintendent Mole,    the then Divisional Commander

of *F* Division,   who confirmed my availibility and requested that I work
                                                                       3


at the match.     He stated that it would be his intention for me to work

at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.




Eight days prior to the Semi-final       taking place I received an Operation

Order,   A comprehensive,      yellow bound,    document which contained details

of how the event would be organised.           Over the next few days I made a

detailed study of this document and,         in particular,   the areas of the

ground where I would be supervising officers.




On Saturday 15th April 1989 I reported for duty at the ground at

approximately 9.30am.       I was in possession of my Operation Order at this

time.




My areas of responsibility were for that part of the ground which was to

be occupied,    in the main,   by Liverpool supporters and for the outside of

the ground at the Leppings lane end.




The following Inspectors were allocated to my command with areas of

responsibility as indicated below:




Inspector   Woodward              North Stand     (upper & lower level)

Inspector   Builas                West Stand

Inspector   White                 Leppings Lane Terrace & Rear Enclosure

Inspectors Sykes)                 Leppings Lane Turnstiles

            Purdy)

Inspectors Delaney      )         Reserves

            Berresford)
                                                             4


I have previously personally    performed duty at all the above locations

at the rank of Inspector.     I have previously   worked at Football matches

with all the above officers with the exception of Inspector Purdy.




The pre-match police briefing was given in the North Stand       (Cop end) and

commenced at approximately 10.0am.     It was a comprehensive briefing and

there was input from Chief Superintendent Ducfeenfield,    Inspector Sewell

and Detective Sergeant Charlesworth.




Immediately following the briefing I sought out all the above named

Inspectors and I personally handed to them written     (photocopy)   details

of criminal intelligence which had been collated concerning people

likely to attend the match from both Liverpool and Nottingham,




I spoke to each of the Inspectors and mentioned points which I

considered to be of particular importance as far as their own area of

responsibility was concerned.     I knew that Inspectors Sykes and White

both had vast experience of policing at Hillsborough and intimate

knowledge of the duties they had been allocated.




Following the briefing until approximately 2.0pm no matters of

particular note took place.     I spent this time 'walking the ground'

speaking to Inspectors,   serial sergeants and constables.




Additionally I spoke to many of the Sheffield Wednesday FC stewards who

I know (by sight but not name),    I noticed that these men appeared to be

working at locations where I had previously seen them operate.         During
                                                                   5


the course of the morning I saw, and heard part of, a briefing given by

Inspector White to these stewards.      This briefing took place in the West

Stand.




It was ray information that the first     turnstiles would be opened at 12

noon.    In fact a small number were opened prior to this and a few

spectators entered at the Leppings Lane end of the ground and went into

the Leppings Lane Terraces in the centre pens.




At approximately 12 noon I visited the Police Control Room and there

spoke to Superintendent Murray.     I asked   him if he had any preference

as to the manner   in which the spectators should be allowed to fill the

Leppings Lane Terraces.    I was informed that the filling of the fenced

pens would be allowed to take place in a natural fashion and that no

control would be   exercised by the police on the supporters regarding

which particular   pen would be   be filled.This instruction     was exactly

in-line with the instruction given the previous year when Liverpool

supporters had occupied the same parts of the stadium.         I only raised

this question because I was aware that on previous occasions different

methods had been used to accommodate spectators.




As people started to enter the stadium I could see the usual mixture of

supporters.   They were in good spirits and obviously looking forward to

what had been forecast as an interesting game between the two teams.




Shortly after 2.15pm I visited Leppings Lane where I spoke to Inspector

Sykes.   There was a contingent of Liverpool supporters standing in
Leppings Lane on the opposite side of the road to the stadium.     We

discussed the merit of encouraging these people across the road to queue

for entry to the stadium.     Many of these were openly drinking from cans

of beer and lager;   they were not at this time causing any trouble.

After discussion we agreed that such a course of action was not

necessary as there was a reasonable quantity of supporters already

forming queues outside the turnstiles.     Furthermore it was considered

that to move these people at this stage may inflame the crowd.




As time progressed towards the scheduled kick-off time it became

apparent that a large number of Liverpool supporters were still outside

the ground in Leppings Lane and in the queues to the turnstiles.        I

noticed at this time that the proportion of supporters who had obviously

been drinking increased.    They were however at this time only a minority

and were not causing any disruption.      Many of the fans -who arrived were

unsure of the geographical layout of the turnstiles which gave

admittance to the North Stand,    the Leppings Lane Terraces and Elevated

Section and the West Stand.     The signs above the turnstiles were not

clear and many fans were confused;    a specific example of this was the

alphabetic character displayed above the turnstile and the alphabetic

character shown on the ticket as the gangway to be used for access to

the West Stand were in apparent conflict.     It was necessary for Police

Officers to give constant assistance in this respect.




At approximately 2.30pm I could see that difficulties were being

experienced in the build up to the turnstiles which were allocated to
                                                            7



the North Stand,    the West Stand and the Leppings Lane Terraces         -   all

these three locations are fed from Leppings Lane.      From this point until

after 3.0pm I continued to monitor and supervise the Leppings Lane end

of the ground on the outside.




I was with Inspector Sykes when he caused the flow of traffic to stop in

Leppings Lane in order to facilitate more opportunity for the ever-

increasing pedestrian traffic to make progress.




I have considerable experience of policing this particular area and I .

could see that the build-up of supporters was later than usually the

case and there appeared to be larger numbers.     The operation was

frustrated more so by the presence of a considerable number of fans who

had arrived in the vicinity of the ground but were not in possession of

tickets entitling    them entry to what was an 'all ticket'      match.

Furthermore many Liverpool fans arrived at the Leppings Lane end of the

ground in possession of tickets which entitled them admission to the

Spion Cop and attempted to seek approval to     enter at the Leppings lane

end with friends who had legitimate tickets     for that area.




The situation outside the turnstiles,    particularly those leading to the

Leppings Lane Terraces,    was such that by approximately 2.40pm a

situation had arisen whereby there was a large crowd of supporters who

were all pushing towards the turnstiles but the turnstiles could not

accept them quickly enough to permit entry to the ground.         The mood of

this crowd was changing from a good natured crowd to a frustrated crowd

who could perhaps see that they had little chance     of gaining access
                                                                   8


prior to the start of the match.          The proportion of spectators who had

been drinking increased as time progressed but they were outnumbered by

people who did not exhibit any signs of drink.




Within this crowd there were at least           two or three police horses who

were attempting to stop the pushing.           It has always been my experience

that horses are able to control such a situation but it was obvious in

this instance that this was not the case.




A police constable was allocated to the outside of              each of the

turnstiles for the Leppings Lane terraces.           These officers were given

the task of preventing supporters entering the ground in possession of

weapons,   banners,   alcohol etc.       This searching action did not impede the

rate of flow of spectators      through the turnstiles.           Because of the

intense pressure from the surging crowd it was necessary to withdraw

those officers from that position;          a decision taken by Inspector Purdy

which I- fully supported.




With a view to reducing the area covered by the police horses I

instructed officers to close the gates which are situated away from the

turnstiles next to the river         -    I did this because fans were using this

gate to get around the horses.




The crush within the crowd was such that people were suffering and there

was the possibility of severe injuries taking place.              I saw two or three

bodies of young persons passed over the heads of members of the crowd,

these people either had,     or were close to,      fainting.
                                                               9


At approximately 2.45pm I re-joined        Inspector Sykes in Leppings Lane

and we adopted a strategy of forming a line of police horses at the rear

of the crowd with a view to preventing the queues at the turnstiles

becoming larger.      This took some time to arrange.    There were gaps

between one police horse and the next one and I attempted to arrange for

a police officer to 'plug' each gap.        Many supporters approached this

line and forced their way through despite firm advice not to do so.           I

even saw a supporter crawl under the beliy of a horse in order to breach

the line.




I could see that some people were climbing over the top of the

turnstiles in order to gain admittance to the stadium and at one point I

recall seeing Inspector Bennett     C F'   Division) on top of the wall above

the turnstiles serving the Leppings Lane Terraces.




Some minutes later I attempted to contact Police Control by radio but

could not do so; there appeared to be a fault with my particular radio

(a Pye PFX personal hand-held radio)       in that it was receiving but 1

could not transmit.      I approached Police Constable Buxton who was at

this time in a Police Landrover.      This vehicle was parked in Leppings

Lane and the officer was giving instructions to the supporters by means

of a public address system.       He was urging the spectators not to push

forward.     I requested Police Constable Buxton to suggest to the Control

Room that consideration be given to delaying the kick-off time of the

match   (his radio,   a Motorola HT600E hand-held radio appeared to be

functioning well).       This suggestion was apparently not acted upon.
                                                                10


At approximately this time I was able to see that the large 'concertina'

gates,   known as A, B, and C had been opened and that a large proportion

of the crowd surged forward through these gates.      These gates were only

opened for a short period of time and I could see officers/stewards at

the rear of the gates apparently struggling to close them,     which they

were subsequently able to do.    It is my impression that Gate C remained

open for a longer prlod than the others.    As a result of this action the

pressure on the turnstiles reduced although supporters were still

arriving at the ground.    This action clearly had the result of easing

the tension outside the turnstiles although the crowd there were still

pushing forward.




A short time later,   I would estimate just after 3.0pm,   there was a

request for all officers to attend inside the ground to deal with an .

apparent invasion of the surface playing area.     I did not hear the

specific radio transmission but I did hear officers around me saying

words to the effect of 'all officers inside - pitch invasion',




I inuisediatley attended inside the ground and went to the rear of the

goal at the Leppings Lane end of the stadium.    I could see that people

were trapped and that the gates from the centre pens were open and

people were coming through them.    There was considerable confusion.

Some supporters were climbing over the fences,   they were assisted to do

so by police officers and by other supporters.        I assisted in the

general activity of lifting injured and apparently dead people from the

Leppings Lane Terraces onto the playing area.    I was present at this

location prior to a 'private'   ambulance arriving.     I gave instructions
■.*«*■ .♦«
    1




                                                                            11

             to some officers in an attempt to co-ordinate what was happening.         I can

             recall in particular     instructing police Constable Goodwill      CF'

             Division) to act as the Communications Officer for Superintendent

             Greenwood who   was obviously having difficulty dealing with his radio

             and assisting in the operation.




             A short time later I attended at the gymnasium situated inside the

             stadium.    I was there concerned in the organisation of a temporary

             mortuary.   My primary tasks were ensuring that each victim brought

             inside was examined by a doctor to confirm death and to allocate an

             individual police officer to each victim       to deal with the formalities

             which would follow.




             I later acted as a logistical officer and was engaged in the liaison

             between the police,    social workers,   relatives and identification teams.

             I continued with this work until retiring from duty at 5.0am the

             following morning.
 ].                                                                            /A T I
/ 4A


      ROBERT WALLACE CREASER




      Chief Inspector




      Communications & Computer Department, Headquarters




      I am a Chief Inspector in the South Yorkshire Police at present attached to

      the Communications and Computer Development Department, Police Headquarters,

      Snig Hill, Sheffield.

      I have been a Police Officer for twenty years and have considerable

      experience of Policing football matches.     I have performed the duty at the

      following five Football League grounds in South Yorkshire:

      Sheffield Wednesday (Hillsborough)

      Sheffield United (Bramall Lane)

      Rotherham United (Millmoor)

      Barnsley (Oakwell)

      Doncaster Rovers (Belle Vue)

      The bulk of this experience has been at Hillsborough, where I have worked at

       numerous football matches.    These have included Football Leagues and F.A. Cup

       Semi-Finals.

       Hillsborough is situated within the   'F' (Sheffield North) Division of the

       South Yorkshire Police.

       The first time I performed duty at Hillsborough for an F.A. Cup Semi-Final

       was as a uniform patrol Sergeant in 1977-

       In 1981 I was posted to 'F' Division (Sheffield North) as a uniform patrol

       Inspector and I remained within the Division until the end of 1987, during

       that time I frequently performed football duties at Hillsborough.
                                       - 2 -




I have been on duty at the Leppings Lane end of Hillsborough Stadium for the

F-A. Cup Semi-Final matches held in the last three years.

I have performed duty at most places within the ground, although the majority

of my experience has been at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

Shortly after Hillsborough was selected as the venue for the Semi-Final

between Liverpool F.C. and Nottingham Forest F.C. I was contacted by

telephone by Chief Superintendent Mole, the then Divisional Commander of 'F

Division, who confirmed my availability and requested that I work at the

match.   He stated that it would be his intention for me to work at the

Leppings Lane end of the ground.    Eight days prior to the Semi-Final taking

place I received an Operation Order.     A comprehensive, yellow bound document

which contained details of how the event would be organised.      Over the next

few days I made a detailed study of this document and, in particular, the

areas of the ground where I would be supervising officers.

On Saturday, 15 April 1989, I reported for duty at the ground at

approximately 9-30 a.m.   I was in possession of my Operation Order at this


 time.

My areas of responsibility were for that part of the ground which was to be

 occupied, in the main, by Liverpool supporters and for the outside of the

 ground at the Leppings Lane end.

 The following Inspectors were allocated to my command with areas of

 responsibility as indicated below:-

 Inspector Woodward                  North Stand (upper and lower level).


 Inspector Bullas                    West Stand

 Inspector White                     Leppings Lane Terrace and rear enclosure


 Inspectors Sykes and Purdy            Leppings Lane turnstiles


 Inspectors Delaney and                Reserves


  Beresford
                                            - 3 -




I have previously personally performed duty at all the above locations at the

rank of Inspector.    I have previously worked at football matches with all the

above officers with the exceptions of Inspector Purdy.

The pre-match police briefing was given in the North Stand (Kop end) and

commenced at approximately 10.00 a.m.      It was a comprehensive briefing and

there was input from Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, Inspector Sewell and

Detective Sergeant Charlesworth.

Immediately following the briefing,      I sought out all the above named

Inspectors and I persoanlly handed to them written (photocopy) details of

criminal intelligence which had been collated concerning people likely to

attend the match from both Liverpool and Nottingham.         I spoke to each of the

Inspectors and mentioned points which I considered to be of particular

importance as far as their own area of responsibility was concerned.              I knew

that Inspectors Sykes and White both had vast experience of policing at

Hillsborough and intimate knowledge of the duties they had been

allocated.

Following the briefing until approximately 2.00 p.m. no matters of particular

note took place.     I spent this time   'walking the g r o u n d ’ speaking to

Inspectors, serial Sergeants and Constables.

Additionally,   I spoke to many of the Sheffield Wednesday F.C. stewards who I

know (by sight but not name).      I noticed that these men appeared to be

 working at locations where I had previously seen them operate.           During the

 course of the morning I saw, and heard part of a briefing given by Inspector

 White to these stewards.    This briefing took place in the West Stand.

 It was my information that the first turnstiles would be opened at 12 noon.

 In fact a small number were opened prior to this and a few spectators entered

 at the Leppings Lane end of the ground and went into the Leppings Lane

 terraces in the centre pens.
As people started to enter the stadium I could see the usual mixture of

supporters.    They were in good spirits and obviously looking forward to what

had been forecast as an interesting game between the two teams.

Shortly after 2.15 p.m. I visited Leppings Lane where I spoke to Inspector

Sykes.     There was a contingent of Liverpool supporters standing in Leppings

Lane on the opposite side of the road to the stadium.     We discussed the merit

of encouraging these people across the road to queue for entry to the

stadium.     Many of these were openly drinking from cans of beer and lager;

they were not at this time causing any trouble.     After dicussion we agreed

that such a course of action was not necessary as there was a reasonable

quantity of supporters already forming queues outside the turnstiles.

Furthermore, it was considered that to move these people at this stage may

inflame the crowd.

As time progressed towards the scheduled kick off time it became became

 apparent that a large number of Liverpool supporters were still outside the

 ground in Leppings Lane and in the queues to the turnstiles.     I noticed at

 this time that the proportion of supporters who had obviously been drinking

 increased.    They were, however, at this time only a minority and were not

 causing any disruption.    Many of the fans who arrived were unsure of the

 geographical layout of the turnstiles which gave admittance to the North

 Stand, the Leppings Lane terraces and elevated section and the West Stand.

 The signs above the turnstiles were not clear and many fans were confused, a

 specific example of this was the alphabetic character displayed above the

 turnstile and the alphabetic character shown on the ticket as the gangway to

 be used for access to the West Stand were in apparent conflict.     It was

 necessary for Police Officers to give constant assistance in this

 respect.
                                        - 5 -




At approximately 2.30 p.m.   I could see that difficulties were being

experienced in the build up to the turnstiles which were allocated to the

North Stand,   the West Stand and the Leppings Lane turnstiles - all these

three locations are fed from Leppings Lane.     From this point until after

3.00 p.m. I continued to monitor and supervise the Leppings Lane end of the

ground on the outside.

I was with Inspector Sykes when he caused the flow of traffic to stop in

Leppings Lane in order to facilitate more opportunity for the ever increasing

pedestrian traffic to make progress.

I have considerable experience of policing this particular area and I could

see that the build up of supporters was later than usually the case and there

appeared to be larger numbers.    The operation was frustrated more so by the

presence of a considerable number of fans who had arrived in the vicinity of

the ground, but were not in possession of tickets entitling them entry to

what was an 'all ticket' match.     Furthermore, many Liverpool fans arrived at

 the Leppings Lane end of the ground in possession of tickets which entitled

 them admission to the Spion kop and attempted to seek approval to enter at

 the Leppings Lane end with friends who had legitimate tickets for that


 area.

 The situation outside the turnstiles, particularly those leading to the

 Leppings Lane terraces, was such that by approximately 2.40 p.m.    a situation

 had arisen whereby there was a large crowd of supporters who were all pushing

 towards the turnstiles, but the turnstiles could not accept them quickly

 enough to permit entry to the ground.    The mood of this crowd was changing

 from a good natured crowd to a frustrated crowd who could perhaps see that

 they had little chance of gaining access prior to the start of the match.

 The proportion of spectators who had been drinking inceased as time

 progressed but they were outnumbered by people who did not exhibit any signs
of drink.   Within this crowd there were at least two or three Police horses

who were attempting to stop the pushing.     It has always been my experience

that horses are able to control such a situation, but it was obvious in this

instance that this was not the case.

A Police Constable was allocated to the outside of each of the turnstiles for

the Leppings Lane terraces.    These officers were given the task of preventing

supporters entering the ground in possession of weapons, banners,    alcohol

etc.   This searching action did not impede the rate of flow of spectators

through the turnstiles.   Because of the intense pressure from the surging

crowd, it was necessary to withdraw those officers from that position; a

decision taken by Inspector Purdy, which I fully supported.

With a view to reducing the area covered by the Police horses, I instructed

officers to close the gates which are situated away from the turnstiles next

to the river - I did this because fans were using this gate to get around the

horses.

The crush within the crowd was such that people were suffering and there was

the possibility of severe injuries taking place.     I saw two or three bodies

of young persons passed over the heads of members of the crowd,    these people

either had, or were close to fainting.

At approximately 2.45 p.m.    I rejoined Inspector Sykes in Leppings Lane and we

adopted a strategy of forming a line of Police horses at the rear of the

crowd with a view to preventing the queues at the turnstiles becoming larger.

This took some time to arrange.     There were gaps between one Police horse and

the next one and I attempted to arrange for a Police Officer to 'plug' each

gap.   Many supporters approached this line and forced their way through,

despite firm advice not to do so.      I even saw a supporter crawl under the

belly of a horse in order to breach the line.
                                       - 7 -




I could see that some people were climbing over the top of the turnstiles in

order to gain admittance to the stadium and at one point I recall seeing

Inspector Bennett ( ’F ’ Division) on top of the wall above the turnstiles


serving the Leppings Lane terraces.

Some minutes later I attempted to contact Police Control by radio but could

not do so; there appeared to be a fault with my particular radio (a Pye PFX

personal hand held radio) in that it was receiving but I could not transmit.

I approached Police Constable Buxton who was at this time in a Police

Landrover.     This vehicle was parked in Leppings Lane and the orficer was

giving instructions to the supporters by means or a public address system.

He was urging t h e spectators not to push forward.      I requested Police

 Constable Buxton to suggest to the Control Room that consideration be given

 to delaying the kick-off time of the match (his radio, a Motorola HT600E hand

 held radio,   appeared to be functioning well).

 At approximately this time I was able to see that the large      'concertina'

 gates, known as 'A', 'B' and ' C ,   had been opened and that a large proportion

 or the crowd surged forward through these gates.       These gates were only

 opened ror a short period or time and I could see officers/stewards at the

 rear of the gates apparently struggling to close them, which they were

  subsequently able to do.    It is my impression that gate ' C    remained open for

  a longer period than the others.    As a result of this action the pressure on

  the turnstiles reduced although supporters were still arriving at the ground.

  This action clearly had the result or easing the tension outside the

  turnstiles although the crowd there were still pushing forward.

  A short time later, I would estimate just after 3.00 p.m., there was a

  request for all officers to attend inside the ground to deal with an apparent

  invasion of the surrace playing area.        I did not hear the speciric radio

  transmission but I did hear officers around me saying words to the effect of
                                        - 8 -




'all officers inside - pitch invasion'.

I immediately attended inside the ground and went to the rear of the goal at

the Leppings Lane end of the stadium.     I could see that people were trapped

and that the gates from the centre pens were open and people were coming

through them.     There was considerable confusion.   Some supporters were

climbing over the fences,    they were assisted to do so by the Police Officers

and by other supporters.     I assisted in the general activity of lifting

injured and apparently dead people from the Leppings Lane terraces onto the

playing area.     I was present at this location prior to a 'private' ambulance

arriving.   I gave instructions to some officers in an attempt to co-ordinate

what was happening.     I can recall, in particular, instructing Police

Constable Goodwill    ('F' Division) to act as the Communications Officer for

Superintendent Greenwood.

A short time later I attended at the gymnasium situated inside the stadium.

I was there concerned in the organisation of a temporary mo r tu a ry .    My

primary tasks were ensuring that each victim brought inside was examined by a

doctor to confirm death, and to allocate an individual Police Officer to each

victim to deal with the formalities which would follow.

I later acted as a logistical officer and was engaged in the liaison between

 the Police,    Social Workers, relatives and identification   teams.     I continued

with this work until retiring from duty at 5-00 a.m. the following morning.
                                                                                                                                                                  ik
                                                    STATEMENT OF WITNESS

                    (C.J. Act, 196 7 , s.9; M.C.A., 198 0 , s. 102; M.C. Rules, 1 9 8 1 , r.70)

             STATEMENT OF                                                ROBERT WALLACE CREASER, LL.B

             AGE OF WITNESS (if over 21 enter “ over 2 1 ” )                                          40 Y e a r s

             OCCUPATION OF WITNESS                                       CHIEF INSPECTOR
             ADD RESS A N D TELEPHONE NUMBER                                            SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE, SNIG HILL,
                                                                                        SHEFFIELD. S3 8LY
             This statem ent, consisting of         ^      pages each signed by m e, is true to th e best o f my knowledge and belief and I make

             it know ing th a t, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which

             I kn ow to be false o r do n o t believe to be true.


             D ated the          1 3 th    day of       J u ly         . 19    90


                                                           Sign


                                              Signature witn


                                                                                                             , being unable to read th e statem ent below,


             I,                                                               of                                                                       , read

             it to him before he signed it.


             D ated th e                   day of                      , 19

        On        Wednesday               22nd      March         1989 I attended a meeting at Hammerton Road Police

        Station which had been                             arranged                to   discuss           the    planning           of     the     FA           Cup

        Semi-final to be held on Saturday 15th April 1989.


        I did not attend at any further planning meetings or pre-match briefings prior

        to the date of the semi-final.                                    I did however keep in close contact with those

        senior officers involved in the preparation and planning of the event.



        Whilst I did not attend the pre-match briefing held on Friday 14th April 1989,

        I did take positive steps to ensure that I was fully acquainted                                                                  with          details
        of        that          briefing            and any particular matters which may have been contrary to

        the normal policing arrangements at Hillsborough Stadium.                                                               I     am     an        officer

        with        considerable experience of policing at Hillsborough and am familiar with

        policing arrangements.


        On the morning of Saturday 15th April 1989                                                    I   attended        the        formal        briefing

        given              to       all      officers             on      Saturday             15th        April       1989         headed        by       Chief

        Superintendent Duckenfield.




GEN/5                                                                               gnature witness

                            R. W. CREASER
                                                                                           2
                                                     STATEMENT OF WITNESS

                                (CJ Act, 1967, s.9: MC Act, 1980, s.102: MC Rules, 1981, r.70)


              Continuation of statement of              ROBERT WALLACE CREASER




        I am unable to remember the                  precise        contents        of     the     briefing     but        I     can
        particularly remember the briefing because it was the first one I had attended

        which had been conducted by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.                                         The     briefing
        was       both thorough and comprehensive and I was impressed by the quality of the

        information which had been included.                        The briefing contained              many        references
        to        the     safety of members of the public and on conclusion I was left with the
        i m p r e s s i o n that safety had          been        given     a      larger         prominence     than           other
        briefings          I     have attended which may have concentrated more on the problem of

        public disorder.              I can recall that Chief Superintendent                        Du c kenfield1s            final

        comment was specific and related to the safety of the public.


        On        conclusion of the briefing I was fully satisfied that a most competent and

        professional task had been accomplished.


        Shortly following this briefing,                    I had detailed discussions with other                          police

        commanders             who   were   involved        in     the     policing        operation.      These could be

        classified as informal briefings or tactical discussions.


        I have been asked to comment in particular in relation to any                                    briefing              which

        may        have    been given concerning the transfer of Liverpool fans from the Spion

        Kop to the Leppings Lane terraces.

                                                            •
        I understand that the Operation Order specified (in a part                                    which     deals           with

        the        responsibilities         of   a    serial of officers on the Spion Kop) that in the

        event of Liverpool supporters gaining entry by ticket to the Spion                                          Kop,        they

        would be transferred to the Leppings Lane end of the ground.




GEN/6        Si                                                   ignature witi
   4
                                                                                                                3
                                                     STATEMENT OF WITNESS

                              (CJ Act, 1967, s.9: MC Act, 1980, s.102: MC Rules, 1981, r.70)


             Continuation of statement of             ROBERT WALLACE CREASER




        I    am   unable to recall this matter being given specific mention at any formal

        or informal briefing I attended.                     This does not indicate that it                         was    omitted

        from any briefing and it is quite possible that it was mentioned.


        In the event of Liverpool fans being on the Spion Kop consideration would have
        been given to transferring them or                     otherwise.              This       would      depend        on     the
        numbers      involved            -   a very small number could be accommodated but the matter

        would have been considered                   very    seriously          in   view        of    the   potential            for
        overcrowding          at     the      Leppings      Lane     end       of    the       stadium.      I believe that,
        irrespective of what the Operation Order specifies, an evaluation                                            would       have

        been      given to the situation to see if such transfer was feasible; it is quite
        likely that an operational decision would have been made for those                                            supporters
        to     remain    on        the       Spion Kop and to have been given attention by a serial of

        police officers.


        I have also been asked                  to   clarify       the     briefing        I     was    given        as     to    the

        monitoring of supporters in the Leppings Lane terraces.


        Again I am unable to specify what information was given at the briefings but I

        was left in no doubt that the usual arrangements would be                                      followed           and    that
        the density of the crowds would be monitored closely by police officers.



        At     approximately 12 noon on Saturday 15th April 1989 I attended at the Police

        Control Room.          I there had a conversation                   with      Superintendent            Murray.            We
        discussed        and confirmed the previously agreed method which was to be used for

        the filling of the pens sited on the Leppings Lane terraces.


        As a result of this discussion I made arrangements to ensure that there was no

        policy      of    firstly filling a particular pen, then another one and so on.                                           The

        fans would be permitted to fill the pens to a comfortable level and this would

        be     closely     monitored by the police.                  This procedure had been used previously




GEN/6                                                          Signature wit
                                              STATEMENT OF WITNESS

                           (CJ Act, 1967, s.9: MC Act, 1980, s.102: MC Rules, 1981, r.70)


          Continuation of statement of         ROBERT WALLACE CREASER



        at football matches involving a              large     number   of   spectators   and   had   been

        successful.




GEN/6     Signed . .   ...............................   Signature
                              ROBERT   WALLACE     CREASER

                   CHIEF   INSPECTOR     - SOUTH   YORKSHIRE   POLICE




Chief Inspector CREASER was the officer with direct control of the concourse

area and the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end of the ground and performed

the same duty at the 1988 Semi-Final.         None of his evidence in relation to

this presentation is in the form of a C.J.A.Statement.




SUMMARY      OF   EVIDENCE   AVAILABLE




POLICE OFFICERS QUESTIONNAIRE - Of no evidential value, it was not made by the

officer himself and the maker is unknown.




R 252 & 2 5 2 (amended) - R 252 is the officers original recollection which is

signed only on the last page but not dated.         R 2 5 2 (amended) is a copy of the

previous document which has no significant amendments.          It appears to be a

photo-copy of the following document S 1840.         It is signed on evry page but

not dated.




S 1840 - West Midlands copy of document R 252(amended).          Typed on plain paper

it is signed but not dated.




TRANSCRIPT O F EVIDENCE GIVEN TO THE LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR INQUIRY - 70 pag




TRANSCRIPT OF EVIDENCE GIVEN TO THE RESUMED INQUEST - 93 pages




S . 74 - INCIDENT 6 - A Criminal Justice Act Statement supplied for the

Discipline enquiry.
               POLICE OFFICERS QUESTIONNAIRE RE ACTION OR

               DUTIES AT HILLSBOROUGH SEMI-FINAL 15.4.89



To Ch Insp/Insp/SargB&ptr/CDaKt/Special «Censt -

Were you involved in any way with events leading up to, during# or
following the occasion of the Liverpool/Nottingham Forest Semi-Final at
Hillsborough on 15.4.89?      YES/MSST


Were you engaged on pre-arranged duties on that date?       YES/H^r
If YES state what duties and where carried out.
                                 / /2>.



Were you off duty and attending the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground
as a spectator?     JlSk/NO


Were you off duty and attended either at the Ground or any Police
Station, Hospital, etc, in response to any police appeal or media
broadcast?     _Jg£/NO      If YES please specify




Did you attend at the Ground or any other location for any other
reason?      YES/NO      If YES please specify




If involved in any way, give brief details of your input into the
events of that day.



                  I v ' r V   e > M   .




Signature
Name/Rank/No


THIS QUESTIONNAIRE MUST BE COMPLETED AND RETURNED TO THE INCIDENT ROOM,
HAMMERTON ROAD POLICE STATION, BY 18.4.89. THE QUESTIONNAIRES OF
OFFICERS ON ANNUAL LEAVE MUST BE COMPLETED ON THEIR RETURN TO DUTY.
ROBERT WALLACE CREASER, LL.B.



39 YEARS



CHIEF INSPECTOR




SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE, SIIG HILL, SHEFFIELD, S3 8LR




I am a Chief Inspector in the South Yorkshire Folice at present attached

to the Communications and Computer Development Department, Police

Headquarters, Snig Hill, Sheffield.



I have been a Police Officer for twenty years and have considerable

experience of policing football matches.   I have performed duty at the

following five football league grounds in South Yorkshire:



Sheffield Vednesday (Hillsborough)

Sheffield United    (Bramall Lane)

Rotherham United    (Millmoor)

Barnsley            (Oakwell)

Doncaster Rovers    (Belle Vue)
'■                       *           ;-J."'■•;••   - .•«.»«■*•       .



        ’
     The bulk of this experience has been a               t      h   ®   v   e

     worked at numerous football matches.          These have included Football

     League and FA Cup matches including FA Cup Seai-finals.




     Hillsborough is situated within the 'F'           (Sheffield North) Division of

     the South Yorkshire Police.




     The first time I performed duty at Hillsborough for an FA Cup semi-final

     was as a uniform patrol sergeant in 1977.




     In 1981 I was posted to *F* Division          (Sheffield North) as a uniform

     patrol Inspector and I remained within the Division until the end of

     1987; during that time I frequently performed football duties at

     Hillsborough.




     I have been on duty at the Leppings Lane end of Hillsborough Stadium for

     the FA Cup Semi-final matches held in the last three years.




     I have performed duty at most places within the ground although the

     majority of my experience has been at the Leppings Lane end of the

     ground.




     Shortly after Hillsborough was selected as the venue for the Semi-final

     between Liverpool FC    and Nottingham Forest FC I was contacted by

     telephone by    Chief Superintendent Mole, the then Divisional Commander

     of 'F' Division,   who confirmed my availibility and requested that I work
                                                                          V^rv-.:;- v.
                             ted that it would be his intention for me to work

 at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.




 Eight days prior to the Semi-final taking place I received an Operation

 Order.     A comprehensive,    yellow bound,    document which contained details

 of how the event would be organised.           Over the next few days I made a

detailed study of this document and,          in particular,   the areas of the

ground where I would be supervising officers.




On Saturday 15th April        1989 I reported for duty at the ground at

approximately 9.30am.         I was in possession of my Operation Order at this

time.




My areas of responsibility were for that part of the ground which was to

be occupied,    in the main,     by Liverpool supporters and for the outside of

the ground at the Leppings lane end.




The following Inspectors were allocated to my command with areas of

responsibility as indicated below:




Inspector     Woodward             North Stand    (upper & lower level)

Inspector     Builas               Vest Stand

Inspector     White                Leppings Lane Terrace & Rear Enel osure

Inspectors Sykes)                  Leppings Lane Turnstiles

              Purdy)

Inspectors Delaney       )         Reserves

             Berresford)
I have previously personally     performed duty at all the above locations

at the rank of Inspector.     I have previously   worked at Football matches

with all the above officers with the exception of Inspector Purdy.




The pre-match police briefing was given in the North Stand     (Cop end) and

commenced at approximately 10.0am.     It was a comprehensive briefing and

there was input from Chief Superintendent Duckenfield,     Inspector Sewell

and Detective Sergeant Charlesworth.




Immediately following the briefing I sought out all the above named

Inspectors and I personally handed to them written     (photocopy)   details

of criminal intelligence which had been collated concerning people

likely to attend the match from both Liverpool and Nottingham.




I spoke to each of the Inspectors and mentioned points which I

considered to be of particular importance as far as their own area of

responsibility was concerned.     I knew that Inspectors Sykes and White

both had vast experience of policing at Hillsborough and intimate

knowledge of the duties they had been allocated.




Following the briefing until approximately 2.0pm no matters of

particular note took place.     I spent this time 'walking the ground'

speaking to Inspectors,   serial sergeants and constables.




Additionally I spoke to many of the Sheffield Wednesday FC stewards who

I know (by sight but not name),    I noticed that these men appeared to be

working at locations where I had previously seen them operate.       During
          '■I-                        ''A'r




  the course of the morning I saw, and heard part of, a briefing
                                             uart of.   bripfinff given by
                                                                        k„


 ■Inspector Shite to these stewards.          This briefing took place in the West

 Stand.




 It was my information that the first          turnstiles would be opened at 12

 noon.     In fact a small number were opened prior to this and a few

 spectators entered at the Leppings Lane end of the ground and went into

 the Leppings Lane Terraces in the centre pens.




 At approximately 12 noon I visited the Police Control Room and there

 spoke to Superintendent Murray.     I asked him if he had any preference

 as to the manner in which the spectators should be allowed to fill the

 Leppings Lane Terraces.      I was informed that the filling of the fenced

pens would be allowed to take place in a natural fashion and that no

control would be exercised by the police on the supporters regarding

which particular pen would be be filled.          This instruction was exactly

in-line with the instruction given the previous year when Liverpool

supporters had occupied the same parts of the stadium.           I only raised

this question because I was aware that on previous occasions different

methods had been used to accommodate spectators.




As people started to enter the stadium I could see the usual mixture of

supporters.      They were in good spirits and obviously looking forward to

what had been forecast as an interesting game between the two teams.




Shortly after 2.15pm I visited Leppings Lane where I spoke to Inspector

Sykes.    There was a contingent of Liverpool supporters standing in
Leppings Lane on the opposite side of the road to the stadium.     We

discussed the merit of encouraging these people across the road to queue

for entry to the stadium,     Many of these were openly drinking from cans

of beer and lager; they were not at this time causing any trouble,

After discussion we agreed that such a course of action was not

necessary as there was a reasonable quantity of supporters already

forming queues outside the turnstiles.     Furthermore it was considered

that to move these people at this stage may inflame the crowd.




As time progressed towards the scheduled kick-off time it became

apparent that a large number of Liverpool supporters were still outside

the ground in Leppings Lane and in the queues to the turnstiles.        I

noticed at this time that the proportion of supporters who had obviously

been drinking increased.    They were however at this time only a minority

and were not causing any disruption.      Many of the fans who arrived were

unsure of the geographical layout of the turnstiles which gave

admittance to the Iforth Stand,   the Leppings Lane Terraces and Elevated

Section and the Vest Stand.     The signs above the turnstiles were not

clear and many fans were confused;    a specific example of this was the

alphabetic character displayed above the turnstile and the alphabetic

character shown on the ticket as the gangway to be used for access to

the Vest Stand were in apparent conflict.     It was necessary for Police

Officers to give constant assistance in this respect.




At approximately 2.30pm I could see that difficulties were being

experienced in the build up to the turnstiles which were allocated to
the North Stand, the Vest Stand and the Leppings Lane Terraces           -   all

these three locations are fed froa Leppings Lane.     From this point until

after 3,0pm I continued to monitor and supervise the Leppings Lane end

of the ground on the outside.




I was with Inspector Sykes when he caused the flow of traffic to stop in

Leppings Lane in order to facilitate more opportunity for the ever

increasing pedestrian traffic to make progress.




I have considerable experience of policing this particular area and I

could see that the build-up of supporters was later than usually the

case and there appeared to be larger numbers.     The operation was

frustrated more so by the presence of a considerable number of fans who

had arrived in the vicinity of the ground but were not in possession of

tickets entitling   them entry to what was an 'all ticket'      match.

Furthermore many Liverpool fans arrived at the Leppings Lane end of the

ground in possession of tickets which entitled t h em admission to the

Spion Cop and attempted to seek approval to    enter at the Leppings lane

end with friends who had legitimate tickets    for that area.




The situation outside the turnstiles,   particularly those leading to the

Leppings Lane Terraces,   was such that by approximately 2.40 pm a

situation had arisen whereby there was a large crowd of supporters who

were all pushing towards the turnstiles but the turnstiles could not

accept them quickly enough to permit entry to the ground.       The mood of

this crowd was changing from a good natured    crowd to a frustrated crowd

who could perhaps see that they had little chance    of gaining access
                                                                        ^     V:
                                                                               v.
                                    ■/V- ; ‘V , , ;   v ' ■ . ".v

                                                                                                          " "        ;;v ,■
"   ■■
         •• " ••:   prior to the start of the natch.                        The proportion of spectators who had

                    been drinking increased as time progressed but they were outnumbered by

                    people who did not exhibit any signs of drink.




                    Within this crowd there were at least                           two or three police horses who

                    were attempting to stop the pushing.                        It has always been my experience

                    that horses are able to control such a situation but it was obvious in

                    this instance that this was not the case.




                    A police constable was allocated to the outside of                          each of the

                    turnstiles for the Leppings Lane terraces.                          These officers were given

                    the task of preventing supporters entering the ground in possession of

                    weapons,   banners, alcohol etc.                    This searching action did not impede the

                    rate of flow of spectators               through the turnstiles.              Because of the

                    intense pressure from the surging crowd it was necessary to withdraw

                    those officers from that position;                      a decision taken by Inspector Purdy

                    which I fully supported.




                    With a view to reducing the area covered by the police horses I

                    instructed officers to close the gates which are situated away from the

                    turnstiles next to the river                    -    I did this because fans were using this

                    gate to get around the horses.




                    The crush within the crowd was such that people were suffering and there

                    was the possibility of severe injuries taking place.                          I s a w two or three

                    bodies of young persons passed over the heads of members of the crowd,

                    these people either had,          or were close to, fainting.
At approximately 2.45pm I re-joined     Inspector Sykes in Leppings Lane

and we adopted a strategy of forming a line of police torses at the rear

of the crowd with a view to preventing the queues at the turnstiles

becoming larger.     This took some time to arrange.   There were gaps

between one police horse and the next one and I attempted to arrange for

a police officer to 'plug' each gap.     Many supporters approached this

line and forced their way through despite firm advice not to do so.        I

even saw a supporter crawl under the belly of a horse in order to breach

the line.



I could see that some people were climbing over the top of the

turnstiles in order to gain admittance to the stadium and at one point I

recall seeing Inspector Bennett OF' Division) on top of the wall above

the turnstiles serving the Leppings Lane Terraces,



Some minutes later I attempted to contact Police Control by radio but

could not do so; there appeared to be a fault with my particular radio

<a Pye PFX personal hand-held radio) in that it was receiving but I

could not transmit.     1 approached Police Constable Buxton who was at

this time in a Police Landrover.     This vehicle was parked in Leppings

Lane and the officer was giving instructions to the supporters by means

of a public address system.      He was urging the spectators not to push

forward.    I requested Police Constable Buxton to suggest to the Control

Room that consideration be given to delaying the kick-off time of the

match <his radio, a Motorola HT600E hand-held radio appeared to be

functioning well).     This suggestion was apparently not acted upon.
At approximately this time I was able to see that the large 'concertina'

gates, known as A, B, and C had been opened and that a large proportion

of the crowd surged forward through these gates.     These gates were only

opened for a short period of time and I could see officers/stewards at

the rear of the gates apparently struggling to close them, which they

were subsequently able to do.   It is my impression that Gate C remained

open for a longer priod than the others.   As a result of this action the

pressure on the turnstiles reduced although supporters were still

arriving at the ground.   This action clearly had the result of easing

the tension outside the turnstiles although the crowd there were still

pushing forward.



A short time later, I would estimate just after.3.Opm, there was a

request for all officers to attend inside the ground to deal with an

apparent invasion of the surface playing area.     I did not hear the

specific radio transmission but I did hear officers around me saying

words to the effect of 'all officers inside - pitch invasion'.



I imiuedjatley attended inside the ground and went to the rear of the

goal at the Leppings Lane end of the stadium.    I could see that people

were trapped and that the gates from the centre pens were open and

people were coming through them.   There was considerable confusion.

Some supporters were climbing over the fences, they were assisted to do

so by police officers and by other supporters.      I assisted in the

general activity of lifting injured and apparently dead people from the

Leppings Lane Terraces onto the playing area.    I was present at this

location prior to a 'private' ambulance arriving.    I gave instructions
                                                            11

to some Officers in an attempt to co-ordinate what was happening.       I can

recall in particular    instructing police Constable Goodwill    <'F'

Division) to act as the Communications Officer for Superintendent

Greenwood who   was obviously having difficulty dealing with his radio

and assisting in the operation.




A short time later I attended at the gymnasium situated inside the

stadium.    I was there concerned in the organisation of a temporary

mortuary.   My primary tasks were ensuring that each victim brought

inside was examined by a doctor to confirm death and to allocate an

individual police officer to each victim   to deal with the formalities

which would follow.




I later acted as a logistical officer and was engaged in the liaison

between the police, social workers, relatives and identification teams.

I continued with this work until retiring from duty at 5.0am the

following morning.
ROBERT WALLACE CREASER




Chief Inspector




Communications & Computer Department, Headquarters




I am a Chief Inspector in the South Yorkshire Police at present attached to

the Communications and Computer Development Department, Police Headquarters,

Snig Hill, Sheffield.

I have been a Police Officer for twenty years and have considerable

experience of Policing football matches.     I have performed the duty at the

following five Football League grounds in South Yorkshire:

Sheffield Wednesday (Hillsborough)

Sheffield United (Bramall Lane)

Rotherham United (Millmoor)

Barnsley (Oakwell)

Doncaster Rovers (Belle Vue)

The bulk of this experience has been at Hillsborough, where I have worked at

numerous football matches.     These have included Football Leagues and F.A. Cup

Semi-Finals.

Hillsborough is situated within the ’F ’ (Sheffield North) Division of the

South Yorkshire Police.

The first time I performed duty at Hillsborough for an F.A. Cup Semi-Final

 was as a uniform patrol Sergeant in 1977-

 In 1981 I was posted to ’F ’ Division (Sheffield North) as a uniform patrol

 Inspector and I remained within the Division until the end of 1987, during

 that time I frequently performed football duties at Hillsborough.
                   \ ' y         :T':   ;   ',   '   v    .! V   ^   :   '   U   V   v   '   .      ^      ■/          -   •' —




                                                                 -       2   -




I have been on duty at the Leppings Lane end of Hillsbo r ou g h Stadium for the

F-A. Cup Semi-Final m a tc h es held in the last three years.

I have performed duty at mo s t places within the ground,                                                although the majority

of m y experience has b e e n at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

Shortly after Hillsborough was selected as the venue for the Semi-Final

between Liverpool F.C.           and Nottingham Forest F.C.                                       I was contacted by

telephone by Chief Superintendent Mole, the then Divisional Commander of ’F ’

Division, who confirmed my availability and requested that I work at the

match.   He stated that it would be his intention for me to work at the

Leppings Lane end of the ground.                         Eight days prior to the Semi-Final taking

place I received an Op e ra t io n Order.                            A comprehensive, yellow bound document

whi c h contained details of how the event would be organised.                                                  Over the next

few days I made a de t ailed study of this document and,                                                in particular, the

areas of the ground wh e re I would be supervising officers.

On Saturday, 15 April 1989, I reported for duty at the ground at

approximately 9-30 a.m.             I was in possession of my Operation Order at this

time.

My areas of r esponsibility were for that part of the ground which was to be

occupied, in the main, by Liverpool supporters and for the outside of the

ground at the Leppings Lane end.

The following Inspectors were allocated to my command with areas of

responsibility as indicated below:-

Inspector Woodward                                       North Stand (upper and lower level).

Inspector Bullas                                         West Stand

Inspector White                                      Leppings Lane                               Terrace and rear   enclosure

Inspectors Sykes and Pu rd y                         Leppings Lane                               turnstiles

Inspectors Delaney         and                           Reserves

 Beresford
I have previously p e r s on a ll y performed duty at all the above locations at the

rank of Inspector.    I have previously worked at football matches with all the

above officers with the exceptions of Inspector Purdy.

T h e pre-match police briefing was given in the North Stand (Kop end) and

commenced at approxim a te l y 10.00 a.m.     It was a comprehensive briefing and

there was input from C h i e f Superintendent Duckenfield, Inspector Sewell and

Detective Sergeant Charlesworth.

Immediately following the briefing, I sought out all the            above named

Inspectors and I persoanlly handed to them written (photocopy)           details of

criminal intelligence whi c h had been collated concerning people likely to

attend the ma t ch from b ot h Liverpool and Nottingham.      I spoke to each of the

Inspectors and me n tioned points which I considered to be of particular

importance as far as th ei r own area of responsibility was concerned.            I knew

that Inspectors Sykes and White both had vast experience of policing at

Hillsborough and intimate knowledge of the duties they had been

allocated.

Following the briefing until approximately 2.00 p.m. no matters of particular

note took place.     I spent this time      'walking the ground'   speaking to

Inspectors, serial Sergeants and Constables.

Additionally,   I spoke to many of the Sheffield Wednesday F.C. stewards who I

know (by sight but not name).      I noticed that these men appeared to be

working at locations where I had previously seen them o p e r a t e .     During the

course of the m o r n in g I saw, and heard part of a briefing given by Inspector

White to these stewards.      This briefing took place in the West Stand.

It was my information that the first turnstiles would be opened at 12 noon.

 In fact a small number were opened prior to this and a few spectators entered

 at the Leppings Lane end of the ground and went into the Leppings Lane

 terraces in the centre pens.
               ■ 1   ••-.'• '   -- '   ■   '             .   ■>   ■ ■   '   1.   -.    .   •   .   ....   - ■■ ■      ... j   ‘ . •:




As people started to enter the stadium I could see the usual mixture of

supporters.          They were in good spirits and obviously looking forward to what

had been forecast as an interesting game between the two teams.

Shortly after 2.15 p.m. I visited Leppings Lane where I spoke to Inspector

Sykes.     There was a contingent of Liverpool supporters standing in Leppings

Lane on the opposite side of the road to the stadium.                                  We discussed the merit

of encouraging these people across the road to queue for entry to the

stadium.     Many of these were openly drinking from cans of beer and lager;

they were not at this time causing any trouble.                                  After dicussion we agreed

that such a course of action was not necessary as there was a reasonable

quantity of supporters already forming queues outside the turnstiles.

Furthermore, it was considered that to move these people at this stage may

inflame the crowd.

As time progressed towards the scheduled kick off time it became became

apparent that a large number of Liverpool supporters were still outside the

ground in Leppings Lane and in the queues to the turnstiles.                                       I noticed at

this time that the proportion of supporters who had obviously been drinking

increased.     They were, however, at this time only a minority and were not

causing any disruption.                        Many of the fans who arrived were unsure of the

geographical layout of the turnstiles which gave admittance to the North

Stand,   the Leppings Lane terraces and elevated section and the West Stand.

The signs above the turnstiles were not clear and many fans were confused, a

specific example of this was the alphabetic character displayed above the

turnstile and the alphabetic character shown on the ticket as the gangway to

be used for access to the West Stand were in apparent conflict.                                              It was

n ec essary for Police Officers to give constant assistance in this

respect.
                                         -   5 ■-


At approximately 2.30 p.m.   I could see that difficulties were being

experienced in the build u p to the turnstiles which were allocated to the

North Stand, the West Stand and the Leppings Lane turnstiles - all these

three locations are fed fr o m Leppings Lane.       From this point until after

3.00 p.m. I continued to m o n i t o r and supervise the Leppings Lane end of the

ground on the outside.

I was with Inspector Sykes w h e n he caused the flow of traffic to stop in

Leppings Lane in order to facilitate more opportunity for the ever increasing

pedestrian traffic to make progress.

I have considerable experience of policing this particular area and I could

see that the build up of supporters     was later than usually the case and there

appeared to be larger numbers.    The   operation was frustrated more so by the

presence of a considerable n u m b er of fans who had arrived in the vicinity of

the ground, but were not in possession of tickets entitling them entry to

what was an 'all ticket' match.     Furthermore, many Liverpool fans arrived at

the Leppings Lane end of the ground in possession of tickets which entitled

them admission to the Spion kop and     attempted to seek approval to enter at

the Leppings Lane end w i th friends who had legitimate tickets for      that

area.

The situation outside the turnstiles, particularly those leading to the

Leppings Lane terraces, was such that by approximately 2.40 p.m.        a situation

had arisen whereby there was a large crowd of supporters who were all pushing

towards the turnstiles, but the turnstiles could not accept them quickly

enough to permit entry to the ground.        The mood of this crowd was changing

from a good natured crowd to a frustrated crowd who could p er h ap s see that

they had little chance of g a in i ng access prior to the start of the match.

The proportion of spectators w h o had been drinking inceased as time

progressed but they were o u tn u mb e re d by people who did not exhibit any signs
:   .
                                      '




                                              - 6 -



    of drink.   Within this crowd there were at least two or three Police horses

    who were attempting to stop the pushing.       It has always been m y experience

    that horses are able to control such a situation, but it was obvious in this

    instance that this was not the case.

    A Police Constable was allocated to the outside of each of the turnstiles for

    the Leppings Lane terraces.     These officers were given the task of preventing

    supporters entering the ground in possession of weapons, banners, alcohol

    etc.   This searching action did not impede the rate of flow of spectators

    through the turnstiles.   Because of the intense pressure from the surging

    crowd, it was necessary to withdraw those officers from that position; a

    decision taken by Inspector Purdy, which I fully supported.

    With a view to reducing the area covered by the Police horses, I instructed

    officers to close the gates which are situated away from the turnstiles next

    to the river - I did this because fans were using this gate to get around the

    horses.

    The crush within the crowd was such that people were suffering and there was

    the possibility of severe injuries taking place.       I saw two or three bodies

    of young persons passed over the heads of members of the crowd,      these people

    either had, or were close to fainting.

    At approximately 2.45 p.m.    I rejoined Inspector Sykes in Leppings Lane and we

    adopted a strategy of forming a line of Police horses at the rear o f the

    crowd with a view to p r eventing the queues at the turnstiles becoming larger.

    This took some time to arrange.       There were gaps between one Police horse and

    the next one and I attempted to arrange for a Police Officer to       'plug' each

    gap.   Many supporters approached this line and forced their way through,

    despite firm advice not to do so.       I even saw a supporter crawl under the

    belly of a horse in order to breach the line.
I could see that 6ome people were climbing over the top of the turnstiles in

order to gain admittance to the stadium and at one point I recall seeing

Inspector Bennett   ('F' Division) on top of the wall above the turnstiles

serving the Leppings Lane terraces.

Some minutes later I attempted to contact Police Control by radio but could

not do so; there appeared to be a fault with my particular radio (a Pye PFX

personal hand held radio) in that it was receiving but I could not transmit.

I approached Police Constable Buxton who was at this time in a Police

Landrover.    This vehicle was parked in Leppings Lane and the officer was

giving instructions to the supporters by means of a public address system.

He was urging the spectators not to push forward.      I requested Police

Constable Buxton to suggest to the Control Room that consideration be given

to delaying the kick-off time o f the match (his radio, a Motorola HT600E hand

held radio,   appeared to be functioning well).

 At approximately this time I was able to see that the large     'concertina

 gates, known as 'A',   'B' and   ' C , had been opened and that a large proportion

 of the crowd surged forward through these gates.      These gates were only

 opened for a short period of time and I could see officers/stewards at the

 rear of the gates apparently struggling to close them, which they were

 subsequently able to do.    It is my impression that gate 'C' remained open for

 a longer period than the others.      As a result of this action the pressure on

 the turnstiles reduced although supporters were still arriving at the ground.

 This action clearly had the r e su lt of easing the tension outside the

 turnstiles although the crowd there were still pushing forward.

 A short time later, I would estimate just after 3-00 p.m.,      there was a

 request for all officers to attend inside the ground to deal with an apparent

  invasion of the surface playing area.      I did not hear the specific radio

  transmission but I did hear officers around me saying words to the effect of
'all officers inside - pitch invasion'.

I immediately attended inside the ground and went to the rear of the goal at

the Leppings Lane end of the stadium.      I could see that people were trapped

and that the gates from the centre pens were open and people were coming

through them.   There was considerable confusion.     Some supporters were

climbing over the fences,    they were assisted to do so by the Police Officers

and by other supporters.    I assisted in the general activity of lifting

injured and apparently dead people from the Leppings Lane terraces onto the

playing area.   I was present at this location prior to a 'private' ambulance

arriving.   I gave instructions to some officers in an attempt to co-ordinate

what was happening.    I can recall,   in particular, instructing Police

Constable Goodwill    ('F' Division) to act as the Communications Officer for

Superintendent Greenwood.

A short time later I attended at the gymnasium situated inside the stadium.

I was there concerned in the organisation of a temporary mortuary.         My

primary tasks were ensuring that each victim brought inside was examined by a

doctor to confirm death, and to allocate an individual Police Officer to each

victim to deal with the formalities which would follow.

I later acted as a logistical officer and was engaged in the liaison between

the Police, Social Workers, relatives and identification      teams.   I continued

with this work until retiring from duty at 5*00 a.m. the following morning.
 ROBERT WALLACE CREASER



Chief Inspector




Communications & Computer Department, Headquarters




I am a Chief Inspector in the South Yorkshire Police at present attached to

the Communications and Computer Development Department, Police Headquarters,

Snig Hill, Sheffield.

I   have been a Police Officer for twenty years and have considerable

experience of Policing football matches.     I have performed the duty at the

following five Football League grounds in South Yorkshire:

Sheffield Wednesday (Hillsborough)

Sheffield United (Bramall Lane)

Rotherham United (Millmoor)

Barnsley (Oakwell)

Doncaster Rovers (Belle Vue)

The bulk of this experience has been at Hillsborough, where T h a w     '.^^ked at

numerous football matches.     These have included Football League^ and fr .A. Cup

Semi-Finals.

Hillsborough is situated within the 'F'    (Sheffield North) Division of the

South Yorkshire Police.

The first time I performed duty at Hillsborough      for an F.A.     Cup Semi-Final

was as a uniform patrol Sergeant in 1977.

In 1981 I was posted to   'F' Division (Sheffield    North) as a     uniform patrol

Inspector and I remained within the Division until the      end of 1987, during

that time I frequently performed football duties at Hillsborough.
                                            2




 I have been on duty at the Leppings Lane end of Hillsborough Stadium for the

 F.A. Cup Semi-Final matches held in the last three years.

 I have performed duty at most places within the ground, although the majority

 of m y experience has been at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

 Shortly after Hillsborough was selected as the venue for the Semi-Final

 between Liverpool F.C. and Nottingham Forest F.C. I was contacted by

 telephone by Chief Superintendent Mole, the then Divisional Commander of          'F'

 Division, who confirmed my availability and requested that I work at the

 match.   He stated that it would be his intention for me to work at the

 Leppings Lane end of the ground.   Eight days prior to the Semi-Final taking

 place I received an Operation Order.   A comprehensive, yellow bound document

which contained details of how the event would be organised.      Over the next

few days I made a detailed study of this document and, in particular,        the

areas of the ground where I would be supervising officers.

On Saturday,   15 April 1989, I reported for duty at the ground at

approximately 9-30 a.m.    I was in possession of my Operation Order at this

time


My areas of responsibility were for that part of the ground which was to be

occupied, in the main, by Liverpool supporters and for the outside of the

ground at the Leppings Lane end.

The following Inspectors were allocated to my command with areas of

responsibility as indicated below:-

Inspector Woodward                  North   Stand (upper and lower level).

Inspector Bullas                    West Stand

Inspector White
                                    Leppings Lane Terrace and rear enclosure

Inspectors Sykes and Purdy          Leppings Lane turnstiles

Inspectors Delaney and              Reserves

 Beresford
0   ..


                                                   - 3 -




         I have previously personally performed duty at all the above locations at the

         rank of Inspector.   I have previously worked at football matches with all the

         above officers with the exceptions of Inspector Purdy.

         The pre-match police briefing was given in the North Stand (Kop end) and

         commenced at approximately 10.00 a.m.    It was a comprehensive briefing and

         there was input from Chief Superintendent Duckenfield,    Inspector Sewell and

     Detective Sergeant Cha rlesworth.

         Immediately following the briefing,   I sought out all the above named

     Inspectors and I persoanlly handed to them written (photocopy) details of

     criminal intelligence which had been collated concerning people likely to

     attend the matc h from both Liverpool and Nottingham.        I spoke to each of the

     Inspectors and mentioned points which I considered to be of particular

     importance as far as their own area of responsibility was concerned.         I knew

     that Inspectors Sykes and White both had vast experience of policing at

     Hillsborough and intimate knowledge of the duties they had been

     allocated.

     Following the briefing until approximately 2.00 p.m. no matters of particular

     note took place.      I spent this time   'walking the ground' speaking to

     Inspectors,    serial Sergeants and Constables.

     Additionally,    I spoke to many of the Sheffield Wednesday F.C. stewards who I

     know (by sight but not name).      I noticed that these men appeared to be

     working at locations where I had previously seen them operate.        During the

     course of the morning I saw,     and heard part of a briefing given by Inspector

     White to these stewards.      This briefing took place in the West Stand.

     It was my information that the first turnstiles would be opened at 12 noon.

     In fact a small number were opened prior to this and a few spectators entered

     at the Leppings Lane end of the ground and went into the Leppings Lane

     terraces in the centre pens.
                                            - 4 -




As people started to enter the stadium X could see the usual mixture of

 supporters.    They were in good spirits and obviously looking forward to what

had been forecast as an interesting game between the two teams.

Shortly after 2.15 p.m. I visited Leppings Lane where I spoke to Inspector

Sykes.     There was a contingent of Liverpool supporters standing in Leppings

Lane on the opposite side of the r oad to the stadium.      We discussed the merit

of encouraging these people across the road to queue for entry to the

stadium.     Man y of these were openly drinking from cans of beer and lager;

they were not at this time causing any trouble.       After dicussion we agreed

that such a course of action was not necessary as there was a reasonable

quantity of supporters already forming queues outside the turnstiles.

Furthermore,    it was considered that to move these people at this stage may

inflame the crowd.

As time progressed towards the scheduled kick off time it became j?gf*ame

apparent that a large number of Liverpool supporters were still outside the

ground in Leppings Lane and in the queues to the turnstiles.       I noticed at

this time that the proportion of supporters who had obviously been drinking

increased.     They were, however,   at this time only a minority and were not

causing any disruption.     Ma ny of the fans who arrived were unsure of the

geographical layout of the turnstiles which gave admittance to the North

Stand, the Leppings Lane terraces and elevated section and the West Stand.

The signs above the turnstiles were not clear and many fans were confused,        a

specific example of this was the alphabetic character displayed above the

turnstile and the alphabetic character shown on the ticket as the gangway to

be used for access to the West Stand were in apparent conflict.      It was

necessary for Police Officers to give constant assistance in this

respect.
 At approximately 2.30 p.m. I could see that difficulties were being

 experienced in the build up to the turnstiles which were allocated to the

 North Stand, the West Stand and the Leppings Lane turnstiles - all these

 three locations are fed from Leppings Lane.    From this point until after

 3.00 p.m. I continued to monitor and supervise the Leppings Lane end of the

 ground on the outside.

 I was with Inspector Sykes when he caused the flow of traffic to stop in

Leppings Lane in order to facilitate more opportunity for the ever increasing

pedestrian traffic to make progress.

I have considerable experience of policing this particular area and I could

see that the build up of supporters     was later than usually the case and there

appeared to be larger numbers.    The   operation was frustrated more so by the

presence of a considerable number of fans who had arrived in the vicinity of

the ground, but were not in possession of tickets entitling them entry to

what was an 'all ticket' match.   Furthermore, many Liverpool fans arrived at

the Leppings Lane end of the ground in possession of tickets which entitled

them admission to the Spion kop and     attempted to seek approval to enter at

the Leppings Lane end with friends who had legitimate tickets for that

area.

The situation outside the turnstiles, particularly those leading to the

Leppings Lane terraces, was such that by approximately 2.40 p.m. a situation

had arisen whereby there was a large crowd of supporters who were all pushing

towards the turnstiles, but the turnstiles could not accept them quickly

enough to permit entry to the ground.    The mood of this crowd was changing

from a good natured crowd to a frustrated crowd who could perhaps see that

they had little chance of gaining access prior to the start of the match.

The proportion of spectators who had been drinking inceased as time

progressed but thev were o u tnumbered by people who did not exhibit any signs
 of drink.     Within this   crowd there were at least two or three Police horses

 who were attempting to      stop the pushing.   It has always been m y experience

 that horses are able to control such a situation, but it was obvious in this

 instance that this was      not the case.

 A Police Constable was      allocated to the outside of each of the turnstiles for

 the Leppings Lane terraces.      These officers were given the task of preventing

 supporters entering the ground in possession of weapons, banners, alcohol

 etc.     This searching action did not impede the rate of flow of spectators

 through the turnstiles.     Because of the intense pressure from the surging

 crowd,   it was necessary to withdraw those officers from that position; a

 decision taken by Inspector Purdy, which I fully supported.

 With a view to reducing the area covered by the Police horses, I instructed

 officers to close the gates which are situated away from the turnstiles next

 to the river - I did this because fans were using this gate to get around the

horses.


The crush within the crowd was such that people were suffering and there was

the possibility of severe injuries taking place.       I saw two or three bodies

of young persons passed over the heads of members of the crowd,       these people

either had, or were close to fainting.

At approximately 2.45 p.m.     I rejoined Inspector Sykes in Leppings Lane and we

adopted a strategy of forming a line of Police horses at the rear of the

crowd with a view to preventing the queues at the turnstiles becoming larger.

This took some time to arrange.      There were gaps between one Police horse and

the next one and I attempted to arrange for a Police Officer to       'plug' each

gap.    Many supporters approached this line and forced their way through,

despite firm advice not to do so.      I even saw a supporter crawl under the

belly of a horse in order to breach the line.
I could see that some people were climbing over the top of the turnstiles in

order to gain admittance to the stadium and at one point I recall seeing

Inspector Bennett   (*F' Division) on top of the wall above the turnstiles

serving the Leppings Lane terraces.

Some minutes later I attempted to contact Police Control by radio but could

not do so; there appeared to be a fault with my particular radio (a Pye PFX

personal hand held radio)     in that it was receiving but I could not transmit.

I approached Police Constable Buxton who was at this time in a Police

Landrover.   This vehicle was parked in Leppings Lane and the officer was

giving instructions to the supporters by means of a public address system.

He was urging the spectators not to push forward.      I requested Police

Constable Buxton to suggest to the Control Room that consideration be given

to delaying the kick-off time of the match (his radio, a Motorola HT600E hand

held radio, appeared to be functioning well).

At approximately this time I was able to see that the large      'concertina'

gates, known as   'A',   'B' and 'C', had been opened and that a large proportion

of the crowd surged forward through these gates.     These gates were only

opened for a short peri od of time and I could see officers/stewards at the

rear of the gates apparently struggling to close them, which they were

subsequently able to do.     It is my impression that gate   'C ’ remained open for

a longer period than the others.     As a result of this action the pressure on

the turnstiles reduced although supporters were still arriving at the ground.

This action clearly had the result of easing the tension outside the

turnstiles although the crowd there were still pushing forward.

A short time later, I would estimate just after 3-00 p . m . , there was a

request for all officers to attend inside the ground to deal with an apparent

invasion of the surface playing area.     I did not hear the specific radio

transmission but I d id hear officers around me saying words to the effect of
 'all officers inside - pitch invasion'.

 I immediately attended inside the ground and went to the rear of the goal at

 the Leppings Lane end of the stadium.     I could see that people were trapped

 and that the gates from the centre pens were open and people were coming

 through them.   There was considerable confusion.     Some supporters were

 climbing over the f e n c e s , they were assisted to do so by the Police Officers

and by other supporters.     I assisted in the general activity of lifting

injured and apparently dead people from the Leppings Lane terraces onto the

playing area.    I was present at this location prior to a 'private' ambulance

arriving.   I gave instructions to some officers in an attempt to co-ordinate

what was happening.    I can recall, in particular,   instructing Police

Constable Goodwill    ('F' Division) to act as the Communications Officer for

Superintendent Greenwood.

A short time later I attended at the gymnasium situated inside the stadium.

I was there concerned in the organisation of a temporary mortuary.        My

primary tasks were ensuring that each victim brought inside was examined by a

doctor to confirm death,    and to allocate an individual Police Officer to each

victim to deal with the formalities which would follow.

I later acted as a logistical officer and was engaged in the liaison between

the Police, Social Workers, relatives and identification       teams.   I continued

with this work until retiring from duty at 5.00 a.m.     the following morning.
 «u                                                                                                                                                                                                             ^ ,7V
                                                                    STATEM ENT OF WITNESS

                           (C.J. A ct, 1 9 6 7 , s.9; M .C.A., 19 8 0 , s. 102; M.C. Rules, 1 9 8 1 , r.70)

                STATEMENT OF                                                                      ROBERT WALLACE CREASER, LL.B

                AGE O F WITNESS (if over 21 en ter “ over 2 1 ” )                                                                      40 Y e a r s

                OCCUPATION OF WITNESS                                                             CHIEF INSPECTOR

                A D D R ESS A N D TELEPHONE NUM BER                                                                SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE, SNIG HILL,
                                                                                                                   SHEFFIELD.  S3 8LY
                This statem en t, consisting o f
                                                                    4        pages each signed by m e, is tru e to th e best o f m y know ledge and belief and I make

                it know ing th a t, if it is ten d e red in evidence, I shail be liable to prosecution if I have wilfully sta te d in i t an ything w hich

                I kno w to be false o r do n o t believe to be tru e.


                D ated th e             1 3 th         day o f          July                  ,19 9 0

                                                                             Signed..


                                                            Signature witnesse



                (........................................................................................................................................................... being unable to read th e statem en t below,


                                                                                                     of                                                                                                        , read
                it to h im before he signed it.


                D ated th e                           day o f                                 .1 9                    .                                                                                                 \




           On      Wednesday                      22nd             March               1989 I attended a meeting at Hammerton Road Police
           Station which had been                                          arranged                       to      discuss                  the           planning                     of         the           FA           Cup
           Semi-final to be held on Saturday 15th April 1989.



           I did not attend at any further planning meetings or pre-match briefings prior

           to the date of the semi-final.                                                         I did however keep in close contact with those

           senior officers involved in the preparation and planning of the event.



           Whilst I did not attend the pre-match briefing held on Friday 14th April 1989,

           I did take positive steps to ensure that I was fully acquainted                                                                                                                    with            details

           of      that             briefing                   and any particular matters which may have been contrary to

           the normal policing arrangements at Hillsborough Stadium.                                                                                                            I       am         an         officer

           with          considerable experience of policing at Hillsborough and am familiar with
           policing arrangements.



           On the morning of Saturday 15th April 1989                                                                             I        attended                    the           formal                briefing

           given              to            all           officers                    on         Saturday                    15th            April               1989             headed                by          Chief
           Superintendent Duckenfield.




G E N /5         Si                                                                                       ignature witnessc
                                R. W. CREASER                                                                                                                                             1—— \A O /            I ^         *
                                                   STATEMENT OF WITNESS

                             (CJ Act. 1967. s.9: MC Act. 1980. s.102: NIC Rules. 1981. r.70)


                Continuation of statement of          ROBERT WALLACE CREASER




          I am unable to remember the              precise          contents         of    the   briefing         but       I    can

          particularly remember the briefing because it was the first one I had attended

          which had been conducted by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.                                       The       briefing

          was     both thorough and comprehensive and I was impressed by the quality of the

          Information which h a d been included.                    The briefing contained              many        references
          to     the    safety of members of the public and on conclusion I was left with the

          I m p r e s s i o n that safety had      been       given         a     larger      prominence          than       other

          >riefings      I   have attended which may have concentrated more on the problem of

          m b l i c disorder.     I can recall that Chief Superintendent                         D u c k e n f i e l d 1s    final
          comment was specific and related to the safety of the public.



          On    conclusion of the briefing I was fully satisfied that a most competent and
          professional task had been accomplished.



          Shortly following this briefing,            I had detailed discussions with other                                 police

          commanders      who   were    involved      in         the       policing        operation.       These could be
          classified as informal briefings or tactical discussions.



          I have been asked to comment in particular in relation to any                                   briefing           which

          may    have    been given concerning the transfer of Liverpool fans from the Spion
          Kop to the Leppings Lane terraces.

                                                          •


          I understand that the Operation Order specified (in a part                                which        deals          with

          the    responsibilities      of      a   serial of officers on the Spion Kop) that in the

          event of Liverpool supporters gaining entry by ticket to the Spion                                      Kop,          they
          would be transferred to the Leppings Lane end of the ground.




G EN /6     Signec                                            Signature w itn a


                                                                                                                        L
 4

                                                      STATEMENT OF WITNESS

                               (CJ Act. 1967. s.9: MC Act. 1980. s.102: MC Rules. 1981. r.70)


              Continuation of statement of            ROBERT WALLACE CREASER




         I    am    unable to recall this matter being given specific mention at any formal

         or informal briefing I attended.                    This does not indicate that it                               was         omitted
         from any briefing and it is quite possible that it was mentioned.



         In the event of Liverpool fans being on the Spion Kop consideration would                                                          have
         been given to transferring                  them or       otherwise.                     This    would        depend          on    the

         numbers      involved            -    a very small number could be accommodated but the matter

         would have been considered                  very    seriously                 in   view          of    the     potential            for

         overcrowding          at     the       Leppings    Lane         end          of    the     stadium.           I believe that,
         irrespective of what the Operation Order specifies,                                       an evaluation             would          have

         been      given to the situation to see if such transfer was feasible; it is quite

         likely that an operational decision would have been made for those                                                   supporters

         to     remain    on        the       Spion Kop and to have been given attention by a serial of
         police officers.



         I have also been asked                 to   clarify        the         briefing           Iwas        given    as       to          the
         monitoring of supporters in the Leppings Lane terraces.



         Again I am unable to specify what information was given at the briefings but I

         was left in no doubt that the usual arrangements would be                                              followed         and        that

         the density of the crowds would be monitored closely by police officers.



         At   approximately 12 noon on Saturday 15th April 1989 I attended at the Police

         Control Room.         I there had a conversation                        with       Superintendent              Murray.              Ve

         discussed       and confirmed the previously agreed method which was to be used for
         the filling of the pens sited on the Leppings Lane ter r a c e s .



         As a result of this discussion I made arrangements to ensure that there was no

         policy     of   firstly filling a particular pen, then another one and so on.                                                      The

         fans would be permitted to fill the pens to a comfortable level and this would

         >e   closely     monitored by the police.                     This procedure had been used previously




G EN/6                                                         S ig n a tu re w itn



                                                                                                                             T
                                                                                                      4
                                             STATEMENT OF WITNESS

                          (CJ Act. 1967. s.9: MC Act. 1980. s.102: MC Rules. 1981. r.70)


            Continuation of statement of      ROBERT WALLACE CREASER



         at football matches involving a             large     number   of   spectators   and   had       been
         successful.______________________




G EN/6   Signed...................................   Signature wi
ROBERT W A L L A C E CREAS ER - CHIEF INSPECTOR                                                           PAGE 1




I am a Chief              Inspector            in    the     South Yorkshire               Police.

On    15 A p r i l      1989        I had      been     a Police        Officer          for    20 y e a r s    and

had     considerable                experience          of     policing       football          matches.            The

b u l k of       this     experience             has    been     at H i l l s b o r o u g h ,     where    I had

worked       at      numerous            football       matches.          These       have      included

football           league      and       Football          Association         Cup       Semi     Finals.

I had       been       on d u t y     at      the Leppings           Lane     end     of    the H i l l s b o r o u g h

stadium          for    the    Football          Association            Cup    Semi        Final      matches        held

in t h e     previous          2 years.              The     majority        of m y      experience        has       been

at    the    Leppings          Lane        end   of     the     ground.

Shortly          after     the      draw       for     the    semi    final      I was         approached           and

confirmed my             availability                for     the m a t c h    to Chief          Superintendent

Mole.        I    subsequently received                       an o p e r a t i o n a l     order      which     I

studied          in d e t a i l .

I was       the     Sector       Commander             with     responsibilities                for    the N o r t h

Stand,       West       Stand,       Leppings           Lane     terracing,           the      rear    enclosure

and    the       Leppings        Lane         turnstiles         both     inside         and    outside        the

ground       (Inquiry Day                1,   Page      88).      My responsibilities                   were

almost       exclusively             inside          the     ground     and    immediately             outside        the

Leppings          Lane    turnstiles             ( I n q u i r y D a y 1,      Page        88).       (He d i d n o t

attend       briefing          on    14 A p r i l      1989.         Can he      sa y w h y not?)

On    15 A p r i l      1989     I reported             for    duty     at    the     g r o u n d at

approximately             9.30       am.

The    following          Inspectors             were        allocated        to my      command with               areas

of    responsibility                as    indicated           below:-
ROBE RT WALLACE CREASER - CHIEF INSPECTOR                                                         PAGE 2




Inspector Woodward                - North    S t a n d (upper        a n d l o w e r lev e l )

Inspector Bullas                  - West    Stand

Inspector White                   - Leppings         Lane terrace       and       rear     enclosure

Inspectors       Sykes

and    Purdy                    - Leppings           Lane    turnstiles

Inspectors       Delaney

and Bere s f o r d                - Reserves




I have       previously       personally          performed         duty     at   all     the     above

locations       at   the    rank     of    Inspector.

The    pre-match      Police        briefing was            given    in the N o r t h        Stand    (Kop

end)    and    commenced       at    approximately            10.00     am.       There was         input

from Chief       Superintendent             Duckenfield,            Superintendent               Murray,

Inspector       Sewell      and     Detective         Sergeant       Charlesworth.

I spoke       to each      of m y    Inspectors         and mentioned             points which            I

considered       to be      of p a r t i c u l a r    importance        as    far    as    their     own

area    of    responsibility was             concerned.             I knew that           Inspectors

Sykes    and White         both had        vast      experience       of     policing       at

Hillsborough         and    intimate        knowledge        of t h e      duties       they had      been

allocated.




* We need a paragraph here to explain his answers to Inquiry Day

1, Page 37, ie was he or was he not told by Superintendent

Murray to brief his subordinates regarding the monitoring of the
terraces/pens for overcrowding.                         (See also statement S 74).
ROBERT W A L L A C E CREASER - CHIEF INSPECTOR                                                           PAGE 3




During       the    course         of    the m o r n i n g       I saw,       and      heard     part    of a

briefing          given       by   Inspector          White          to these       stewards.           This

briefing          took    place         in    the W e s t       Stand.




* Paragraph detail regarding visiting control box and being told

by Superintendent Murray of find your own level theory, as per

S 74 - what steps did he take to ensure pens were not filled
sequencially?



It w a s m y       information               that    the       first     turnstiles           would     be o p e n e d

at    12    noon.        In    fact     a small           number were          opened         prior     to this.

As    time    progressed             towards         2.15       pm    it b e c a m e    apparent        that     a

large       number       of    Liverpool            supporters were                still      outside      the

ground       in    Leppings          Lane      and    in       the    queues       to the      turnstiles.             I

noticed       at    this       time     that        the    proportion          of      supporters        who     had

obviously          been       drinking         increased.              They were,            however,      at    this

time       only    a minority           and were           not       causing any disruption.                     Many

of    the    fans    who       arrived         were       unsure       of t h e     geographical           layout

of    the    turnstiles            which       gave       admittance          to    the N o r t h     Stand,         the

Leppings          Lane    terraces           and e l e vated           section         and the West         Stand.

The    signs       above       the    turnstiles               were    not    clear      and many        fans w e r e

confused,          a specific           example           of    this was       the      alphabetic

character          displayed          above         the    turnstile          and      the    alphabetic

character          shown      on     the     ticket        as    the     gangway        t o be   used     for

access       to    the    West       Stand were            in    apparent          conflict.          It w a s

necessary          for    Police        Officers           to    give     constant           assistance         in

this       respect.
 RO B E R T WALL ACE CREASER - CHIEF INSPECTOR                                                  PAGE 4




At     approximately           2.30    pm    I could       see    that    difficulties          were

being        experienced        in    the    build    u p to the         turnstiles          which were

allocated          to   the    North    Stand,       the West       Stand      and     the    Leppings

Lane     turnstiles           - all    these       three    locations       are      fed     from

Leppings       Lane.          From    this    point       until   after     3.00       pm    I continued

to m o n i t o r    and   supervise          the   Leppings       Lane    end     of    the    ground    on

the    outside.




     Perhaps a paragraph in here about his lines of communication

and per Inquiry Day 2, Pages 58/59, ie problems inside ground he

would report to Superintendent Greenwood, problems outside he

would report to Superintendent Marshall.                                 He also had direct
contact by radio to control box.

Pattern of communication was:                         If Inspectors inside saw a

problem they would tell him and (Inquiry Day 2, Page 59A) if he

had a problem he was unable to deal with he would report
upwards.



I was    with      Inspector         Sykes    when    he    caused       the   f l o w of     traffic    to

stop    in L e p p i n g s    Lane    in    order    to    facilitate more             opportunity

for    the    ever      increasing         pedestrian       traffic       to m a k e    progress.




  Perhaps he could go into a little more detail on why!



I have       considerable        experience          of    policing       this    particular        area
R OBERT WALLACE CREASER - CHIEF INSPECTOR                                                                          PAGE 5




and    I    could        see t h a t      the     build       up of     supporters                was    later       than

usually          the     case    and      there       appeared         to    be    larger          numbers.           The

operation          was      frustrated more                 so by the          presence            of a

considerable              number       of     fans     who      had    arrived          in the v i c i n i t y            of

the    ground,          bu t w e r e      not     in p o s s e s s i o n     of   tickets              entitling          them

entry       to what        was    an      "all     ticket"          match.        Furthermore,                 many

Liverpool          fans      arrived         at    the      Leppings         Lane       end       of    the    ground          in

possession             of t i c k e t s     which      entitled them admission                           to    the    Spion

Kop    and       attempted        to      seek     approval           to enter          at t h e        Leppings          Lane

end with          friends who             had     legitimate           tickets          for       that    area.

The    situation           outside          the    turnstiles           particularly                   those       leading

to    the    Leppings         Lane        terraces,           was     such    that       by a p p r o x i m a t e l y

2.40    pm       a situation           had      arisen        whereby there              was       a large          crowd

of    supporters who were                    all      pushing towards                  the    turnstiles,             but

the    turnstiles            could        not     accept       them quickly              enough          to    permit

entry       to   the     ground.            The m o o d       of t h i s     crowd was            changing           from a

good    natured          crowd     to       a frustrated            crowd       who      could         perhaps        s ee

that    they       had little             chance       of     gaining        access          prior       to    the    start

of    the match.

Within       this       crowd there             were     at     least       t w o or    three          Police       horses

who    were      attempting            to       stop     the pushing.             It     has       always          been my

experience          that      horses            are    able to c o n t r o l           such       a s i t u a t i o n , but

it    was    obvious        in t h i s          i n s t a n c e that    this           was    not       the    case. A

Police       Constable          was       allocated           to the       outside           of   each        of    the

turnstiles          for the        Leppings            Lane     terraces.              These        officers          were
 ROBERT WALLACE CREASER - CHIEF INSPECTOR                                                               PAGE 6




 given     the       t a s k of     preventing             supporters          entering      the      ground       in

 possession             of w e a p o n s ,     banners,          alcohol       etc.       This     searching

 action       did       not    impede        the     rate       of   f l o w of   spectators          through       the

turnstiles.                Because        of     the      intense       pressure        f r o m the    surging

crowd,        it w a s        necessary          to w i t h d r a w     those     officers        from that

position.




* Did he know that extra resources had been sent to him, ie

mounted and reserve Serial number 20 by Inspector Delaney?                                                      Did

he tell anyone of the problems - Control Box, Mr Marshall, Mr
Greenwood, his Inspectors on concourse?



With    a v i e w to          reducing          the       area    covered       by the      Police     horses,          I

instructed           officers           to close           the    gates     which     are    situated away

from    the     turnstiles              next     to       the    river    - I did       this      because     fans

were    using        this      gate      to     get       a round the       horses.

The    crush within               the    crowd was              such    that   people       were     suffering

and there          was      the    possibility              of    severe       injuries      taking     pl ac e .

I saw two          or     three     bodies           of   young        persons     passed      over    the    heads

of m e m b e r s     of t h e      crowd,        these          people    either      had,     or    were    close

to    fainting.

      approximately               2.45     pm    I    joined         Inspector      Sykes      in    Leppings

Lane    and     we      adopted         a s t r a t e g y of         forming      a line     of     Police

horses     at      the     rear     of     the       crowd with          a v i e w to     preventing         the

queues     at      the     turnstiles            becoming            larger.       This    took      some    time
ROBERT WALLACE CREASER - CHIEF INSPECTOR                                                                   PAGE 7




to    arrange.           There         were       gaps    between        one      Police      horse     a n d the

next     one      and    I attempted               to arrange           for    a Police         Officer       to

'plug*       each       g a p.     Many       supporters             approached          this    line      and

forced       their way            through,          despite          firm advice          not    t o d o so.        I

even    saw a supporter                     crawl    under        the    belly      of    a horse       in o r d e r

to    breach       the     line.

I could        see      that      some       people were             climbing       over      the    top    of the

turnstiles           in o r d e r       to    gain       admittance           to the      stadium and            at one

point       I recall        seeing           Inspector Bennett                 ('F'      Division)         o n t o p of

the    wall       above     the        turnstiles          serving          the    Leppings         Lane

terraces.            Some        minutes          later    I attempted             to    contact      Police

control        by radio,           but       could       not    do   so;      there      appeared       t o be a

fault with my             particular               radio       in t h a t     it w a s    receiving,         but    I

could       not    transmit.                I approached Police                   Constable         Buxton who

was    at    this     time        in    a Police          Landrover.              This    vehicle      was       parked

in L e p p i n g s    Lane        and       the    officer was          giving          instructions         t o the

supporters           by m e a n s       of    a public          address        system.          He w a s    urging

the    spectators           not        to    push    forward.           I requested             Police

Constable          Buxton        to     suggest       to the         control        room      that

consideration             be     given        to    delaying the            kick        off   time    of    the

match       (his     radio       appeared           t o be      functioning well).




* Perhaps a bit more detail regarding this request, ie did he
not consider using Buxton's radio to tell

Greenwood/Marshall/Control Box of his problems?
  ROBERT WALLACE CREASER - CHIEF INSPECTOR                                                        PAGE 8




  * In his recollection he then tells of the gates opening.                                             We

  need more detail in view of the times we now know, ie where was

  he?     Why did he not go inside, following crowd in to see his
  command through on concourse and terrace?

  * He does explain that the opening of the gates relieved the

  tension on the outside.                   Therefore, what did he do between 2.52
  pm and 3.06 pm?



  A    short    time   later,       I would        estimate       just    after      3.00    pm,    there

  was    a request       for      all    officers     to attend          inside      the    ground      to

  deal    with    an   apparent          invasion     of    the   surface       playing       a r ea.        I

 did     not    hear   the     specific      radio     transmission,            but    I    did    hear

 officers        around me         saying words        to the       effect      of    "All    officers

 inside        — pitch    invasion."           I   immediately           attended      inside       the

 ground        and went      to    the   r e a r of   the    goal    at   the     Leppings         Lane      end

* of    the    stadium.




 * At no time was I told that the exit gates were to be opened,

 nor was I asked for any advice regarding the consequences of

 such a decision.                 I did not receive any subsequent instructions

 regarding the control of the crowd once the gates had been

 opened or to utilise the serials under my command in any
 specific manner.

 * At the 1988 semi final I had the same command responsibility -

 Did he know of closing of tunnel?                          What were the arrangements
 for filling the pens in 1988?
