fis s i
          Q.O&




          /   OM
                                                                                                  / f



                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                   Ref:
        From:    PC 552 Hartshorne                                 Station/Dept:   Doncaster
        To:
                 Chief Superintendent Thompson
                                                                   Date:
                                                                                   ^5 .5.89
                SUBJECT:    HILLSBOROUGH SEMI - FINAL   SATURDAY     15th APRIL 1Q8Q.



                       My duty on this date was with serial 24,supervised by PS 1628 Dolan and
                       in overall command was Inspector Humphries.

                       I travelled to Hillsborough football ground on a double decker PSV with
                       other officers.Upon arrival at the ground we were briefed in the seated
                       area of the ground most of which was incoherant due to the distance and
                       clarity from the speakers.
                       After the briefing we took refreshments in the same seated area.As a
                       serial we then made our way to the Hillsborough shopping precinct where
                       I was teamed up with PC 1837 Brookshaw.This would be about 11.30am.
                       My duties were basically a police presence in the area and to deal with
                      public order and other matters related to the football match.
                       At about 11.50am Inspector Humphries directed myself and PC Brookshaw
                      to the area near to the Park public house on Wadesley Lane.We arrived
                      at about 12 noon whereupon the public house was closed and shutters were
                      in position on the windows.

                      For a period of about two hours we were constantly asked by Liverpool
                      Supporters where the nearest open public house was.We informed those
                      asking we did not know the area and had no knowledge and advised them the
                      best thing to do was to get into the ground early.The vast majority took
                      no notice but continued along Wadesley Lane obviously in search of some
                      -where what was selling alcohol.As the afternoon continued the crowds
                      grew in both directions along Wadesley Lane.The spectators walking along
                      Wadesley Lane back towards the ground were very noisy and at least 50 %
                      were either drinking or carrying alcohol of some decription.
                      In the main strong Pils lager was being drank along with cans of beer
                      litres and carafes of wine and plastic litre bottles of cider.
                      PC brookshaw and myself spent a good while taking pub glasses containing
                      beer from spectators en route to the ground.I was informed by these persons
                      carrying the glasses they had paid 30 pence on top of the price of the beer
                      for the charge of the glass.I understood this was occuring at the next
                     public house from the Park public house along Wadesley Lane the name of
                      which I could not ascertain.

                                                                             Continued......
Gen/2
I also ascertained supporters were buying the canned alcohol and wine etc
from an off licence near to this public house.
From about 2pm onwards the crowds along my position grew steadily worse in
both noise and drunkeness.I could hear glass being smashed on the ground
further along Wadesley Lane and the supporters were more bunched up and were
singing football songs.Due to the size of the crowds it was not possible to
identify who the culprits smashing the glass were.
Even at this time we were being constantly asked if we knew where pubs were
open or where alcohol could be purchased.They were given the same advice as
before.I was also asked on numerous occasions where tickets for the match
could be purchased.These people were told 'No* and that we understood it to
be an all ticket match with no tickets on sale at the ground.These persons
took no notice of our advice and stood about our location asking persons
en route to the ground.I believe I did see some transactions but I did not
know wether or not these were spare tickets or their own being sold for profit.
At 2.30pm PC Brookshaw arrested a youth who we had seen throw a bottle into
the rear yard of the Park Public house.This was                         iob
                             jiverpool.The offence was Drunk and Disorderly.
PC Brookshaw accompanied         in a police transit van I then moved along
Wddesley Lane and stood with other police officers.
I was then stood near to a Sergeant and could hear sporadic police transmissions

from his radio.I heard some message regarding starting the game at 3* i5pm*
At approximatly 3»05pm I heard for all spare officers to attend the perimeter
track.I assumed the police control feared a pitch invasion.
On arrival at the Leppings Lane end of the ground there were still a large
amount of people wanting to get into the ground. There were also people filtering
back out from the ground.
I was instructed to form a cordon across the Leppings Lane entrance and not to
let any more persons into the ground.I was led to believe there had been a
serious incident inside the ground but to what extent I did not know.
It was only when injured and emotional fans were coming from the ground that
I realised something had seriously taken place.It was only when I was verbally
insulted by emotional fans saying such things as 'WE MIGHT HAVE CAUSED HEYSEL
BUT YOU BASTARDS CAUSED THAT',that I understood the problem.
As emergency vehicles arrived I assisted with traffic control and with shocked
and emotional people the best I could.
At 6pm I attended the North Stend for De - Briefing upon conclusion I walked
to Clay Wheels Lane where I boarded transport back to Doncaster.
Submitted for your information and consideration.



PC 552
25.5.89
