" Other Document Form                     Date and time raised ,, ~pc>.~o..~                       .,,   Number



  (Include source end eny documant number if relevant)

  Receivers instructions urgent action Y~iNo                  ’~
                                                                                                                        Receiver


  Document registered/inlkndf’d~s indicated ...........                                                                  Indexer
  No(s) of actions raised
   i
  Statement readers instructions                                                                                        Statement
                                                                                                                        Reader

                                                                               ii , i i i
  Indexed as indicated                                                                                                   Indexer

  No(s) of actions raised
                                                                       I                    !1 ¯
  Examined - further action to be taken                                                                            O/M             SIO
                                                                                                                  f-,

                                                                   I       I      I

  Further action no(s)                                                                                                   Indexer

  When satisfied all actions-raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form

  MIR 15
 J Ande~on hq Oils ¢StJ qlql ~IJLI
GIUI~ Oo8~able
¯rHter Ibm4beKer ,hlAco
IP 00os aZ (S Meet rDO)
Cbe~er hue
Ilerer Strut
~beKer lU6 0U




XI~XU xlrro ’ruI ilXLLSBOIOOGil STADIOIt DXIJIJITIIIt
Ti~nk you for forverd£q to me a copy of the &Gi~0 vr~ttem
eul~uZon to the above Xnq~r7.

X laavo 8tud~od the report and append~cee ~tb ~terost and am
r#llurei thet 811 till pO~LIIt! thet I tou~d l~elt to MVl Hen
made I~ve ~ fact mn felly covered.

Jlany thenk8 for e11 yoer efforts onour behalf.




                                  1
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

ACPO SUB COMMITTEE SUBMISSION




PARAGRAPH

1 -   4       Outlines the development of national policy in the
              policing of football and the publication of the
              ACPO Public Order Guide in October 1987(Appendix ’A’)

Hooliganism
Problem

5 -   22      The development of football hooliganism has prompted
              a police response of a more organised and forceful
              policy aided by legislation and technology. It has
              done much to colour police perception of crowd
              control, strategies being based upon a presumption of
              the probability of violence between rival spectators.

              "Policing by containment" has developed and there are
              three fundemental aspects to this approach :-

              (a)   development of information re crowds in transit
                    and plans to intervene and escort;

              (b)   a commitment to segregate in transit, at the
                    turn stiles, inside stadia and on departure;

              (c)   construction of containment fencing to control
                    movement of supporters.


              This general strategy is well known to police and
              supporters alike and allows decent spectators to feel
              secure within their own controlled environment.
              However, it tends to encourage antagonistic and
              tribal attitudes between rival groups which requires
              a high police presence.

              Observations and intelligence operations have done
              much to reveal the inner workings of hooligan gangs.
              The Sub-Committee goes on to describe the
              organisation and objectives of the determined
              criminal hooligans and the tacit support received
              from others by acquiesence towards the ill-behaved
              and indifference to police strategies.
PARAGRAPH

               "Policing by containment" is therefore seen as a
               check but not a cure. Concentration in recent times
               has therefore been on the development of
               surveillance, intelligence and evidence gathering
               ("Pre-emptive policing") and these initiatives are
               discussed later in paragraphs 23-40.

            The issues of public safety and hooliganism often
            seem at variance. Containment fencing may prevent
            rapid evacuation but its absence may facilitate wild
            surges, panic and dangerous crowd pressures - public
            disorder being a prime mover. So long as a crowd is
            reasonably orderly then danger is minimal but there
            can be no absolute protection, by engineering or
            policing, if large numbers in the crowd are
            determined to behave irresponsibly (e.g. non ticket
            holders attempting to gain entry in large numbers).

               The characteristics of football hooliganism is ever
               changing and legislation re alcohol and C.C.T.V. have
               made a major impact. This has had a displacement
               effect away from the terraces.

               Additional problems are identified where the
               atmosphere is heightened by the occasion
               (e.g. championships, promotion, relevation). It
               takes little to upset the balance of order
               (e.g. violent incident, late train, inadequate
               turnstiles, non ticket holders) and can reduce
               policing to a desparate effort to maintain order.
               If crowds are disorderly or unreasonable then no
               matter what the policing arrangements and given the
               out dated nature of most major sports stadia, there
               is a potential for danger, if not disaster.


RECENT INITIATIVES

Intelligence

23 - 25        Discusses the National Index at New Scotland Yard,
               its development and the creation of "intelligence
               officers" for each club. Also identifies the
               financial constraints inherent in wholesale
               intelligence operations embracing undercover
               operations, the use of "spotters" and the training
               necessary to put the theory into practice.
PARAGRAPH



National Football
Intelligence Unit

26 - 28       Its development is seen as of critical importance
              and negotiations with the Home Office are well in
              hand for it to be funded by the Common Police
              Services (Appendix ’B’).

C.C.T.V.

29 - 32       Details the progress made in this area but states its
              real potential not entirely fulfilled given the lack
              of wholehearted development on the intelligence
              front and the different specifications required for
              use in terms of crowd control and safety. ACPO Sub-
              Committee Working Party papers on these two areas are
              included at Appendix ’C’

Football
Conferences

33 -     35   Their objective is to improve liaison and increase
              consistency. Conference minutes are included at
              Appendix ’D’.

Liaison with
other bodies

36   -   40 Lists other bodies.



PROBLF~ARF_~S

Old Grounds

41 - 42       Identifies piece-meal development of many grounds
              which have outgrown their sites and which still have
              inadequate parking and crowding problems compounded
              by narrow streets. The result is crowd supervision
              both inside and outside consisting of "making the
              best of a bad job". The point is made that home
              supporters are familiar with the problems, that
              semi-finals are made up entirely of away supporters
              and it may be that on these occasions the design
              failing of old football grounds are most likely to
              surface.
PARAGRAPH


Capacities and
safety certificates

43 - 53     Identifies the problem of overcrowding on terraces as
            opposed to seated areas. Gives one solution as
            smaller segregated areas but recognises dangers in
            terms of lack of crowd expansion in the event of an
            emergency. Conversely wide open terraces allows
            expansion but also enables crowd concentration at
            given points. Stewarded passages/gangways and secure
            corridors give protected access to initial areas but
            the reality is that in practice these are difficult
            to maintain.

            The pros and cons of all seated stadia are discussed
            and a rolling programme to introduce same is
            advocated.

            At paragraph 50 suggests it is timely that safety
            certificates require some system of monitoring crowds
            accessible to the Police Control Box and at
            paragraph 52 questions whether the guidance in the
            "Green Code" is sufficient.

Late arrivals and
banned spectators

54 - 58     Identifies the problems re delayed kick-offs, the
            fact that an absolute ban on alcohol drives
            supporters further afield and encourages late
            arrivals and questions whether the 3 pm kick-off
            time is really appropriate.

            Discussions with the league are proposed with
            reference to turn stile frauds.

            "All ticket" fixtures have in practice presented
            match day commanders with a mob outside and
            insufficient resources to police both inside and
            outside, the result being that non ticket holders
            have been let in.

            Short term exclusion orders are not enforceable and
            are not a deterent.

Touts

59          They disturb segregation arrangements and encourage
            none ticket holders to attend. Legislation is
            advocated.
o" ¯




       PARAGRAPH


       Communications

       6O      64   Advocates : land line telephones at key points
                                 complimented by good C.C.T.V.
                               : siting and facilities of Control Posts
                                 vital
                               : over-ride facility on P.A. system.

       Intelligence

       65           A need for the Police Service to make a greater
                    commitment in this area and re-states the need for
                    a National Football Intelligence Unit.

       Costs
       66 - 7O      Only a small percentage of costs recoverable under
                    present arrangements and proposes a levy akin to
                    "aviation security levy" currently in use at
                    airports. (Appendix ’E’ re costs).

       Stewarding

       71 - 81        Whilst recognising the legal argument and the
                      responsibilities of the club, the effectiveness of
                      the police in the event of an emergency is
                      conditioned by what has gone before - "otherwise the
                      service is very much a hostage to fortune".

                      Police should have control over stewards through
                      their supervisory chain, stewards would continue to
                      have a vital role but two issues would follow : first
                      if "packing" and "gangway" control were on occasion
                      a police responsibility, the police might require a
                      different standard of performance from stewards;
                      secondly co-ordination between the organisers and
                      police would have to be clear and formal.

                      Should be mandatory inspection of stewards (included
                      in safety certificate) and failings should result in
                      sanctions.

                    Police to take an active role in training of stewards
                    utilising the training video produced by the
                    Sub-Committee.

       Training

       82 - 85      Sub-Committee training video on "briefing" for
                    football to be used.
                    Specialist C.C.T.V. training for operators.
                    Match Commander training courses.
Q
    W6




         PARAGRAPH

         The Football
         Spectators Bill

         86 -   87     Reiterates ACPO view (Appendix ’F’).

         Conclusions

         88            Training need for commanders.

                       Special games should only be played at grounds with
                       excellent facilities.

                       Annual certification.

                       More guidance to Safety Committees on the ’whole’
                       concept of safety in grounds.

                       A universal programme to provide seating

                       Dual responsibility is a recipe for confusion -
                       police must accept a leading role and despite civil
                       liabilities of the clubs, take an overall supervision
                       wherever crowd safety is an issue. Safety will
                       always be in the balance if crowd behaviour is
                       unreasonable. Safety Inspectorate to be set up to
                       inspect and support the affairs of "certifying
                       authorities"
    .P
J
                                            C James Anderton CBE, CStJ, QPM, DL, CBIM
                                            Chief Constable
                                            Chief Constable’s Office
                                            P O Box 22 (S.West PDO)
                                            Chester House
                                            Boyer Street
                                            Manchester M16 ORE
                                            Telephone 061 872 5050


         AND



          cc/Mco                              29th June 1989




                     Hillsborough S%adium Disas%er Inquiry
          I refer to your letter of 23rd May 1989 to the General
          Secretary of the ACPO at New Scotland Yard which was passed
          to me for my attention, and enclose six copies of the ACPO
          Submission to your Inquiry, together with the relevant
          Appendices.    Although the bound document incorporating the
          Appendices is not marked ’Confidential’ there are some papers
          in it (e.g. the minutes of Police Conferences on Football)
          which are clearly not public documents. I am sure you will
          be mindful of this point in your use of the various papers.
          If there are any particular aspects upon which further police
          evidence or information is required I will be happy to oblige
          on request.
          I should mention that the formal minutes of the latest series
          of post-season police conferences on football are not yet
          available and will be forwarded in due course.
          Mr. David Phillips (Secretary of the ACPO Sub-Committee) and
          I will be glad to meet The Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Taylor if he
          wishes.




                                Chief Cons%able



          R.M. Whalley Esq.
          Secretary to the Inquiry,
          Hillsborough Inquiry,
          50 Queen Anne’s Gate,
          London. SWIH 9AT
l
l
l
!
l
              ASSOCIATION OF CHIEF POLICE OFFICERS
l           OF ENGLAND, WALES AND NORTHERN IRELAND
I
l
 l                     INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH
 i                            STADIUM DISASTER

i
I
    i                         A.C.P.O. SUBMISSION
i
I
l
                                                June 1989
 l
i
i

i       PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY THE CHIEF CONSTABLE OF THE GREATER MANCHESTER POLICE FORCE ON BEHALF OF A.C.P.O.
!
!
                                FOREWORD
!
    This documen% has been researched and wri%%en by Mr. J. David
    Phillips (Depu%y Chief Cons%able of Devon & Cornwall
    Cons%abulary; un%il recen%ly Assis%an% Chief Cons%able
    (Opera%ions) Grea%er Manches%er Police), Secre%ary of %he
    ACPO Sub-Commi%%ee on Hooliganism a% Spor%ing Even%s, in
    consul%a%ion wi%h Mr. C. James Ander%on, (Chief Cons%able of
    Grea%er Manches%er Police), Chairman of %he Sub-Commi%%ee.
    I% is published under %he au%hori%y of %he Associa%ion of
    Chief Police Officers.
    The documen% is based on %he accumula%ed knowledge,opinions
    and delibera%ions of %he Sub-Commi%%ee, and reflec%s curren%
    %hinking, policies and prac%ices wi%hin %he ACPO on whose
    behalf i% is submi%%ed %0 %he Inquiry in%o %he Hillsborough
    S%adium Disas%er for %heir considera%ion.
    Fur%hermore, many of %he key issues rela%ing %o such %hings
    as perime%er fencing, crowd con%rol and public safe%y were
    fully discussed a% %he pos%-season Police foo%ball
    Conferences held during May and June, 1989 covering all
    divisions of %he Foo%ball League.
    The lis%ed Appendices being copies of working documen%s
    previously circula%ed %0 Chief Cons%ables have been sen%
    under separa%e cover %0 %he Inquiry.
    The %hree Police Training Videos:
!   i.    S%ewards "STEWARDS"

     .
          Briefing Parades "BRIEF FOR SUCCESS"
    3.    Use of C.C.T.V. "C.C.T.V."
    referred %o in %his ACPO Submission have also been sen% %o
    %he Inquiry for %heir informa%ion.

!
                           C. James Ander%on
                            Chief Cons%able
                                Chairma~
                   ACPO Sub-Commi%%ee on Hooliganism
                           a% Spor%ing Even%s




    27 June 1989
                  A.C.P.O. GENERAL PURPOSES COMMITTEE
                           SUB-COMMITTEE ON
                    HOOLIGANISM AT SPORTING EVENTS

                               MEMBERSHIP


I   Chairman                    C.J. ANDERTON Esq CBE QPM DL
                                Chief Constable
                                Greater Manchester Police
I   Secretary                   J.D. PHILLIPS Esq BA (Econ)
                                Deputy Chief Constable
                                Devon and Cornwall Constabulary
    No.l Region                 R. ADAMS Esq MA
                                Assistant Chief Constable
                                Merseyside Police
    No.2 Region                 W.W.W. JACKSON Esq
                                Assistant Chief Constable
                                South Yorkshire Police
    No.3 Region                 J.M. JONES Esq MSc
                                Assistant Chief Constable
                                West Midlands Police
    No.4 Region                 J.A. WESELBY Esq QPM
                                Deputy Chief Constable
                                Derbyshire Constabulary
    No.5 Region                 G.E. HEDGES Esq
                                Assistant Chief Constable
                                Thames Valley Police

I   No.6 Region                 P. MANNING Esq MSc
                                Assistant Chief Constable
                                Avon & Somerset Constabulary
I   No.7 Region                 H. DAVIES Esq QPM
                                Assistant Chief Constable
I   No.8 Region
                                South Wales Constabulary
                                J.P. ROBINSON Esq QPM BSocSci

I                               Commander
                                Metropolitan Police
    British Transport Police    W.I. McGREGOR Esq
I   Co-opted Member             Assistant Chief Constable
                                  INDEX

    Subject                               Paragraph
i
    ACPO Standing Sub-Committee           1-4
i   Alcohol - control of                  19, 55
    All-seater stadia                     48
I   All-ticket matches                    57

I   Association Football
    Banned spectators
                                          36, 37
                                          54-58
I   C.C.T.V.                              19, 25, 29-32,
                                          63, 74, 91

I   Civil liability                       91
    Conclusions                           88-93
I   Conferences - football                33-35
    Containment - policing by             9, i0
    Control Box, police                   50, 63, 74, 91
    Communications                        6O
    Costs                                 66-70
I   Crowd, football, categories           14
    Crowd control                         88, 91
i   Crowd safety                          22, 88
    Drunkenness                           19
    Dual-responsibility                   91
    Exclusion Orders                      58
    Football, Association                 36, 37

               conferences                33-35

I              crowds, categories         14
               grounds                    41-53
        Football, League
I                 Liaison officers
                                              36, 39

                                              2, 24

I                 Spectators Bill
                  Trust
                                              86, 87
                                              29, 30, 40, 66

I       Forged tickets                        59

        Fraud, turnstile                      56
I       Gangs, organised                      13, 26


I       Grounds, football
        ’Green Code’
                                              41-53

                                              52, 64, 80,
        ’Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds
I       Home Office, S.R.D.B.
                                              93

                                              30

i       Hooliganism
        Intelligence gathering
                                              3-22

                                              20, 23-28, 65

I       Intelligence officer                  25
        Intelligence (N.F.I.U.)               26-28, 65
        Late arrivals                         54-58
        League-football                       36, 39
        Liaison officers                      2, 24
        National Football Intelligence Unit   26-28, 65
        Organised gangs                       13, 26
        Police Control Box                    50, 63, 74, 91

    I   ’Policing by containment’             9, i0
        Public safety                         17, 22
i       Safety Certificates                   43-53, 75
        Safety, crowd                         22, 88
l
        Safety Inspectorate                   93
        Safety Officer                        79
        Spectators Bill                       86, 87
I
I
I   Standing Sub-Committee (ACPO)

    Stewards
                                    1-4
                                    71-81

I   Tickets, All-ticket matches
    Tickets, forged
                                    36, 37
                                    59
I   Ticket Touts                    59
    Touts
I   Training
                                    59
                                    82-85, 91

I   Trust, Football
    Turnstiles
                                    29, 30, 40, 66
                                    41, 42, 44, 47
I   Turnstile, fraud
                                    50, 56
                                    56

I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
                   LIST OF APPENDICES


    APPENDIX   SUBJECT


I     ao       ACPO Sub-Committee on Hooliganism at
               Sporting Events: "Guide to Policing
               Football"

I     B.       Outline Proposals for National Football
               Intelligence Unit
!     C.       Proposals for the Identification/

I              Prosecution of Hooligan Gangs and the
               Raising of Behavioural Thresholds at
               Football Grounds

!     D.       Note of the Meeting of Divisional Football
               League Commanders
!     E.       Costs of Policing Football

I     F.       ACPO Correspondence on the Football
               Spectators Bill
I              i) Mr. Anderton, Chairman of the
                   Sub-Committee, to G.L. Angel Esq.,

I                  Home Office

               2) Mr. Anderton, Chairman of the
                   Sub-Committee to J. Goddard Esq.,
I                  Home Office

      Go       ACPO Evidence - July 1985 - to the
               Committee of Inquiry into Crowd Safety and
               Control at Sports Grounds

      H.       ACPO Evidence - Second Report,
               September 1985 - to the Committee of
i              Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control at
               Sports Grounds
                        POLICING FOOTBALL - ACPO POLICY


    DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL POLICY IN THE POLICING OF FOOTBALL



I   i.      At a meeting of the ACP0 General Purposes Committee on ist
    June, 1979, it was resolved to form a Standing Working Group to
I   assess the problems relating to football hooliganism. The Group was


I   constituted to include representatives from other organisations,

    members of ACP0 and anyone within the Police Service with special

i   expertise or knowledge in this matter. Its purpose was to examine

    issues of national importance.

I
    2.      During the life of the Working Group it considered the
I   generality of policing football and formulated some Notes of

I   Guidance on policing which related particularly to arrangements for

    travelling supporters, their arrival and departure at grounds and

I   information about their movement through the transit system. This

    guidance was eventually formulated and made available to officers in
I   a document called "The Public Order Guide". The Group met on six


I   occasions before it was allowed to lapse. There still remained an
    arrangement for meetings to be held on an ad hoc basis between

I   interested parties and Mr. Anderton, the Chief Constable of Greater

    Manchester, was appointed to act as Liaison Officer and to be a
I   depository for information about special events and a reference


I   point on dlfficulties that might arise. The Working Group also set
    up a system whereby each Police Force hosting a football ground was

I   asked to nominate a Liaison Officer to pass information to his

    counterpart in other Police Forces about travelling supporters. A

I
l
    National Register of Liaison Officers was and is maintained at New
I   Scotland Yard and this system has remained in tact ever since. It


I   has in recent times been reorganised and its arrangements

    formalised, paragraphs 25 - 28 refer.

I
    3.      At a meeting of the General Purposes Committee on the 3rd
I   November, 1983, in the face of continued problems at football


I   grounds and indeed at other sporting events, the whole matter was
    discussed again and it was decided to resuscitate the football

I   hooliganism group but extend its terms of reference so that all

    matters concerned with hooliganism in sport could be considered. To

I   this end the General Purposes Committee approved the constitution of

    a Standing Sub-Committee on "Hooliganism in Sport". Mr. Anderton
l   has since that time acted as Chairman. The Terms of Reference of

I   the Sub-Committee included a requirement to act as a reference point
    in respect of special problems relating to sporting fixtures, mainly

!   in England and Wales but also with an eye to Scotland and to events

    in Europe.     The early business of the Sub-Committee included
i   consideration of the initial C.C.T.V. systems set up in England and


I   Scotland and consideration of problems in relation to alcohol,
    particularly on public service vehicles.

I   4.      The reconvened Sub-Committee on Hooliganism at Sporting

I   Events met for the first time on the 13th November, 1984 and it has
    met on a total of twelve occasions since. Early on its agenda was
I   the question of guidance offered to police officers. It was felt

I   this needed to be reviewed in the light of then recent events and

    the Secretary was asked to undertake an examination of the

I   guidance.     The new document was prepared and approved by the


                                        -2-
I   Sub-Committee on the 23rd February, 1987 when it was decided to

l   issue it as a stand-alone document which should be made available to
    all officers with a responsibility for supervising football games.
I   The document subsequently received the endorsement of ACPO Council


I   and by October 1987 had been circulated to all Police Forces.

    (Appendix A).

I
    THE HOOLIGANISM PROBLEM
I
I   5.      To compass a topic of this complexity completely and in

    detail is clearly not possible within the terms of this submission.

I   Nonetheless a number of points need to be made which relate both to

    current strategies and to ways forward.

I
    6.      First of all it has to be said that football hooliganism is
I   almost a worldwide phenomenon and has plagued the game in England at

I   least since the mid-sixties. It is difficult to guage the extent as

    no real index of the problem exists (arrests are a very doubtful

I   indicator). Nonetheless the police view is that by the mid to late

    seventies it was endemic with police officers subjected to spitting,
l   abuse and assault so often that it became "normal". Indeed by the


l   turn of the decade police officers were surprised if they did not

    have to skirmish to preserve some kind of control over events.

l
    7.      More organised and forceful pollcing checked the worst

I   excesses and in due course legislation and technology have ali in


I   their turn added to the plethora of controls which in recent years

    have restrained football’s belligerents. Despite these improvements

I   policemen are in no doubt that at many matches the balance of


                                         -3-
I
i   control is a fine one and at the margins hooligan gangs still
    venture on a deliberate course of affray. The nagging strain

I   associated with this violent fringe does much to colour police
    perceptions of crowd control.

I
    8.      It is probably fair to say that traditlonal policing methods
I   for handling football were largely consistent with policing methods


I   for handling large crowds in general. During the 1960’s, as

    problems with football crowds became notorious, policing methods

I   became increasingly defensive and a good deal more co-ordination
    between Police Forces developed. Over the last two decades policing

I   football has become a speclalist area and policing strategies have

    been based upon a presumption that violence between rival spectators
I   is probable wherever they have the opportunity to intermingle.

i   9.      Analysing policlng tactics, certainly over the earlier part

I   of these years, allows the contention that substantially what has
    been developed is an all encompassing pattern of "pollcing by
I   containment". There are three fundamental aspects to this approach:-


l   (a)     The development of information concerning crowds in transit

I           and plans to intervene and escort at every turn~


I   (b)     A commitment to segregation of "home" and "away" supporters
            both in transit, through the turn-stiles, whilst in the
I           ground and at their departure;

I   (c)     The construction of containment fencing within grounds to

I           control the movement of supporters.


I                                       -4-
I   10.     The general strategy of "policing by containment" is near

l   universal and routine to police, ordinary supporters and hooligans

    alike. In the great majority of cases it operates with relative
I   ease and, perhaps paradoxically, allows decent spectators to feel


I   secure within their own controlled environment.          It has been
    successful over the years for most fixtures in marshalling great

I   numbers of football spectators within grounds more or less trouble

    free, despite undertones of aggression at the fringes.
I
            On the negative side its disadvantages are that, it tends to
I   ii.
    encourage an antagonistic and tribalist attitude between rival

I   groups and to some degree provides a framework for the "war games"

    of determined hooligan gangs. Equally, whilst we may have contained

I   the problem, in reality we require a veritable army of policemen
     every weekend to hold sway between hostile groups apparently bent on
I    violence. The sheer size of the police commitment is daunting and


I    has progressively raised the question of how the problem of violence
     might be removed rather than merely controlled. (This observation

I    has to be set aside the general case that any large crowd needs some
     measure of direction and control in the interests of public

I    safety). Hence over the last four years, at least at the policy


I    level, we have been doing much more to study the phenomenon of

     hooliganism and to try complementary strategies designed to reduce

I    the problem itself.


I    12.     This more searching examination of hooliganism has been
     based in part upon close observation and in part upon the work of
I    intelligence operations which have done much to reveal the inner

I    workings of hooligan gangs. In the event this work has put in


                                         -5-
    question a number of basic propositions.    Policing by containment in

    a sense has been policing "en-masse".      Faced with crowds of many

    thousands it has seemed impossible to       concentrate on individual

    offenders and police officers have planned to exercise crowd control
    over large groups at "arms length". This tends to have sustained

    the presumption that football crowds by their very nature are
    volatile and combustible and that whenever rival groups clash sparks

    of violence are inevitable. The more we have become involved in the
    close analysis of hooliganism the more this presumption has been put
    in question.



i   13.     The alternative thesis of football hooliganism has much more

    to do with concentrating police attention upon determined criminal
I   hooligans. Very often it seems these people have no other interest


I   than violence, they are organised in gangs and carry through

    pre-determined plans to fight and cause damage wherever they can do

i   so with impunity. In reality few clashes are in fact spontaneous,
    they are almost always arranged even if that is not evident at the

i   time. The numbers involved vary from 10’s to 100’s. They are part

    of a culture with a hierarchy of command, a mythology of motives,
B   and the outline of national organisation. Football provides for

I   them a magnificent opportunity - the nature of the game is one of

    physical confrontation; support is often partisan in the extreme;

I   ill constructed stadia provide an accommodating platform; vast

    crowds provide both the atmosphere and the cover behind which they
i   can manoeuvre; and the fixture list organises a calendar for their


I   criminal encounters.




                                        -6-
I
    14.     It would be wrong to describe these hooligan groups as a
I   "tiny minority" as the football industry is want to do. Regardless


I   they are a minority and some explanation of how they can create such

    a destructive level of nuisance is required. Equally it has to be

I   explained why some fixtures, indeed the majority of fixtures, pass

    off without any apparent trouble. Football crowds can be broken

I   down into at least three broad groups. Firstly, there are those who

    are keen supporters, who attend regularly, who will be represented
I   within a wide age range and who are in every respect co-operative,


I   and behave fairly and reasonably. Many of these people will be in

    seated areas, family paddocks and be season ticket holders. A

I   second broad group who fill the popular terraces will be vociferous

    in their support of their own club, acquiescent towards the ili
I   behaved and indifferent to police strategies. A third broad group


I   of largely young male volatile supporters will be noisy, actively
    involved in demonstrating allegiance to their own club as well as

I   belligerence towards the opposition. Whilst generally passive they

    are sufficiently i11-humoured that if the opportunity for disorder

I   is presented they will join the throng. The determined hooligan
    groups who represent a special stratum of this last element can
I   therefore, and this is really the point, rely upon a good deal of

I   tacit support in the event of disorder.



I   15.     The hooligan groups are constantly surveilling the

    environment for opportunities to generate confrontation in
I   situations that will carry the uncommitted with them. In addition


i   our present understanding leads to the view that they pick their
    fixtures and that the hooligan effort is selectively targetted.

I
                                        -7-
I
    16.     On this alternate thesis it is not surprising that "policing
I   by containment" has not found an answer to the problem even though

I   it has generally held it in check. The hooligan may be arrested on

    occasions but the determined nature of his activities is likely to

I   remain undiscovered. For these reasons we have been concentrating

    in recent times much more on the development of surveillance,
I   intelligence and evidence gathering. This is a developing phase and


l   might be termed "pre-emptive policing". Many of the initiatives
    described later in this evidence are designed to sharpen and target

I   the police approach to this aspect of the problem.



I   17.     A further matter needs to be examined here and that is the
    connection between public safety and hooliganism. These issues are
I   often seemingly at variance. Containment fencing for example may

l   also prevent rapid evacuation.         Equally however,     lack of

    containment, will allow hooligan groups to storm the opposition and

I   create a scenario within which there are wild surges, panic and

    massively dangerous crowd pressures. In short public order is
I   intrinsically linked with safety. Those charged with handling large


I   crowds know that the greatest danger lies in the sheer weight of

    numbers and that any signs of undue urgency or even panic can create

l   shock waves in one part of the crowd felt with tremendous intensity

    at another. This is clearly likely to be compounded on terraces
I   where there is a deliberate incline.        Public disorder is the


l   occurrence most likely to generate frantic crowd movement. Herein

    lies an awesome truth. Where large crowds are concerned the sheer

I   irrational momentum of sudden movement can never be wholly guarded

    against. Every step can be taken to provide a safe environment but

I   if the facilities are misused there can be no guarantees. Put


                                        -8-
    another way any large crowd in a confined space generates potential
I   dangers, so long as that crowd is reasonably orderly that danger is

I   minimal but there can be no absolute protection, by engineering or
    policing, if large numbers in the crowd are determined to behave

I   irresponsibly.


I   18.     Fortunately the great majority of regular supporters


I   recognise the obvious dangers and are cautious, particularly when
    entering and leaving sports stadia. The hooligan is as ever the

I   bizarre exception and in this category we would have to put those

    who seek to enter an all ticket stadium without tickets. This
I   unfortunately is not uncommon and as a strategy must involve

    something of a mass attempt to stand any chance of success.
I
I   19.     These paragraphs are an attempt to characterise football

    hooliganism at its present stage, however the situation is almost by

I   its very nature ever changing.       Overall there is probably less

    hooliganism by volume but where it occurs it is often more serious.
I   Two aspects of control have done much to change the nature of


I   hooliganism. The leglslation which prevented the general supply of

    alcohol to fans in transit and the universality of C.C.T.V. have

I   made a major impact. Taken together the effect has been that

    displays of wild aggression from hoardes of drunken supporters are
I   much less frequent. The hooligan has moved out of the camera’s


I   range and in a word, there has been "displacement" away from the

    terraces to the darker confines of the stadium or to other venues

I   such as public houses and the transit system.




                                        -9-
I
    20.     The evidence from our intelligence operations indicates a
I   good deal of violence occurs away from football grounds on other

I   than match days and seemingly having nothing to do with football
    other than that allegiance to a football team is the reason behind

l   the gang’s association. This may be a consequential development or

    it may simply be that we are only ~ust learning of how these things
I   occur. A further inference drawn from intelligence operations is


I   that the hooligans are much more selective in their affairs. They
    do not attend every match with a plan for disorder, rather they pick

I   particular fixtures which represent in their distorted mythology
    special challenge or consequence. On these occasions they may well

l   contact beforehand others who are similarly minded and even the

    opposition.
I
l   21.     Whilst much of the worst of the problem relates to hooligan

    gangs this is not the only phenomenon. Earlier in paragraph 14

I   reference was made to a "third estate" of supporters who were always

    capable of wholesale misbehaviour if circumstances are favourable to
I   that end. Containment policing is designed to keep this in check


I   and is usually effective in doing so. It should be said however

    that policing "big occasions" is especially trying because that is

I   exactly when the atmosphere is likely to be so heightened that this

    volatile section of the crowd will misbehave. It is the sense of
I   occasion associated with "semi-finals" and "finals" or with end of


I   season clashes which determine championships, promotion and
    relegations which induces an atmosphere of challenge and expectation

I   and often drunkenness to boot. In these circumstances policing can

    be much more difficult but usually achieveable all other things

I
                                        -I0-
I
    being equal. It takes, however, very little to change the balance.
I   A violent incident occurring, a late train, inadequate turn-stiles,


I   supporters in numbers without tickets - all these things can upset

    the best of plans and given the numbers involved reduce policing to

I   a desparate effort to maintain order.


I   22.     It is recognised that safety is the main concern of this
    enquiry and the attention given to the hooliganism problem is
I   purposefully presented in this context. Skirmishes in public houses

I   away from the ground will not of themselves put large numbers in a
    football crowd at risk. But disorder in and amongst a large crowd

I   is unquestionably dangerous. If crowds are orderly and responsive

    the only real danger, providing spectator llmits are maintained, is
I   from fire. If they are not, then no matter what the policing


I   arrangements and given the outdated nature of most major sports

    stadia, there is a potential for danger if not disaster.

I
    RECENT INITIATIVES
I
    Intelllgence



I   23.     AS previously mentioned the original ACP0 guidance on

    policing football included the setting up of a national index of

I   football llaison officers. Their purpose was and is to develop

    "match information" to assist both the match commander in his
I   planning and to provide information to his opposite number in the

I   event of an away game. This index is maintained at New Scotland

    Yard and published annually. Throughout the 1970’s this was the

I
                                        -II-
basis of the intelligence system. It was effective to a degree and
provided information about numbers of travelling supporters and

their mode of transport. It was consistent with the strategy of
"containment policing" in that it provided the basis for control and

segregation, escorts and the rest.



24.      In 1985 the sub-committee determined to examine and revise

this intelligence system recognising that it lacked precision and
formality. As a result of that examination the system of passing

information between liaison officers was standardised and an effort
made to make the information available more comprehensive.          A

proforma was produced so that information would be stored on a

common basis and the system required that a match information

summary be prepared at the conclusion of each game to record the
details of the match, viz., number of travelling supporters, the

accuracy of the information supplied, details of coaches and trains,

details of arrests, details of any incidents etc. A copy of the
report would be retained by the Force hosting the match and a

further copy sent to the Force from whom the away support

originated. On this basis over time each liaison officer would have
a file of reference for all encounters during preceding seasons as

well as a file on the performance of his supporters at all away

games.     This system works effectively and match commanders and

liaison officers report it is much more effective than it used to be.



25.      Whilst these arrangements were being put into effect we were
at the same time examining more closely the distinction between

"match information" and "intelligence°’. Whilst match information is

in some degree intelligence, in real terms intelligence should



                                     -12-
    relate to the identity, the known associations, the known strategies

    and, if possible, the actual plans of those involved in football
    violence. Recognising that most liaison officers were not in a

    position to develop much of this sort of information we have over

    the last two years made additional recommendations. In particular

    we have recommended that for each club there is an approved
    "intelligence officer" who should seek to develop a portfolio of

    intelligence in real terms.       It is recognised, however, that

    developing intelligence involves a different approach to policing

    football than simply managing each game.




                                     Whilst such an approach has been

    recommended by the ACPO Sub-Committee the costs and professional

    difficulties have to be taken into account and many Forces have not

    felt at this stage that justification has existed for such a
    commitment. Equally the development of the skills necessary to

    build up intelllgence takes time and, whilst we have been involved

    in explanation and training, practices are not yet in step with

    theory.


    Na~ion~l Football Intelligence Unit




l   26.       In an effort to give some coherence to intelligence

    gathering and because by its very nature intelligence of this kind

I   needs a wide purview, the ACPO have presented the case for a
    natlonally organised intelligence unit.      Hooligan gangs operate

I   across a wide area and may of course be involved in criminal


I                                         -13-
    escapades in any town between their point of departure and the venue
I   of the fixture. Furthermore, in recent times there is good evidence

I   that they will often plan criminal violence which has nothing

    whatever to do with football. There is a need to overview such

!   events to identify patterns and recognise what is behind seemingly

    unconnected events.
I
    27.     Equally we have argued that as there has been much public

    concern about the conduct of English spectators abroad, particularly
    those following the national side, there is a need for some central

    point to retain, gather and disseminate intelligence concerning fans
    who travel abroad and cause trouble. At present no local Police

    Force has any real stake in this matter.



l   28.     For all these reasons the development of a National Football

    Intelligence Unit is seen as of critical importance and at present

i   negotiations with the Home Office are well in hand for it to be

    funded by Common Police Services (Appendix B refers).
l
    Closed Circuit Television



I   29.     In 1983 in conjunction with the Football Trust, who provided

    the finance, an experiment was undertaken to examine the usefulness
I   of C.C.T.V. in dealing with hooliganism. Rudimentary systems were


I   set up in Manchester, Edinburgh and Birmingham. One of the problems

    which always exists in developing ACPO (i.e. national) initiatives

I   is the lack of a central staff to evaluate and formulate policy. It

    was therefore difficult to evaluate properly these experiments but

I   in 1985 an approach was made to the Trust to extend these facilities


I                                       -14-


I
I
     in First and Second Division grounds. About this time as a result
I    of the problems at Luton, Birmingham, Bradford and Heysel the call


I    for C.C.T.V. became a clamour. Very obligingly the Football Trust
     made considerable funds available and over the last few years some

I    sort of system has been made available to all League clubs.


I    30.     Because of the considerable expenditure there was an urgent


I    need to be more precise in the whole area of C.C.T.V. A review
     organised by the sub-committee reported that systems were generally

I    inadequate as far as their specifications went and that operators

     were untrained and operations lacked strategy. In short, simply to

I    put in C.C.T.V. was no answer at all. We needed to know what we

     expected of the equipment, what the best configuration of equipment
I    might be, operators needed to be properly trained (to this end a


I    whole new area of expertise had to be developed) and it had to be

     allied to an intelligence system. Protracted negotiations with the

I    Home Office took place and eventually a technical committee was set

     up staffed by officers and support staff with knowledge in this area
I    from various Forces and with the permanent expert advice of Mr.


I,   Andrew Ford, seconded from the Scientific, Research and Development

     Branch of the Home Office. This committee has worked in conjunction

I    with the Football Trust and given professional advice to all Police

     Forces providing C.C.T.V. coverage. It has also developed advice on

     new equipment and proper specifications.


I    31.     Over the last two years training courses set up in Greater

I    Manchester have trained almost 200 operators nationally and training

     is ongoing. Additionally a training and awareness video has been

I    put together and made available to all Police Forces.


I                                         -15-
I
    32.     Whilst we have made great strides in this area the present
I   lack of wholehearted development on the intelligence front still

I   means that the real potential is not entirely fulfilled. Equally
    there remains something of a debate as to the best use of C.C.T.V.

i   For evidence and intelligence gathering different specifications may

    be desirable than those for crowd control and safety. Accordingly
I   the sub-committee has now set up a working party to examine the best


I   advice on the use of C.C.T.V. for crowd control. On 29th July 1988,
    following presentations by the Secretary to "football conferences"

I   and to the ACPO national conference, a paper was circulated by the

    Chairman to Chief Constables outlining the related strategies
I   recommended by the sub-committee in relation to the use of C.C.T.V.

    and intelligence operations. These are attached at Appendix C.
!
    Football Conferences



!   33.     The difficulty of disseminating national policy has always

    been accute. In the area of football policing there is a greater
I   need for consistent policy and communication with other Forces than


I   in almost any other area of policing.
    self-evident.
                                                         The reasons are
                       Almost uniquely we are always policing events

I   involving some level of participation with other Police Forces. In

    a word we are policing a crowd and hooligans from another Division
I   or another Police Force.


I   34.     In 1986 in an effort to improve liaison and increase

I   consistency a system was set up to provide a conference at the

    season’s end for the match commanders and their intelligence

I   officers for each Division of the Football League.


I                                       -16-


I
I
    35.       At each of these conferences the ACPO guidance on policing
I   football is an agenda item and commanders are requested for any

I   views as to its update. Copies are also issued to all people

    attending the conferences. The conferences have provided a forum

I   for wide-ranglng debate, the exchange of professional information
    and new ideas and the emergence of concerns for consideration by the
I   ACPO sub-committee. A copy of the minutes of those conferences is


i   at Appendix D.



    Liaison with other bodies


    36.       Over the last four years we have sought to improve and

    facilitate our liaison with other bodies and institutions that have
    a role in dealing with the football problem. The Secretary of the

    Sub Committee is in frequent contact with the Football Association,
    the Football League, the Professional Footballers’ Association and

    the Referees and Linesmen Association. On all of these fronts

    relationships are good and generally a high level of co-operation

    exists.


    37.       As far as the Football Association is concerned recent areas

    of co-operatlon include close attention to international fixtures

    (the Football Association in part funded the intelligence operations
    undertaken by British police officers in West Germany during the

    European Cup) and a substantial agreement over handling of

    mlsbehaviour on the field of play.




                                         -17-
    38.     There are many matters of mutual concern between the police

    and the Football League, in particular problems concerning the
    scheduling of fixtures.



I   39.     In the general context match commanders are inevitably in

    weekly if not daily contact with the secretaries of Football League
|   clubs and in the great majority of cases the relationship on


i   practical matters is first class.. At the level of policy the ACPO

    Sub Committee through its Secretary deals with current issues and

I   the Police Service has no difficulty in making known its views.
    Whilst there is no absolute coincidence of view on every issue, in

I   general there is a spirit of co-operation.


I   40.     It should be mentioned too that the Secretary of the Sub


I   Committee is ex-officio a trustee of the Football Trust. Over the

    last few years the Trust have endorsed a number of spending schemes

I   to assist policing, most particularly in the area of closed circuit

    television.
I
    PROBLEMAREA$



    01d Grounds


I   41.     Many football grounds are over 100 years old and many more

    were built at a time when it was sensible for the stadium to be
I   close at hand to their support. Consequently many stadia have

l   outgrown the sites on which they were built and rise ominously from

    the door-steps of terraced housing which presses almost up to the

I   turn-stiles.     There is inadequate parking space and crowding



                                        -18-
I
    problems are compounded by narrow streets.          It is extremely
I   difficult to sustain free routes for emergency vehicles.


I   Immediately after a game the ground is often isolated for up to an
    hour by the sheer volume of people making their way to car parks,

I   trains, coaches and the rest. Whereas much is made of large sums of

    money involved in transfer fees, most of this money is often no more
    than credit balances circulated within the League, in effect


I   exchanging funds from the wealthy clubs to the poorer clubs in

    return for better players. Either way few clubs have had the money

I   if they have had the wish to do much to substantially improve the

    structural quality of grounds. Many are primitive in the extreme

I   often with wholly inadequate toilets and refreshment facilities,

    often with uncovered areas of terracing and usually comprising in a
I   main stand a warren of passages and rooms which are at best

I   inadequate. Although some of the major clubs have some part of

    their facilities at an excellent standard, they all retain primitive

I   enclosures for the less articulate members of their support.
    Football stadia have been tinkered with over many years, few were
I   actually designed to be what they are now. Radial and perimeter


I   barriers have been imposed on an inadequate infrastructure. Often

    the alignment between turn-stiles, facilities and terracing is

I   completely distorted. In short, crowd supervision within the ground
    and outside at turn-stiles usually consists in making the best of a
I   bad job.


I   42.        A point that should be made here is that on most occasions

I   the bulk of the crowds are home supporters and go to exactly the

    same place in the ground every match. They know their way and they

I
                                         -19-
I
    know the problems.      "Semi-finals" played     at neutral grounds,
I   however, are entirely made up of away           supporters where this

I   directional sense is usually wholly absent.     Thus it may be that on
    these occasions the design failings of old football grounds are most

I   likely to surface.


I   CapacitieS and Safety Certificates


I   43.     The safety certification process involves the general

l   presumption that segregated parts of the grounds will be safe for a

    given capacity. If the structure has failings then the capacity is

I   reduced until things are improved. There are however difficulties
    with this arrangement particularly where the area in question is
I   terracing. If it is a large area but nonetheless sub-divided then

l   there can be over- crowding in some parts balanced by spaces in
    others. Seating of course would determine distribution on an even

i   basis, terracing certainly does not.


I   44.     One solution would be to make the segregated areas smaller


I   so that, provided turn-stiles, facilities and terracing are properly
    aligned, capacities in a given segment would be sufficiently low

I   that over-crowdlng should not be a problem. The difficulty with
    this proposal is that in the event of fire or structural collapse

I   there should be "expansion room" for the crowd to escape.


I   45.     In short the disadvantage of wide open terraces is that the

I   crowd can concentrate, the advantage is that it provides expansion

    room. This is a fine balance and probably needs greater research.

l   Unquestionably however more seating would improve the distribution.



                                           -20-
I   46.     Policing arrangements       ideally would allow officers

    sufficient access to the crowd so that they could act to

I   "distribute" overcrowding and/or remove troublemakers. There should

    be gangways and access points well enough stewarded to allow passage

I   and there should be secure corridors as well giving protected access

    to critical areas. In general however it is in the very nature of
I   terracing that if the crowd is large gangways are extremely

I   difficult to maintain.



I   47.     Not to labour the point, if grounds were being constructed

    afresh well designed control mechanisms could produce configurations
I   which would allow a much safer management of the crowd. As has been


I   indicated the alignment between queueing areas, turn-stiles,

    facilities and spectator areas is critical. There is a balance to

l   be achieved between confining sections of the ground so that undue
    concentration is avoided on the one hand, and allowing sufficient

I   expansion room for safety on the other. In reality few football

    stadia are even moderately well designed.          The containment
I   arrangements have all been disjointedly fastened on to a basically

I   inadequate structure.



I   48.     A question that needs to be addressed here is the relevance

    of "all seater" stadia. Historically it has been tried with very
I   disappointing results. Coventry was a noteable example and to an


I   extent other clubs have greatly increased their seating capacity

    only to find spectators reluctant to use seats or worse eager to

I   misuse them. There are a number of considerations which are to be

    taken into account. Firstly, if seating is provided the area has
I   really to be covered. People may stand in the rain but they will


I                                       -21-


I
    not sit in the rain. Secondly, there is a good deal of consumer

    resistance. Many spectators simply want to stand in the traditional
    way which they associate with "atmosphere". Thirdly of course there
    is the question of cost and, on some grounds, the risk of reduced

    capacities.



    49.     None of these matters are fundamental and given the

    over-riding importance of safety and the obvious benefits in terms
I   of distributing spectators and making the stadium more manageable
    all seater stadia should without question be the aim.          As a

    practical matter however it would probably be desirable to develop a
I   rolling programme requiring club management to progressively reduce
    the capacity of standing areas and increase the availability of

    seating. This would allow spectators to gradually adjust and be

I   more realistic from the club’s point of view. Ibrox is perhaps a

    powerful example of what can be achieved.

i
    50.     As a final word on capacities the ACP0 guidance includes a
t   recommendation that the Police Control Box should have the facility


I   to monitor turn-stile readings. This is available in some grounds

    but not many and it is probably timely that safety certificates

l   require some system of monitoring accessible to the Police Control

    BOX.




    51.     The issue of Safety Certificates is fundamental to the whole

    question of ground safety and to Policing.




                                        -22-
    52.     Safety certificates are generally complex and subject of
    detailed scrutiny. In most cases, a Safety Committee involving

    Police, Fire Service, Local Authority and, sometimes, Club
    Secretary, work together to determine specifications. Whilst this

    is good practice, its weakness is that we have no guarantee of the

    real expertise of those involved. After a tragedy, in which so many

    young lives have been lost, we really have to ask ourselves whether

    the guidance in the "Green Code" is sufficient. The point is made
    again that there is a need for greater research into safety problems

    and greater investment in the training of those who make the

    decisions.


    53.     A final point of concern, in respect of Certification, is
    that some grounds are now owned by Local Authorities who are also

    the Certifying Authority. This appears to be wrong in principle.


    Late Arrlvals and Banned Spectators


I   54.     A common problem for police concerns the late arrival of


I   fans.   If a train is late or perhaps a motorway blocked, it can be

    that several hundred spectators will arrive at the ground after

I   "kick off" and, particularly if it is a critical fixture, will be
    clamorous to gain entry. There is an argument that in these

I   circumstances the "kick off" might be delayed. The problem is of
    course that on this basis kick off times will inevitably slide
I   further and further back. To date there has not really been a

I   convention about this although it is always open to match commanders

    to propose a delay to the referee.

I
                                          -23-
I   55.     A further problem relates to people who for no good reason
    are late to reach the turn-stiles. It was ACP0’s fear that if an

I   absolute ban on alcohol was enforced at grounds, and if indeed local
    hostelries were closed, the effect would simply be to delay arrival

I   as fans went further afield to find "watering holes". Guardedly it

    may be said this is generally the case. If fans know no alcohol is
I   available some are more likely to be late arriving. One answer to

I   this problem lies in timing critical fixtures so that alcohol is not

    available anyway, for example morning or mid-day kick offs. It

I   remains an open question as to whether the general 3 p.m. "kick-off"
    time is really appropriate.
I
I   56.     A related issue is the efficient manning of turn-stiles.

    Over many years match commanders have complained about not enough

I   turn-stiles being open or not being open early enough. As with

    stewarding turn-stile operatives are often casual labour and not
I   entirely reliable.      These matters have been raised with Club

    Secretaries and, certainly for major fixtures, should not now occur
I   too often. There is however a further problem at turn-stiles about

I   which less is known than should be. The intelligence operations

    referred to previously suggest that turn-stile fraud is

I   wide-spread. This clearly is a serious matter if borne out as

    capacities could be exceeded without police or management being
I   aware. Some means of auditina turn-stile operations is necessary

I   and it is proposed to enter discussions with the League to discuss
    this issue.

I

                                        -24-
I   57.     As a sanction against troublesome supporters the F.A. have

    insisted that for some clubs, Leeds United being the best known

I   example, away fixtures should be "all ticket".       Only approved

    supporters of the Leeds Club with Supporters Club Card are allowed

I   to buy tickets. This system has in fairness done something to
    moderate the reputation of Leeds but largely by transferring the
I   problem. ACP0 did not support the scheme in principle although they

I   agreed to stand by it. In fact, on the day, many match commanders

    faced with a mob outside the ground and insufficient resources to

I   Police in and out, simply let them in without tickets. This was a
    regrettable reality but underlines the difficulties associated with
I   "all ticket" fixtures. No doubt long term and short term solutions


I   are in conflict here, and no doubt resolve in favour of the long

    term should be best practice, but it is only fair to record that on

l   many occasions match commanders have acceded to the mob at the gate

    and let in fans without tickets.
i
    58.     One other group of banned supporters should be mentioned
l   namely those subject to "exclusion orders". Suffice it to say that

I   although many hooligans were excluded under the provisions of the

    Public Order Act, 1986 the Courts imposed bans for such short

I   periods that the exclusion scheme became wholly discredited in the

    eyes of the Police Service. Short term exclusion is simply not
I   enforceable and certainly no deterrent.


I   To,ts

I
    59.     The ACPO Sub Committee has for sometime registered concern
l   with the Home Office about the problem of ticket touts. The


I                                       -25-


l
I   difficulties they present are principally two fold~ firstly, because
    they will sell tickets to anyone, they are likely to disturb the

I   segregation arrangements (away supporters for example will be sold
    tickets for the home sections of the ground); secondly, because they

I   guarantee the availability of tickets on the day, they effectively

    encourage people without tickets to attend all ticket fixtures.
I   There is no particular offence in relation to ticket touts and

I   commonly the police resort to arresting them either for obstruction
    or suspicion of forged tickets. Regrettably the ACPO were not able

I   to produce factual evidence of a problem to satisfy the Home Office

    of a need for legislation but the difficulty lies in knowing exactly
I   what woul~ constitute such evidence other than the judgement of


I   police officers on the scene. There undoubtedly remains a clear

    need for an offence making it illegal to trade tickets for "all

I   ticket" fixtures on match days. There may need to be some exemption
    allowing the club to do so with the approval of the Police.

I
    Communications
I
I   60.     The Police Service has long struggled with the problems of

    communications on major sporting occasions, the difficulties are

I   commonplace in the Service. Principally the problem relates to the
    high level of ambient background noise associated with a large crowd
I   and technical gadgets such as ear pieces have not really compensated


I   successfully. In addition, when large numbers of men are deployed

    there is often a problem of providing enough channels to avoid the

I   system being overloaded. Many forces are not in a position for
    example to provide a dedicated command channel.
I
                                        -25-
I
I   61.      Regardless, good communications are of absolute importance
    and two issues are probably of great assistance.          Land line

I   telephones at key points connecting to the Match Control are of
    critical importance and secondly good C.C.T.V. systems will allow

I   the Control to survey problems themselves reducing the need for

    reports back.
I
I   62.     Problems of communications are simply technical however and

    with a sufficient level of investment should be surmountable. It is

I   perhaps the case that investment in this area should be a
    responsibility of the football club and more clearly addressed
I   within Safety Certificates.


I   63.     One aspect which is vital is the siting and facilities of

I   Control Posts. They should be specified to give an all-round

    perspective of the grounds, allow C.C.T.V. monitoring, have good

I   radio and telephone links, sufficient room for llaison with other

    services, accommodate maps, plans and emergency systems and so on.
!   Few are really adequate and in our view if they fall short the


I   global capacity of the ground should be restricted to I0,000.



I   64.     Communication with the crowd is another issue.          It is

    recommended good practice to have the ability to override the public
I   address system at any time in the interests of public safety. This


I   should be a rehearsed practice understood by both police and those

    who operate the system. It is probably valid to recommend the

I   training of the professional broadcaster to present police

    messages. It is suggested in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds

I
                                        -27-
    that portable public address systems be at hand to speak to the

    crowd. Police experience is a little ambivalent in this area. They
    can be useful but in serious situations they tend to be ineffective.



I   Intelligence


I   65.     Paragraphs 23 -    28 refer to developments in the police

I   intelligence system but under the heading of "Problems" it is
    reasonable to record some of the difficulties police have in this

I   direction. First of all with 43 separate Police Forces in England

    and Wales it is always difficult to obtain consistency of practice.
I   Equally up to the present there has been no efficient means of


I   enhancing the system and enforcing standard practice.
    development of the National Football Intelligence Unit should
                                                                     The



I   improve the situation but there is probably a need for the Police
    Service to make a greater commitment in this area.
I

I   66.     The cost of policing football is enormous. Appendix E sets
    out some details of what is involved. On balance football clubs pay

I   approximately 30% of the total cost (of which 30% is subsidised by

    the Football Trust). It has been recognised of course that much of
I   the policing effort is directed towards the crowds on the public

I   highways making their ways to and from the fixture. By common

    practice these officers form a reserve during the game usually on

I   duty in the grounds but uncharged for. The whole business of
    charging football clubs has been considered and re-consldered by
I   Police Forces over the last few years. There are a number of


I                                       -28-


I
I   difficulties. There is some disparity between Police Forces as to

    the rate at which charges are made. The number of hours charged

!   varies and is bound to both because tours of duty may be longer for

    large crowds and ma~or fixtures and/or because officers may have to

I   travel long distances to the grounds. There is some ambiguity as to

    what constitutes "ground duties". If the physical perimeter of the
I   stadium is the dividing line then officers engaged in the duties of

I   turn-stile supervision (searching and queuing) would not be charged

    for. Police opinion is that such duties should usually be regarded

I   as ground duties.


I   67.     There is another area of difference in that some forces


I   charge for specific numbers on a match by match basis and others

    charge according to a formula rating matches as "high", "medium" and

I   "low" priority, gauged over the season.



I   68.     From the club’s point of view there is a feeling that police

    charges continue to soar and that they have no control over the
I   numbers that the Chief Constables determine are required. Whilst

I   this is true in reality they probably do not fare badly from an

    equitable point of view but this observation takes no account of

I   their ability to pay or otherwise.         Clearly many clubs face

    recurrent dlfflcultles in meeting their creditors.
I
I   69.     At a practical level there is sometimes a reluctance by the

    police locally to pollce additional fixtures even where there is a

I   willingness to pay because income from football is usually not

    directly available to the match commander as "overtime". In short
I
                                        -29-
    internal budgeting arrangements for Police Forces where private cost
    charges are involved sometimes present difficulties for match

    commanders.



I   70.     Whilst it is the case that Police Forces are bound to police

    what is there rather than what they would like to police, the burden
I   of policing football often falls most heavily on those that are


I   anyway hard pressed and at particularly busy times. If any broad,

    new view is to be taken about policing football some consideration

I   should be given to the difficulty Police Forces face in providing
    the manpower given that under the present (legal) arrangements only
I   a relatively small percentage of costs are recoverable. Whilst it


I   can be argued that crowds in public places are a natural part of the
    police responsibility it can also be argued that football crowds

I   have become a very special problem and that perhaps some other way

    of funding police commitments out of football revenue should be

I   considered. An alternative to present arrangements might be to

    raise a levy on persons attending football grounds akin to the old
I   "aviation security levy" at airports. If this proposal was properly

I   evaluated a means might be found of more adequately recompensing
    police efforts.

I
    Stewardina

I
I   71.     This seemingly innocuous heading in fact raises one of the

    most contentious issues which has probably never been satlsfactorily

I   resolved. On the face of it a football stadium is privately owned

    and the proprietors have a responsibility to conduct and manage the

I   ground when spectators are present in the interests of public


I                                       -30-


I
I
    safety. Stewards are largely their agents to this effect. In most
I   circumstances this would be a fairly unequivocable proposition. The

I   debate however surrounds the role of the police and the police are

    only there because stewards cannot handle football crowds without

I   the back-up of law enforcement officers. An acquiescent crowd could

    well be managed by stewards alone but a crowd which has time and
I   again demonstrated an eagerness to fight on a mass scale if


I   unsupervised by police, simply cannot be controlled by stewards

    alone. Because of this, whatever the theory, the practice in most

I   football grounds is that the police control ingress and egress and

    determine what parts of the stadium will be kept clear and where the
I   divisions between groups of spectators will lie. Usually this is
    routine and stewards carry out an ancillary role in accordance with
!   the police plan. The question is therefore raised who is in charge

I   of crowd control and where does responsibility lie for the

    management of fans?

I
    72.     Mr. Justice Popplewell’s final report at paragraphs 4.13 -
I   4.19 discussed this issue. Indeed Mr. Justice Popplewell took


I   evidence from the Chairman and Secretary of the Sub-Committee on
    this point and his observations very much reflect this. In brief

I   the final report resolved that the police presence is there to

    assist enforcement of law and order but that a primary and
I   continuing obligation lay upon the proprietors to manage the crowd.


I   Mr. Justice Popplewell noted that in the event of emergency, police
    inevitably take de facto responsibility for organising the crowd but

I   added this in no way lessened the obligations of the proprietor.




                                        -31-
!   73.     Whilst Mr. Justice Popplewell’s remarks are a wise and fair

    summary of the situation current reflection does raise further

I   questions.      Whilst legal responsibilities may lie with the

    proprietor the "de facto responsibility" which falls upon the police

i   in the event of an emergency is conditioned in its effectiveness by

    what has gone on before -       otherwise the Service is very much a
I   "hostage to fortune".

i   74.     In particular if capacity control and packing is not a

I   police function, which commonly (although not entirely) it is not,

    then handling the aftermath is a tall order. Equally if the Police
I   exercise priority (which they always do) in marshalling segregation


I   of the crowd, and through their control post, C.C.T.V. and

    communications dominate the meanl of crowd control, they cannot

I   simply say it is at bottom a matter for the Club. Most Club

    Secretaries if asked would simply say "the police control the

i   match". Whatever the legal niceties this often seems to be the


I   reality. Yet because police control is only partlal in the sense

    that stewards, turn-stile staff and the rest have considerable

I   duties, there are grey areas.



I   75.     The Safety Certificate is supposed to resolve the
    difficulties in part by laying down safe tolerances such that in an
I   emergency the ground and the men that run it, can cope. The stark


I   reality may be however that a good many football grounds are simply

    not safe enough in an emergency if they are at or near capacity -

I   given the present nature of football crowds. Of course, most of the




                                         -32-
I
    time "capacities" are not reached and the problems do not show.
I   But, in the last analysis, safety is always a calculated compromise

I   and as practical men safety committees ask for what is possible.



I   76.     It may be that the ambiguous position of the police is part

    of the problem - that is acknowledging the club’s responsibility for
I   safety on the one hand, whilst routinely assuming all those tasks of


I   stewarding which the stewards cannot do, either because of the

    truculence of supporters or the limited talents of the stewards

I   themselves, on the other. It has to be said that the present lack

    of clarity in these arrangements can lead to something of a ’dogs

I   dinner’. In some clubs the police actively control the stewards, in

    others the stewards are quite independent and, despite some
I   improvements, standards of stewarding vary considerably with many

I   being too old or simply unreliable.

    "safety officer" but he will
                                                 The Secretary is normally the

                                                 have many other weighty

I   responsibilities on match days.


I   77.     It may be better to acknowledge that if trouble is


I   anticipated or if crowd control is going to test the ground

    capacities then, in the interests of public safety, police should

I   take control over the stewards through their supervisory chain.

    Stewards would continue to have a vital role in the strategy but two
I   issues would followz first if "packing" and "gangway" control were


I   on occasion a police responsibility, the police might require a
    different standard of performance from stewards;               secondly

I   co-ordination between the organisers and police would have to be

    clear and formal.

I
                                          -33-
I
            It is necessary to re-iterate some observations on
I   78.
    stewarding. They are at best casual workers (usually working one

I   day in two weeks), they are probably not people who have a
    supervisory role in ordinary life and are not always equipped or

I   used to giving directions or facing obstruction, many are retired

    people, and pay is not so attractive as to guarantee commitment.
I
I   79.     In the best circumstances there should be a well qualified

    Safety Officer, someone other than the Club Secretary, a Chief

I   Steward, Sector Supervisors and well trained, carefully selected

    Stewards. All this is presently recommended. To make it a reality
I   it would need to be a more carefully worded condition of the safety
    certificate with mandatory inspection by members of a "Safety
I   Committee" which includes the police. The Chief Steward should

I   report to the Match Commander and maintain liaison with Police

    Control and, on occasions the Match Commander should have the

I   authority to direct the Chief Steward. The Safety Committee should

    regularly inspect stewards and any failings should result in
I   sanctions.


I   80.     Regardless the police have over the last few years been

I   concerned to encourage clubs to improve the standards of

    stewarding. Our guidance includes close liaison with stewards as is
I   recommended in the "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds". We also


I   recommend police take an active role in training stewards and
    recently the Sub-Committee produced a training video which has been

I   circulated both to Police Forces and Football Clubs.




                                        -34-
I
    81.        Whilst there is general improvement the situation is still
I   rather patchy. As stated earlier, many stewards are too old or more

I   interested in watching the game than fulfilling their proper
    function. In particular stewards rarely can intervene effectively

I   in the face of troublesome supporters. There has however been a

    marked improvement in the conduct and organisation of fire stewards
I   and the manning of exit doors is probably constant.


I   Training

I              As a very practical business which is routine to the
    82.

I   Sub-Division which hosts the ground, policing football as a skill is

    generally "picked up" by all ranks who are new to it. For many
I   "specialists" such as mounted, motor cyclists, support groups, and

I   the like it is a fundamental part of their duties learned within the

    context of on-going events. Recognising that support from other

I   Divisions is often necessary, good briefing is both essential and
    general. The ACPO Sub-Committee recently issued a training video to
I   all Forces on "briefing" for football.


I   83.        Specialist Training Courses for C.C.T.V. operators and

I   Intelligence Officers are hosted by Greater Manchester Police.


I   84.        Whilst it is inevitable that much will have to be learned in
                                                          training for match
I   the doing the question of more specialist

    Commanders is an issue which needs to be              considered.   Safety

I   certification, crowd movement and safety,

    intelligence     system,   C.C.T.V.    strategy,
                                                          communications, the

                                                        evidence gathering,

I
                                          -35-
I
    membership schemes and the rest, are now all difficult and
I   specialist subjects.      Furthermore, the need for consistency of


I   practice has been underlined several times in this submission and
    training is the most likely vehicle to achieve it.

I
    85.     The case of a match Commander’s training course cannot be
I   separated from the need for more research and evaluation. Taken


I   together the possibility of a developing package of operational
    practice is most attractive. The subject may be ideal for a

I   "Carousel" course at the National Police College.



    The Football SPectator Bill


I   86.       Police views on this matter have been made reasonably

I   clear. Compulsory membership imposes the likelihood of considerable
    resource costs to achieve enforcement but holds out some prospect of

I   greater crowd discipline. The ACPO have been more concerned as to

    the detail than the principle and have sought to emphasise that the
I   most careful consideration must be given to issues like the capacity


I   of the "agency" to prevent fraud; the expertise of the "agency" to
    manage the process so that it is effective; and the robustness of

I   the technology and the regime at turn-stiles. The ACPO views on
    these matters are well set out in the attached correspondence

I   (Appendix F).


I   87.     It is the resolution of these issues which will determine

I   the balance of advantage between the amount of police time invested

    to make the scheme viable as against any noticeable improvement in

I   crowd behaviour.



                                        -36-
    CONCLUSIONS



I   88.       Over the last few years the ACPO has done much to highlight
    best practice and co-ordinate a nationally consistent approach. It

I   is of course the responsibility of individual Chief Constables to

    interpret national guidance within their own domain. On balance we
I   have fared well in relation to the development of match information

!   and liaison between forces and other agencies and we are probably on

    the brink of major improvements on the "intelligence" front.

I   National guidance is reasonably sound but probably limited by lack

    of systematic research into crowd safety issues -         in particular
I   police concern with hooliganism sometimes narrows vision on safety


I   matters. Whilst there is a conference system to spread best
    practice there is probably now a training need for Commanders. So

I   complex and technical has the policing of football become that a

    rethink on the preparation of match Commanders is probably now

I   imperative but must be linked with more research into managing
    crowds.
I
I   89.       Two issues cast a shadow over these general observations:

    the poor quality and inappropriate location of so many football

I   grounds; and the vexed question of "who’s in charge".


I   90.       Each of these matters is intractable.         The wholesale


I   relocation of football grounds is not possible but some substantial

    things can be done within the existing framework.              Three

I   opportunities in particular may be pursuedz




                                         -37-
I
I   (a)     critical fixtures test grounds much beyond a normal game,
            special games should only be played at grounds with

I           excellent facilities (and the League and F.A. may need to

            identify and improve some key venues);

I
    (b)     the process of certification needs to be placed on an annual
I           basis and safety committees need more guidance on the


I           "whole" concept of safety in grounds, i.e. not just the

            physical tolerances of structures but configuration and the

I           relationship of space and crowd behaviour as a process.

            Overall capacities may well need to be reduced;

I
    (c)
I           a programme to provide seating, eventually to cover most
            spectator sections of the stadium, needs to be implemented

I           universally.



I   91.     As to the question of "responsibility" the matter of civil
    liability should not cause us to resile from hard decisions if they
I   are necessary. Dual responsibility for safety is a recipe for


I   confusion. The Police are always going to seize the initiative in a

    crisis; crowd control is always going to be inextricably linked to

I   criminal hooliganism; the Police are never going to accept direction

    from stewards; stewarding will never (at least not in the
I   foreseeable future) be able to cope without some law enforcement


I   back-up; and finally Police do "own" most of the means of control.
    In these circumstances the Police must accept a leading role and,

I   despite the requirements and civil liabilities of football clubs,




                                        -38-
    themselves take on supervision of the overall conduct of events

    wherever crowd safety is an issue. This responsibility itself turns

    upon:


    (a)     greater research to provide a professional corpus of

            knowledge;



    (b)     the better training of match Commanders;



    (c)     through the safety certificate process, the improvement of
            the means of control particularly communications, control

            posts, C.C.T.V., etc.


    92.     Despite all these things safety will always be in the

    balance if crowd behaviour is unreasonable, those who by violent

    design disturb the equilibrium of large crowds so as to unleash the

    terrible pressures which great numbers can so precipitately create,

    carry an awesome responsibility - as do the Police and Courts in
    properly bringing them to book!



    93.     As a final observation but perhaps of ultimate significance
    is the matter of compliance. Whilst the Police Service has gone

    some way to establish a code of best practice (which has focused

    primarily on the public disorder aspects), safety matters remain

    largely localised in concept and in application. The Guide to
    Safety at Sports Grounds is merely a guide and in no dimension

    mandatory. Many "certifying" authorities have just one club to

    consider and no real comparative yardstick. This submission has




                                        -39-


l
I
I   several times raised the question of research and training but these

    developments alone are not a guarantee of performance. It is beyond

I   the immediate scope of this document to outline the actual structure

    which would establish and empower such a body, but it is considered
I   that there is a need for a Safety Inspectorate which would have a

    wide if not national purview, and would be both the repository of
I   knowledge and the purveyor of best practice on all matters affecting

I   ground safety. Such a body may need to be multi-disciplinary
    (involving the Police, Fire and Ambulance Services as well as

I   structural engineers and a representative from football). It would

    not replace the certification process but inspect and support its
I   affairs.


I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I                                       -40-


I
I
I
I
I
          ASSOCIATION OF CHIEF POLICE OFFICERS
I       OF ENGLAND, WALES AND NORTHERN IRELAND
I
I
!                 INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH
I                        STADIUM DISASTER

I
I
I                                    APPENDICES
I
I
I                                          June 1989
I
I
I
I   PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY THE CHIEF CONSTABLE OF THE GREATER MANCHESTER POLICE FORCE ON BEHALF OF A.C.P.O.
m
I
I                  LIST OF RPPENDICES


I   APPENDIX   SUBJECT


I              ACPO Sub-Committee on Hooliganism at
               Sporting Events: "Guide to Policing
               Football"

      So       Outline Proposals for National Football
               Intelligence Unit
I
      C.       Proposals for the Identification/
I              Prosecution of Hooligan Gangs and the
               Raising of Behavioural Thresholds at
               Football Grounds
I     m.       Note of the Meeting of Divisional Football
               League Commanders
I     Eo       Costs of Policing Football
I     Fo       ACPO Correspondence on the Football
               Spectators Bill
I              l) Mr. Anderton, Chairman of the
                  Sub-Committee, to G.L. Angel Esq.,
I                 Home Office
               2) Mr. Anderton, Chairman of the
                  Sub-Committee to J. Goddard Esq.,
                  Home Office


I     Go       ACPO Evidence - July 1985 - to the
               Committee of Inquiry into Crowd Safety and
               Control at Sports Grounds
I     So       ACPO Evidence - Second Report,

I              September 1985 - to the Committee of
               Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control at
               Sports Grounds

I
I
I
I
I
l
                  .,-,

I
I
I
l
I
I
I
I      ACPO SUB COMMITTEE ON
    HOOLIGANISM AT SPORTING EVENTS
I
      GUIDE TO POLICING FOOTBALL
I
I
l
I
I
I                          OCTOBER 1987
I
I
I
I
I
I
i
I
I
I
l
I
I
I
i
             A.C.P.O.
l       PUBLIC ORDER GUIDE

I       REPLACI~4ENT FOR THE

    HXEBALL HOOLIGANISM SECTION

I
I
l
l
I
I                                     CONTENTS
    CHAPTER 1 - POLICING FOOTBALL
I   Introduction
    Intelligence
    Pre-Match Planning
                                                                     1.1
                                                                     i .2 -i .6
                                                                     1.7
    Use of ’Away’ Officers (Spotters)                                1.8 -i .i0
I   Briefing
    Away Supporters
                                                                     1.11-1.16
                                                                     1.17-i .19
    Flashpoints                                                      i .20
I   Stadium Searches
    Entry into the Ground
                                                                     i .21
                                                                     i .22-i .27
                                                                     i .28-i .39
    Exclusion Orders
I   Entrance to the Ground
    Team Managers, Referees and Linesmen
    Entertainment
                                                                     i .40-i .45
                                                                     i .46-i .47
                                                                     1.48
    Crowd Distributions                                              i .49
I   Segregation
    Stewards
                                                                     1.50
                                                                     i .51
    Disposition of Manpower                                          i .52-i .54
I   Police Reserves
    Persons Arrested or Ejected
    Contingency Planning
                                                                     i .55
                                                                     i .56-i .60
                                                                     i .61
    Emergency Evacuation
I   Retention of Visiting Supporters
    Early Re-Deployment of Police
                                                                     i .62
                                                                     i .63
                                                                     i .64
    Vehicular and Pedestrian Traffic                                 1.65
I   Bus, Railway and Main Line Stations
    De-Briefing of Senior Officers
                                                                     i .66
                                                                     i .67


l   CHAPTER 2 - VISITING SUPPORTERS TRAVELLING BY COACH AND
    Introduction
                RAIL COINJNICATION OF INTELLIGENCE
                                                                     2.1 -2.2
    Action to be Taken by Home Liaison Officers                      2.3
I   Action to be Taken by Away Liaison Officers
    Post Match De-Briefing on Quality and Accuracy of
                                                                     2.4 -2.8
               the Intelligence Provided                             2.9 -2.11
l   Information to Police Force Through Whose Area Visiting
               Supporters are Expected to Travel
    Travel by British Rail - Liaison with B.T.P.
                                                                     2.12
                                                                     2.13

I   International and Other Foreign Fixtures
    Liaison with British Transport Police
    Football Trains Etc. Ban of Alcohol
                                                                     2.14
                                                                     2.15-2.18
                                                                     2.19-2.20

l   CHAPTER 3 - DUTIES OF S~S
    The Effect of Safety Certificates Issued Under the
               Safety at Sports Grounds~ Act, 1975                   3.1 -3.2
I   Identification and Supervision
    Emergency Procedures - Stewards’ Role
                                                                     3.3 -3.6
                                                                     3.7 -3.10
    CHAPTER 4 - POLICING FACILITIES AT FOOTBALL GROUNDS
I   Introduction
    Prisoner Reception Point Within the Ground
                                                                     4.1
                                                                     4.2
    Parading and Briefing                                            4.3
l   Control Room
    C.C.T.V. and Still Photography
                                                                     4.4 -4.7
                                                                     4.8 -4.16


l   CHAPTER 5 - SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS: ACT, 1975 - CERTIFICATES
I                            FOOTBALL HOOLIGANISN

l         POLICING FOOTBALL

          I nt roduct i on

I   1.1   Thts document has been compiled for the purpose of providing
          general advice to offtcers given the responsibility of arranging
          operational poltce planning for sporttng occasions. The level
i         and degree of advance planning must necessarily depend to a large
          extent on the particular ftxture and the amount of trouble that
          may reasonably be expected as a result of Intelligence gathered
I         by the police.
          Intelligence

l   1.2   Intelligence concerning the likelihood of crowd disturbance or.
          hooliganism occurring will necessarily be obtained from a variety
          of sources and should be interpreted through experience and
I         common sense. It ts recognised that the degree of advance
          planning for a particular game depends upon both the interest in
          the fixture and the amount of trouble anticipated, based upon

I         intelligence available to the police. Aside from the importance
          of the fixture in terms of league position or ’cup’ prospects,
          football matches are often used by hooligans to celebrate
          prevtous encounters with particular sets of fans.             It Is
I         therefore particularly important to be aware of the history of
          that ftxture.

l   1.3   The prime source of football intelligence is the Police National
          Intelligence System which is based on the network of Police
          Ltalson Officers (see paragraphs 2.1 to 2.11 et. seq.).

I         Summaries completed by police officers of the home club Force are
          forwarded to the visiting club’s liaison officer, making
          available intelligence about fans behaviour at both home and away
          fixtures. This information will be collated and made available
l   1.4
          for future matches involving that club.

          The summary includes details of those arrested, charged or

I         ejected and complaints of misbehaviour both inside and outside
          the ground, including public houses, railway/coach stations and
          other places where football supporters gather. This allows for
          regular offenders to be identified and targeted, resulting in a
I         systematic build-up of intelligence. To ensure the maximum
          benefit of such intelligence it is essential that the match
          summary is completed accurately and comprehensively, and

I   1.5
          forwarded promptly to the Police Force concerned.

          Misbehaviour by football supporters whilst travelling on trains,
          London Underground, or ferries, or whilst on British Rail
I         property is collated by British Transport Police as part of a
          national intelligence system operated by that Force. This
          information is available to Force liaison officers through their
l         British Transport Police counterparts (see paragraphs 2.13 to
          2.20 et. seq.).


l   1.6   Sources of intelligence may be summarised as follows:-
II          (a)     Match summaries compiled by the ’home’ club will provide
                    a record of the same fixture on previous occasions.

l           (b)     Intelligence from the liaison officer associated with the
                    visiting club.
            (c)     Analysis of C.C.T.V. coverage to identify group leaders
II                  and observe the ’tactics’ of the hooligans.

            (d)     ’Spotters’ supplied by the police associated with the
I           (e)
                    visiting club.
                    The football clubs (home and away).

!1          (f)     Travel agents, coach operators, British Transport Police,
                    supporters’ clubs.

II          (g)     The development of intelligence will take into account
                    the history of the fixture, the anticipated size of the
                    crowd, importance of result to either club, strength of
II                  ’away’ following, absence of other games in the area,
                    whether or not a ’derby’ fixture, press coverage.
            Pre-14atch Plann| ng
l    1.7    Depending on the fixture football matches will involve the use of
            various branches of the Force (the mounted, traffic, special
II          constabulary, etc.).        It is important that the officer
            responsible for policing the match determines the pre-match
            planning in the light of the intelligence at hand. In many cases

!1          an officer will be delegated the planning task and it is
            recommended that as a routine the planning officer, intelligence
            officer and the officer in charge of policing the match confer to
            analyse ’intelligence’ and determine tactics.
II          Use of ’Away’ Officers (Spotters)

II   1.8    The use of ’spotters’ from the Force area from which fans are
            travelling to ’away’ games may be of benefit, but there are
            difficulties, particularly if the officers travel with the
            supporters. A distinction has to be drawn between, on the one
II          hand, routine ’spotters’ who seek to provide regular intelligence
            to the ’home’ Force and, on the other, covert intelligence
            gathering.
II   1.9    In the former case it is recommended that arrangements be made
            beforehand with the ’home’ police; that the officers do not

I           travel with the visiting supporters as police officers; that they
            report to and liaise with the ’home’ police to assist with
            intelligence. Whenever possible their role should be solely to
            provide intelligence and not to be directly involved in the
I    1.10
            policing.

            In the latter case (covert operations) it is important that a

II          means of contact be established prior to the game and that the
            officers handling the communications, and the officer in charge
            of the game, know exactly what arrangements have been made.

II
I          Briefing

I   1¯11   Officers should receive a full briefing prior to taking up their
           duties which should include after match arrangements and clear
           instructions as to booking off. Where practicable such briefings
i          should be carried out on site. In large scale police operations
           the operational commander should brief all officers not below the
           rank of Inspector, and Inspectors should be responsible for
           briefing officers of the rank of Sergeant and Constable¯
I   I¯12   In accordance with the ’Popplewell’ recommendations the briefing
           must include evacuation procedures and "the duties and
I          responsibilities of stewards should be brought to the attention
           of police officers (see Duties of Stewards - paragraph 3.1 et.
           seq. ).

I   I¯13   Briefing cards may prove advantageous, particularly when officers
           are unfamiliar with the routines of policing football¯ Where
           officers are unfamiliar they should be provided with a map of the
I          ground and its immediate environs identifying ’home’ and ’away’
           sections of the ground and the numbers or letters used by the
           club, so that they can answer questions for supporters¯

I   1¯14   Briefing should pay particular attention to policy and practice
           as to searching, arrest and ejection and officers must know where
           to take prisoners¯ Intelligence as to likely offenders and
I          common practices of disturbance should be carefully outlined¯
           Supervisors in particular need to know the ground commanders
           ’public order strategy’¯
I   I¯15   Copies of evacuation procedures and any briefing cards or other
           information passed out in documentary form during briefing should
i   1¯16
           be available within the ’police control’.

           Ground regulations, which have national application, should be
           brought to notice as follows:-
I                                    GROUND REGULATIONS

I          I ¯     All matches are played in accordance with the Rules and
                   Regulations of the Football Association and The Football
                   League and the Laws of the Game.

I            ¯     Play cannot be guaranteed to take place on any particular
                   day or at any particular time and the Club reserves the
                   right to change its advertised fixtures without notice

I           ¯
                   and without liability.
                  No refund of any cash admission charge paid at the
                  turnstile will be made.
I           ¯     Refunds will be made in respect of seats booked in
                  advance and paid for where a match is postponed, subject
I                 to a time limitation, details of which can be obtained
                  from the Box Office.


I           ¯     Unauthorised persons are not permitted to enter upon the
                  field of play.
I
l      .
           With the exception of authorised press representatives
           holding official passes, the taking of photographs or
           cine photography inside the ground is prohibited. In
           addition, no recording, whether for radio or television
!          or for private purposes and whether for transmission or
           otherwise, is permitted save with a special authorisation
           in writing by the Club.
I    7.    Only persons specifically authorised in writing by the
           Club are permitted to distribute without charge or offer
           for sale in the ground any newspapers, periodicals or any
I          other articles.
     8.    Unnecessary noise such as that from the use of radio sets
I          and behaviour likely to cause confusion or nuisance of
           any kind including foul or abusive language is not
           permitted in any part of the ground.

l    9.    The climbing of floodlight pylons, stands or other
           buildings in the ground is forbidden.

I    10.   The consumption of intoxicating liquors is permitted only
           in authorised places and in accordance with the Sporting
           Events’ (Control of Alcohol Etc.) Act, 1985.
i    11.   Fireworks, smoke canisters, bottles, glasses, cans,
           flags, banners, poles and other similar articles or
           containers, including anything which could or might be
I          used as a weapon, are not permitted within the ground,
           and any person in possession of such an article or
           container may be refused entry or ejected from the
l    12.
           ground.
           Under no circumstances is it permitted to throw any
l    13.
           object on to the pitch.

           Any person who fails to comply with instructions from a
           steward may be ejected from the ground.
l    14.   In general the right of admission is reserved to the Club
           management.
II   15.   Any person who remains in a gangway may be ejected from
           the ground.

I    16.   The Club reserves the right to refuse admission to or
           eject any person who refuses to be searched by a police
           officer.
l    17.   All persons entering this ground are admitted only
           subject to the above Ground Regulations and to the Rules

l          and Regulations of The Football Association and of The
           Football League. Entry to the ground shall be deemed to
           constitute unqualified acceptance of all these Rules and
           Regulations.
I
|           18.     The Club reserves the right for its servants and agents
                    to remove from this ground any person who does not comply
                    with Ground Regulations and with the Rules and
!                   Regulations of The Football Association and The Football
                    League or whose presence on the ground is or could
                    reasonably be construed as constituting a source of
                    danger, nuisance or annoyance to other spectators.
B           Away Supporters

B    1.17   Intelligence officers should provide clear instructions to coach
            operators as to routes and parking facilities. Car and coach
            parks should be clearly signed and a police presence maintained
l           to ensure security and prevent interference. The presence of
            police at such locations may also enable the early gathering of
            intelligence on the numbers and behaviour of visiting supporters.

|    1.18   It may be prudent for police to escort supporters from coach
            parks to the sports stadium in order to ensure that they do not
            become the subject of, nor engage in, hooliganism. Similarly,
l           railway stations should be monitored by police and supporters
            escorted to the stadium where the match is to be played. Close
            liaison with British Transport Police is recommended. Most fans
g           are familiar with escort arrangements and where possible police
            should stick to routines which become familiar.

     1.19   After a match coaches leaving the area may require a police
!           escort until they are away from trouble.
            Flashpoints
!    1.20   Special attention should be given to any public house or other
            unofficial assembly point, and to the routes taken in general by

!           supporters where confrontation between rival fans may occur.
            Also attention should be given to waste ground and derelict
            property along any such routes where missiles or offensive
            weapons may be gathered by hooligans. Bridges have often been
l           used by hooligans and should be monitored.
            Stadium Searches
!    1.21   Before spectators are admitted into the stadium a physical search
            should be made of the ground and terraces by the officer in
            charge of policing the game to ensure that all fences and gates
I           are sufficiently secure and that no objects which may be used as
            offensive weapons or missiles are to hand. There should be an
            arrangement with the club for an official to be available when
l           the inspection is carried out to put right anything which is
            amiss.
            Entry Into the Ground
I    1.22   Approaches to the ground are themselves flashpoints and need to
            be well monitored. Careful planning to co-ordinate as far as
II          possible the routes taken by different groups of supporters to
            relevant turnstiles may reduce the opportunity of conflict.


!
 1.23   Clear marking of turnstiles is essential and all officers on
        football duties should be briefed as to the segregation
        arrangements.
 1.24   The searching of spectators depends on circumstances. The terms
        of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act afford a right of search
        only where there are grounds to suspect an offence is being
        committed, and the suspicion must relate directly to the person
        searched. The Codes of Practice, however, exempt the need to
        make customary records if in the circumstances it is not
        practicable to do so. Ground regulations reserve the right of
        the club to decline admission to any person who refuses to be
        searched by a police officer, and this may allow for routine
        searching on entry to grounds, but police officers need to know
        the limits of this provision. Refusal to be searched may entail
        a refusal to allow entry.
1.25    Within the limitations officers should seek to prevent supporters
        entering the ground with weapons, missiles, flag poles etc.
l .26   Drunkenness is recognised as a major cause of hooliganism and
        supporters may attempt to enter sports grounds whilst in a
        drunken condition or carrying alcohol. Where the conditions of
        the Sporting Events’ (Control of Alcohol Etc.) Act, 1985, apply
        the provisions should be enforced. The main conditions are as
        follows:-
        (a)     Section 2(la) and (Ib) - It is an offence for any
                person to have intoxicating liquor or an ’article’ to
                which this section applies in his possession during a
                designated event in the viewing area or while
                entering/trying to enter a ground during an event.
        (b)     Section 2(2) - It is an offence to be drunk in a ground
                during a designated event or while entering/trying to
                enter the ground.

        ’Article’ means any article capable of causing injury to a person
        struck by it being:-
        (a)     a bottle, can or other portable container (including such
                an article when crushed or broken) which:-
                (i) is for holding any drink, and
                (ii) is of a kind which, when empty, is normally
                     discarded, or returned to, or left to be recovered
                     by, the supplier, or

        (b)    part of an article falling within (a) above.
        It does not apply to anything that is for holding any medicinal
        product (Medicines’ Act, 1968}.
l .27   The Public Order Act, 1986, makes it an offence to be in
        possession of distress flares, fog signals, fireworks, pellets
        and capsules intended to be used as fumigators or for testing
        pipes at a football match. Contained within the same Act are the
        offences of affray, violent disorder, disorderly conduct and
        threatening behaviour.
        Exclusion Orders
l .28   The Public Order Act, 1986, also gives the courts power to make
        an exclusion order to prevent a person convicted of certain
        offences attending a football match. The court can make an order
        of conviction where:-
        (a)    The person has been convicted of an offence which fulfils
               one or more of the following conditions:-
               (i)     The offence was committed during any period
                       relevant to a prescribed football match while the
                       accused was at, or entering or leaving or trying
                       to enter or leave, the ground concerned.
              (ii)     The offence was committed going to or from a
                       match and:-
                       (I)       involved the use of threat of violence
                                 by the accused to another person;
                                 involved the use of threat of violence
                                 towards property;
                       (3)       was committed under Section 5 of the
                                 Act.
               (iii)   The offence was committed under Section I(3) or 4
                       or IA(3) or (4), Sporting Events’ (Control of
                       Alcohol Etc.) Act, 1985. These are the offences
                       of possessing alcohol travelling to or from a
                       football match.

        (b)    No exclusion order may be made unless the court is
               satisfied that making such an order in relation to the
               accused would help to prevent violence or disorder at or
               in connection with prescribed football matches.
        (c)    An exclusion order may only be made in addition to a
               sentence, probation order or discharge, following
               conviction, i.e. it does not apply to person brought
               before the court to be bound over under Section llS,
               Magistrates’ Court Act, 1980.

               If these conditions are satisfied, the court may make an
               order "prohibiting him from entering any premises for the
               purpose of attending any prescribed football match
               there."
1.29    A crucial factor in the enforcement of orders is the availability
        of photographs of those subject to them. Section 35 of the Act,
        makes provision for the court, on application of the prosecution,
        to order a photograph to be taken. However, where possible,
        persons arrested for any offence which might result in the
        imposition of an order should be photographed at the time of
B            charging. Photographs taken at this time are likely to be of
             more value for subsequent identification purposes than those
             taken at or following a court appearance.

I    1.30    Photographs which should conform to the following specifications
             should be affixed to each police copy of an exclusion order:-

!            (a)    Standard passport size 2" x 2".
             (b)    To be in colour.
!            (c)    To be in single aspect three quarter profile or full face.

II   i .31
             (d)    Polaroid photographs are NOT recommended for this purpose.
             Photographs held for the purpose of enforcing exclusion orders
             are for police officers only and must not be circulated to any
!            other person.
     1.32    Wherever an order is made, copies, together with photographs
I            should be forwarded to the Chief Officer of Police for the area
             where the offender lives and to the Chief Officer of Police for
             the area(s) in which any club he is known to support is situated.

!            It is recommended that any photographic negative also be
             forwarded to the latter.
     i .33   Circulation of information relating to Exclusion Orders is
I    i .34
             incorporated into the football match intelligence system.
             Football Liaison Officers will maintain schedules, together with

!!           photographs of those subject to orders who are known to support
             their club. Prior to each match, complete schedules should be
             forwarded to the away team liaison officer. Schedules should be
             returned after each match, together with the completed football
I            match summary form.
     1.35    These schedules and photographs will be of particular importance
!            to those officers operating C.C.T.V. equipment. When scanning
             crowds during the course of the game or when viewing videos of
             disorder after the event, operators will be able to check the

!    i .36
             crowd against the photographs.
             Where weight of numbers of those subject to orders makes the
             supplying of full schedules impracticable, circulation should be
!    1.37
             restricted to targetted hard core offenders.
             Liaison officers will need to maintain several schedules of
!    i .38
             orders to cater for midweek games, late returns, etc.,
             Where an individual first came to notice after 31.12.80, as
             indicated by his C.R.O. number, suffix information relating to
!            exclusion orders will be maintained on the P.N.C. within the
             subjects convictions file.

il   i .39   In certain circumstances, offences which might lead to the
             imposition of exclusion orders are not reportable to the N.I.B.
             Therefore, where an individual has no P.N.C. record, or first

!            came to notice prior to 1.1.81 or where there is any other reason
l            to believe an individual is subject to an exclusion order, a
             check should be made with his home Force.

!            N.B.   Where an order has been in force for a period of 12
                    months, application can be made to the court for the
                    termination of the order. Details of Termination Orders

|                   will not be shown on the P.N.C.

    Entrance to the Ground

1   1.40     Stadium entrances must be signed to indicate clearly the stands
             and terraces to be used by home and visiting supporters.

    l .41    Officers with local knowledge should be posted to turnstiles to
             prevent supporters entering a section of the stadium allocated to
             supporters of the opposing team. When possible, the same
g            officers should be regularly used at locations considered to be
             of particular importance, e.g. main entrance, points of potential
             trouble etc.

i   1.42     It is emphasised that effective turnstile policing is the key to
             prevention of disorder inside the ground. Officers should be
             encouraged to talk to those waiting to enter in order to identify

!   1.43
             non-local accents, drunks, etc.
             Queues forming at turnstiles should be closely monitored by
             police and stewards. It is recommended that mounted officers,
!            where available, are used for this purpose. There is often
             frustration at turnstiles if queues remain after the game has
             started. Orderly control will minimise the risks.

1   l .44    All ticket matches also need turnstile control as supporters in
             possession of tickets for a particular section of the ground may

!            seek to gain entry to another section of the ground, which could
             result in some sections of the ground exceeding the limit
             specified in the safety certificate. Where limits are critical
             police should make arrangements to monitor turnstile counts.
!   l .45    High interest ’all ticket’ fixtures have the effect of generating
             a black market in tickets and ’touting,. This will likely
             undermine segregation. It is therefore recommended that some
             section of the ground be set apart to accowmdate identified fans
             who support one side and have tickets for opposing supporters’
             area. If circumstances warrant it ’ticket touts’ should be
I            arrested, and efforts made to discover where the tickets came
             from. For all ticket games every effort must be made to tighten
             up the sales procedure to assist segregation policy, preferably
!            by restricting sale of tickets to those attending home fixtures
             and selling tickets within the ’home) enclosures.

             Team Nanagers, Referees and Ltnesmen
1   1.46     All officials concerned in controlling the game should be aware
             of the police action that will be taken if there is any invasion
I            of the playing pitch, or serious disorder occurring within the
             crowd. All officials concerned in controlling the game should be
             aware of any planned emergency procedure that may be taken in the
l            event of an emergency or bomb threat.
I   1.47    The conduct of players on the field can have a marked impact on
            crowd behaviour. Particularly where the fixture is judged
            volatile the club should be encouraged to arrange for players to
!           leave the tunnel together and to shake hands at the end of the
            game. They may also be reminded of the importance of good
            behaviour on the pitch. It rests with the match commander to

!           take up with the club any misbehaviour by players.
            Entertai nment
m   1.48    The club should be encouraged to provide some form of
            entertainment to take place during the half hour preceding kick
            off, for example bands, displays and recorded music. A good
I            ’announcer’ using the public address system can establish a
            rapport with the crowd and influence behaviour. Thought should
            be given to liaising with ’announcers’ to make suitable

I           interventions if appropriate. This means may be used to advise
             ’away’ supporters as to arrangements for their leaving the
            ground, changed travel instructions etc.

!   1.49
            Crowd Di stri butions
            It is emphasised that stewards should ensure that all sections of
!           terraces and stands are filled to capacity before allowing access
            to further sections where possible. This will require monitoring
            turnstile totalisers and the use of public address systems in
            some instances. This operation is greatly assisted by the
I           compartmentalisation of grounds, each compartment being filled in
            sequence.

!   1.50
            Segregation
            Home and visiting supporters should be segregated inside the

I           stadium by means of segregation fencing and/or sterile zones, and
            steps should be taken to impose segregation before they enter and
            after they leave the stadium. Each section of the stadium
            designated for the use of particular supporters should have its
I           own toilet and refreshment facilities. Barriers and doors should
            be provided so as to segregate home and visiting supporters and
            thus avoid confrontation at entrances/exits. Experience has

!           shown that policing segregated areas is best achieved by placing
            officers inside’ the segregation if this is possible.

I   1.51
            Stewards
            Good liaison between stewards and police should be established.
            (See Duties of Stewards - paragraph 14.1 et. seq.) The officer
            in charge of the match should make periodic inspections of
            stewarding standards and report results to the club’s management.
            The police control must be able to contact the Chief Steward and
            Head Fire Steward at all times.
            Di sposi tion of Nanpower
    l .52   Where no pitch perimeter fence exists a presence may be required
            by police and stewards in order to isolate the playing area. In
            such circumstances police officers should take up standing
            positions away from and facing the crowd when incidents occur to
l          arouse the crowd. Where fencing has been erected police officers
           and stewards must have keys for the gates and a universal locking
           system should be used. Pitch perimeter gates should remain
l          unlocked and manned at all times the public have access to the
           ground.
    1.53
i          All bars, refreshment and toilet areas should be policed in order
           to prevent hooliganism occurring.
    1.54   At the conclusion of the match consideration should also be given
!          to deploying police in appropriate areas to minimise a sudden
           stampede or pushing within the crowd in their endeavour to leave
           the stadium quickly.
I          Police Reserves

I   1.55   A number of police officers should generally be held in reserve
           in order to deal with spontaneous incidents occurring inside, or
           immediately outside the stadium.

I          Persons Arrested or Ejected From the Ground
    1.56   Ejection is an option which can be used where behaviour is poor,

!          but falls short of an actual offence (e.g. contravention of
           ground regulations). However, ejection should not be used as an
           alternative to arrest; where there is sufficient evidence the

l   1.57
           offender should be arrested and charged.

           It is recommended, where possible, that in violent situations
           police officers in groups should enter the affected section of
I          the stadium from above the incident, making arrests where
           necessary, and then making their way onto the perimeter of the
           pitch. Officers should not enter from the perimeter if this can

I          be avoided. Arrest operations should be planned and controlled
           to avoid officers being isolated or overwhelmed.

    1.58   A standard procedure should be adopted with regard to arrests and
!          ejections. Prisoners should be taken to a forward reception
           point where details are recorded (including ejections), and
           prisoners photographed together with arresting officer.
I   1.59   Persons ejected from the ground or supporters who are not
           admitted for whatever reason should be carefully policed.

I          Experience indicates that such persons often gain further entry
           to the ground either at half time or immediately before the end
           of the match, and provoke confrontation.

I   1.60   In the event of a football match generating a large number of
           arrests, it is worth considering bailing prisoners to special
           courts in order that Magistrates may be fully aware of all the

i          circumstances appertaining to the events of that game. Early
           liaison with the Crown Prosecution Service is advisable to inform
           them of the intention to hold special courts, in order that they
           can be fully acquainted with the background facts.
I
         Contingency Planning
 l .61   Pre-determined plans should be available to control such
         contingencies as serious disorder, pitch incursion and locked out
         spectators. Because of the great divergence in ground and crowd
         factors these plans must be ground specific. However, these
         plans must take into consideration the ’Popplewell’
         recommendations with regard to the transmission of coded messages
         over the public address system, the availability of emergency
         telephones and a facility for the police to intercept the public
         address system.

         Emergency Evacuation
l .62    Stewards must be familiar with the action to be taken in the
         event of an evacuation of the whole or part of the stadium.
         Police should assist in the rapid evacuation of a stadium in such
         circumstances. Stadia should have a universal locking system and
         all stewards should be in possession of keys for the exit gates.
         They should wear a distinctive tabard or other means of easy
         identification.       It must be made clear to both the club
         management and to the individual stewards that they must not
         leave their post without being relieved. It is essential that
         exit gates can be opened without delay in the event of an
         emergency. Simulated emergency evacuation exercises for the
         staff employed by the club must be held at least twice each
         season to test the emergency evacuation procedure. The crowd
         will not be involved but depending upon circumstances it could be
         an advantage to explain to the crowd that an emergency evacuation
         exercise is taking place. Experience has revealed that in an
         actual evacuation it is essential to monitor exit doors when the
         crowd has left the stadium to prevent them wandering back into
         the stadium before the reason for the evacuation has been
         completed.

         RetentI on of Vt sI tI ng Supporters
l .63    In some circumstances the officer in charge may decide to hold
         the visiting supporters in the ground until he considers it
         appropriate to release them. If such a tactic is employed then
         the situation will be greatly eased if the visiting fans are kept
         informed.
         Early Re-Deployment of Poltce Officers
l .64    Police officers should be deployed outside the ground, in key
         positions, early enough to be seen in these positions by the
         crowd as it leaves the ground. This gives an appearance of good
         order and police control. At critical points the use of police
         officers in groups under the command of a sergeant should be
         considered. The effective after-match deployment of police
         officers is dependent on the pre-match briefing and allocation of
         tasks.
         Vehicular and Pedestrian Traffic
l .65    At the end of the game early dispersal of supporters is clearly
         beneficial. Most Police Forces will develop a traffic control
            plan to facilitate this. Particular attention should be given to
            routes used by ’away) supporters. Supporters who are not local
            must always be able to find coaches where they got off them and
            generally it is good practice to convoy and escort coaches away
            from the general area. Many grounds are in heavily built-up
            areas of old industrial towns and it is extremely difficult to
            move police resources in the immediate aftermath - it is
            therefore essential to detail traffic and public order duties
            beforehand.
            Bus, Railway and Main Line Stattons
    l .66   Foot patrol and mounted officers (in liaison with British
            Transport Police) should be used to control queues and prevent
            rowdyism occurring. Large groups of supporters should generally
            be escorted on to the station and, where necessary, British
            Transport Police may wish to consider travelling with supporters
            until they are dispersed.

            De-Briefing of Senior Offtcers
    l .67   In the event of inadequacies being exposed in the police
            operation, at the conclusion of the match there should be a
            de-briefing of supervisory officers.



!
I         VISITING SUPPORTERS TRAVELLING BY COACH AND RAIL
          COMMUNICATION OF INTELLIGENCE

    2.1   The following information is set out for the particular advice of
          Force (football) liaison officers and for those officers either
          preparing or controlling police operational planning for
          football.
    2.2   Since Force liaison officers were appointed for each club in the
          football league in 1975, the procedure for gathering and
          communicating intelligence about the numbers of visiting
          supporters travelling by coach and rail has been developed and
          refined. In the light of experience the following procedures are
          recommended to improve the quality and reliability of this
          intelligence:-
          Action to be Taken by Home Liaison Officers
    2.3   At least 21 days before the match the home team Force liaison
          officer should correspond with his opposite number for the
          visiting team giving information on the following lines:-
          (a)    Suggested routes for supporters travelling by road.
          (b)    Off street parking facilities that will be available for
                 coaches/cars near to the stadium.
          (c)    Areas suitable for street parking near to the stadium.
          (d)    Location of railway station and distance from the ground,
                 also arrangements for journeys from the station to the
                 ground.
          (e)    Advice to coach operators:-
                (i)      location of coach parking with route and plan;
                (ii)     arrive no earlier than one hour before scheduled
                         kick off time;
                (iii)    depart within half an hour of the final whistle;
                (iv)     do not stop within ten miles of their
                         destination;
                (v)      avoid stopping for refreshment at any place where
                         intoxicating liquor is available.
          (f)    Advice to visiting supporters:-
                (i)      plan of the ground and its environs showing
                         visitors entrance and enclosures;
                (ii)     enter stadium only through designated visitors
                         turnstiles;
             (iii)    supporters will not be allowed on to the ground
                      carrying articles which could be construed as
                      offensive weapons.
      (g)     Obtain from British Transport Police:-
             (i)      number of trains carrying visiting supporters;
             (ii)     times of arrival and departures;
             (iii)    number of supporters expected on each train,
                      details of the actual number to be confirmed on
                      the day;
             (iv)     a breakdown of the number expected to travel by
                      charter train, special train or scheduled
                      services.
              NOTE: British Transport Police usually pass this
              information either by telephone or teleprinter two or
              three days before the game, and update as necessary.
      Action to be Taken by ~Away Te~’. Liaison Officers
2.4   Liaison officers should establish and maintain close liaison with
      the local supporters club and coach operators who carry football
      supporters to away matches.
2.5   Forward to coach operators the information received from the home
      club liaison officers about suggested routes, parking
      arrangements, plan of the ground and environs, etc., requesting
      details of the number of coaches and the approximate number of
      supporters travelling to the away game.
2.6   Forward to the supporters club the information received from the
      home club liaison officers requesting information about:-

      (a)     the number of coaches and supporters travelling by road;
      (b)     the number of supporters travelling by chartered or
              special trains.
2.7   Confirm with the British Transport Police the number of
      supporters expected to travel by charter trains, special trains
      or scheduled services.
2.8   Advise the home club liaison officer in writing of the
      intelligence collated from the above sources, including:-
      (a)     the name of the coach firms, the details of coaches and
              the approximate number of supporters;
      (b)     any intelligence on the number of supporters travelling
              by train;
           (c)    information about the behaviour of the supporters at
                  other away matches, and information as to the known
                  ’tactics’ of troublemakers and if considered relevant
                  details of likely offenders.
           NOTE: The most accurate and up-to-date information may not be
           available until the day before the game or even later and liaison
           officers should contact their opposite number by telephone where
           necessary.
           Post Match De-Briefing on the Quality and Accuracy of the
I          Intelligence Provided
    2.9    It is essential that home club liaison officers advise, as a
i          matter of course, their opposite number about the accuracy of
           intelligence provided by way of the football match summary form
           including:-

!          (a)    the estimated number of visiting supporters;
           (b)    the estimated number who travelled by coach;

           (c)    the estimated number who travelled by train;

           (d)   details of any incidents before, during or after the
                 match;
           (e)    details of visiting supporters arrested/ejected;
           (f)    registered numbers of any mini-buses (or transit vans)
                  seen in the vicinity of the ground, in order that the
                  names and addresses of the keepers or operators can be
                  ascertained for future intelligence purposes.
    2.10   The importance of the accurate completion and prompt return of
           the football match summary forms is again stressed.
           Consideration should also be given to the forwarding of C.C.T.V.
           tapes containing intelligence about visiting supporters to the
           Police Force concerned.
    2.11   It is important that supervising officers encourage officers to
           submit any relevant intelligence to Football Liaison Officers in
           order to positively assist in the gathering of intelligence.
           Information to Poltce Force Through Whose Area Vtstttng
I          Supporters are Expected to Travel
    2.12   It may be necessary for information to be supplied to the Force
!          through whose area large numbers of supporters travel or on whose
           area notorious ’crossroads’ or ’watering holes’ are situated.
           This assumes a more urgent aspect if there has been trouble at

i          the ground; or if there is a history of violence between
           supporters likely to meet en-route to their respective away
           fixtures. Reports of such problems should be passed to the
           football liaison officers of the clubs involved by the Force in
I          whose area the incident occurred.
       Travel by British Rail - Liaison with British Transport Police
2.13   British Transport Police policy is to segregate football
       supporters from ordinary passengers as far as practicable. To
       achieve this, pricing and other policies have been introduced in
       an attempt to encourage supporters to travel in the following
       order of preference:-
       (a)   Charter Trains or Carriages
       These trains are not normally accompanied by British Transport
       Police. The chartering club MUST arrange for insurance and
       stewards, and accept responsibility for any damage which may
       occur on the train.
       (b)   British Rat1 Sponsored Trains
       These are special trains used for the exclusive carriage of
       football fans and which should always have a British Transport
       Police escort.
       (c)   Schedule Services
       Encouragement bein~ given to organised party travel.Such trains
       are policed on an as required’ basis.
       International and Other Foreign Fixtures
2.14   ’PERMANENT CORRESPONDENTS’ IN EUROPEAN COUNTRIES.
       ’TREVI’ ORGANISATION.
       Ministers of the Interior of member countries of the European
       Community meet regularly to determine ways of resolving mutual
       problems. They are supported by teams of officials. One of the
       working groups of this ’TREVI’ organisation has football
       hooliganism within its remit.
       Each E.C. Country has a permanent correspondent with whom contact
       can be made in connection with all football matters. The
       Assistant Chief Constable, British Transport Police has been
       appointed as the ’PERMANENT CORRESPONDENT~ for the UNITED
       KINGDOM.
       The British Transport Police Football Intelligence Unit at their
       Force Headquarters has been recognised by A.C.P.O. as the Central
       collation point in respect of information regarding British
       football supporters travelling to fixtures in foreign countries,
       and foreign supporters travelling to the United Kingdom.
       Information is collated and passed to Home Department Forces
       within the United Kingdom, Foreign Police Forces, and other
       nominated agencies.
       Officers who require information or assistance in respect of
       matters, connected with foreign football, or who have information
       related to fixtures played abroad should liaise with the British
       Transport Police, Football Liaison Unit.
       Telephone: 01-388 7541, ext. 8831 or 8961
       or INFORMATION ROOM
       Telex: 23508 Telephone: 01-380 1400
       Liaison With British Transport Poltce
2.15   The responsibility for preventing and dealing with incidents of
       hooliganism on trains carrying supporters of football clubs to
       and from matches lies primarily with the British Transport Police
       and they should be given full co-operation and assistance.
2.16   If disturbances involving travelling supporters have taken place
       during the game or outside the ground afterwards, particularly if
       arrests have been made, it is usually an indication that trouble
       may be expected on trains carrying supporters home. Any
       incidents which may have a bearing on the behaviour of supporters
       travelling by train should be reported as soon as possible to the
       local office or Headquarters control room of the British
       Transport Police.
2.17   For their part, the British Transport Police will inform the
       local police at the terminal station and, if necessary, at any
       stopping point on the route when hooliganism breaks out on the
       train or if they have any reason to suspect hooliganism is likely
       to occur either on the train or at the terminal station.
2.18   The British Transport Police send by telex details of the timings
       of all special and charter trains to Police Forces covering the
       departure and terminal stations and those en route.
       Football Trains Etc., Ban on Alcohol
2.]9   The Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol Etc.) Act, 1985, as
       amended by The Public Order Act, 1986, prohibits alcohol on a
       vehicle which:-
       (a)    is a public service vehicle, or not a public service
              vehicle but adapted to carry more than eight passengers
              (i.e. minibus), or a railway passenger vehicle, and
       (b)    is being used for the principle purpose of carrying
              passengers for the whole or part of a journey to or from
              a designated sporting event.
2.20   A bye-law made by the British Rail Board under Section 67 of The
       Transport Act, 1965, in effect bans alcohol from any train in
       respect of which notice of the prohibition on alcohol has been
       given to the travelling public.
      DUTIES OF STEILA, RDS
      The Effect of Safety Certificates Issued Under the Safety at
      Sports Grounds Act, 1975
3.1   A level of control is provided by the Safety at Sports Grounds’
      Act, 1975, at those grounds which are required to be certified.
      The Local Authority, before issuing a Safety Certificate, is
      required to consult the Chief Officer of Police regarding the
      terms and conditions to be included in the certificate.
3.2   Whilst police do not directly control the employment of stewards
      at football grounds, it should be accepted that there is a
      responsibility, within the wider context of public safety, to
      exert influence to ensure that the arrangements made by the
      management of the ground are adequate in this respect. It is
      most important that stewards are sufficient in number, suitably
      deployed, well trained and capable mentally and physically of
      carrying out their routine and emergency functions. It is
      recommended that the police regularly inspect stewarding
      arrangements to determine they are in accord with certification.
      Identification and Supervision
3.3   Persons employed as stewards at football grounds should be
      clearly identifiable, wearing coloured tabards. They should at
      all times be under the direct control of supervisors whose
      identities should be made known to the police officers on duty at
      the ground and who should be in contact with the Police Control.
3.4   Stewards should be distributed throughout the ground in
      accordance with a detailed pre-arranged schedule, agreed between
      the police and management of the ground.
3.5   Their duties may be divided into four main categories:-

      (a)     controlling or directing members of the public who are
              entering or leaving the football ground;
      (b)     patrolling the ground to deal with any emergencies, e.g.
              raising alarms, extinguishing fire, etc.;
      (c)     manning entrances, exits and other strategic points,
              particularly exit doors, and gates which are not
              continuously open whilst the ground is in use;
      (d)     undertaking specific duties relating to emergency and
              evacuation procedures.
3.6   In accordance with the ’Popplewell’ recommendations all stewards
      should:-
      (a)     be trained and instructed to deal with any emergency
              relating to fire or evacuation;
      (b)     be given written instructions about the action to be
              taken in cases of emergency;
           (c)     receive practical instruction and training appropriate to
                   their responsibility;
           (d)     not be employed as a steward unless they have been so
                   instructed and trained;
           (e)     be adequate in number, physically and mentally capable of
                   performing their duties, effectively deployed,
                   effectively supervised and readily identifiable.
           Emergency Procedures - Stewards Role
    3.7    Formal emergency procedures at each ground require joint
           consultation between police, the management of the ground, fire,
           ambulance and other services.
    3.8    It is essential that stewards and their supervisors are fully
           aware of the part they have to play in the plans which are
           produced. The management of the ground should ensure that
           written instructions concerning the action to be taken in the
           event of an emergency are made readily available to all staff and
           stewards and, in particular, that all the staff and stewards
           should receive practical instruction and training appropriate to
           their responsibilities in the event of an emergency. Exercises
           for the staff and stewards should be carried out regularly to
           ensure the smooth operation of the procedure for dealing with an
           emergency.
    3.9    A record should be kept by the club authorities containing
           details of the training and instruction given and the exercises
           held, and should include the following matters:-
           (a)   date and time of the instruction or exercise;
           (b)   duration;
           (c)   name of the person giving the instructions;
           (d)   names of the persons receiving the instructions;
           (e)   nature of instruction or exercise.
           Consideration should be given to the inclusion of these
           conditions in any safety, or special safety certificate.
    3.10   After initial practical instruction all members of staff and
           stewards should receive verbal instruction, given by a competent
           person, at least once in every period of three months at regular
           intervals. Stewards should be given briefing cards relevant to
           particular points.




i
I
I
I
          POLICING FACILITIES AT FOOTBALL GROUNDS
    4.1   There are marked differences in the facilities provided by clubs
!         and it must remain a matter for local negotiation between police
          and clubs as to the standard of facilities, bearing in mind
          average attendance and a need for police presence. It is
I         recommended that General Safety Certificates are reviewed on an
          annual basis in an effort to achieve continuing improvement.
          Prisoner Reception Point Within the Ground
I   4.2   It is considered essential that a prisoner reception point should
          be available at the ground. The office should be sited, if
I         possible, so that there is adequate access for the unobtrusive
          removal of prisoners. There should be either a G.P.O. telephone
          line or a direct line to the nearest police station. Ideally the
I         ~olice accommodation should have two detention rooms to separate
           home and ’away’ supporters.
          Parading and Briefing
I   4.3   It is desirable
          are briefed on
                            that police officers to be deployed in the ground
                            site. This can usually be done under cover in
I         most grounds. A
          by police and
          evacuation.
                            standardised form of stadium grid reference used
                            club personnel will facilitate briefing and

          Control Room
    4.4   It is desirable, and in some cases essential, that a control room
I         is provided to oversee police operations in the ground.
          Provision should be made for a base station to control the U.H.F.
          police radio. It should have a direct access to the ground

!         public address system and either a G.P.O. or direct telephone
          line to the local police station, and the police office within
          the ground. The room should be of adequate size to accommodate
          C.C.T.V. monitors and ancillary equipment. It is desirable to be
I         able to operate, in addition, high intensity lighting systems
          from the police control which may be switched on when there is
          trouble or emergency.
!   4.5   The control room should be sited to give an over view of the
          ground and to allow the match police commander ready access from

I   4.6
          the ’touch line’.
          The costs of the provision of the police office and control room
          and facilities should be borne by the club. The police generally
I         provide radio communication and additional items such as loud
          hailers and binoculars.
    4.7
I         Safety at Sports Grounds! Act, 1975, by providing for
          consultation between the local authority and police (Section
          3(iii)) on conditions to be included on safety certificates has
          had a clear effect on improving ground facilities. Full use
I         should be made of these provisions to ensure adequate police
          facilities.

I
I
I
I           C.C.T.V. AND STILL PHOTOGRAPHY
     4.8    The guidance offered in this section is intended to assist
I           Commanders having operational responsibility for policing
            football. It is not a definitive work and should be read in
            conjunction with the report of the A.C.P.O. Working Party,

I           entitled, ’Use of Video and Still Photography.
            I ntroducti on

I    4.9    The use of C.C.T.V. and still photography as an aid to the
            effective policing of football is a recent development. At the
            present time, all First and Second Division football grounds are
I           provided with static video cameras and recording facilities,
            which enable the police to monitor crowd behaviour within and in
            the immediate vicinity of stadia. It is anticipated that

!,          videoing facilities will be extended to all Third and Fourth
            Divsion grounds in the near future but not necessarily of the
            same type as in the two higher Divisions.

I           The quality of the equipment and re-production of image presently
            available in football grounds is now always compatible with its
            adequate presentation before the courts, and its use has resulted

I           in some confusion between its function in relation to ’command
            and control’ and to evidence gathering. Experience to date
            indicates the greatest value lies in developing a system for the
            use of C.C.T.V. and still photography within stadia for the
!           purposes of intelligence and evidence gathering.
            All systems at present in use at football grounds are capable of
!           being enhanced and developed. When these changes are n~de it
            should be ensured that the replacement equipment is of sufficient
            standard that the quality of recording is such as to be
            acceptable for use as evidence in court.
I           Accepting the need for identification and evidence gathering for
            prosecution to be the primary function of the system, the
I           following points are worthy of consideration in the use of
            development of existing and anticipated faci]ities.

I    4.10
            Technical Considerations
            (a)    At the time of installation, consideration should be given
                   to the siting of cameras and cables so as to prevent
I                  interference or damage.
            (b)   As good video recording requires good light and as most
!                 football fixtures are played during winter months, the
                  need for adequate lighting within and around football
                  stadia is essential to eliminate areas of darkness which

I                 may be used as cover for disorderly behaviour. Fans are
                  increasingly aware that such behaviour is monitored by
                  C.C.T.V. and they will attempt to evade detection by
                  seeking whatever cover is available. It is therefore
!                 important that cameras are sited in such a way as to
                  minimise blind spots and that facilities are provided to
                  increase lighting intensities in stands, etc. The siting
I                 of video cameras should take account of sloping roofs, to



I
I                  enable recording at the rear of stands. This problem can
                   be overcome by the use of hand-hel d cameras.
                   Consideration must be given to all foreseeable problems
I                  that may affect the performance of video equipment. A
                   good example that is easily overlooked is the path of the
                   setting sun. A video camera would be ineffective if the
                   sun was shining directly into the lens.
I           (c)    Police Control Rooms contain valuable equipment and are
                   often vulnerable. Consideration should be given to taking
I           (d)
                   protective measures to increase security.
                   Control Rooms should be placed in a position which

I                  commands a good all round view of the ground and
                   consideration should be given to placing the video
                   monitors in such a position that the operator is not
                   distracted by activities within the ground.
I           (e)   Careful consideration to the type of lighting and the
                  provision of glass partitions should be given to prevent
I                 reflection or distortion. The Control Room should have
                  adequate background heating to protect the electrical
                  equipment and for the comfort of personnel employed within
                  the room. Heating should remain switched on 24 hours a
I                 day during cold weather.
            (f)   The use of flash equipment in the vicinity of sensitive
I                 video cameras may damage the tube if discharged facing the
                  camera. Even if this damage is not permanent, the video
                  camera would be unable to function for some time. As a
I                 general rule flash equipment should not be used in the
                  vicinity of operating video cameras.
           (g)    Police Control Rooms must be provided with multi-recording
I                 facilities in order that the opportunity exists to capture
                  all incidents which may occur in different areas within
                  the stadium.
I                 Operational Considerations
    4.11   (a)    It is important that police officers are made aware that
I                 their actions in dealing with disorderly behaviour within
                  the stadium will also be recorded on C.C.T.V.

I          (b)    Consideration should be given to the preparation of a
                  ground specific video, to be used in briefing officers who
                  may not be familiar with the stadium.

I          (c)    It is important whenever possible to use the same
                  personnel in police ground control room operations. They
                  will more readily identify regular troublemakers and
I                 ~target’ them within the ground. Over a period of time
                  they will develop similar abilities in relation to
                  visiting supporters.
I          (d)    Immediately following a fixture where arrests for
                  misconduct have occurred, arresting officers should be

I                 allowed an opportunity to view any recording of the
I                incidents concerned to establish (i) the evidence for
                 their arrest and (2) whether the offender has committed
                 any further acts not witnessed by the arresting officer.
l                IntelligenceGathering

I   4.12   (a)   Away fans arriving at grounds may be videoed as they come
                 through turnstiles, get off buses or leave railway
                 stations. This helps with identification and the tracing

I                of those responsible for causing trouble. It also makes
                 the fans aware that they are on record.
                 When grounds are full, the crowd may be filmed all round,
I                so that if trouble starts, identification will be
                 assisted. It will also make the crowd aware that they are
                 on record. To assist this procedure, it is always useful
I                to have identification marks around the ground so that the
                 fans’ location within the stadium can be pin-pointed with
                 accuracy.

I          (b)   Some clubs have followings from areas of the country many
                 miles from their home base. Therefore, when it is
                 necessary to identify persons from the crowd, photographs
I                and video recordings should be circulated to Forces who
                 have supporters~ clubs of that particular football club in
                 their area.
I          (c)   Each Force should compile sets of photographs and/or
                 videos of its own clubsr hooligans and either ~) forward
                 on such compilation to each Force that is likely to host
I                the club during the forthcoming season, or (ii) one such
                 compilation be taken to each away game by officers
                 travelling with the club’s supporters.
I                Each host Force should supply the visiting team’s home
                 Force with photographs and video recordings of the

I                visiting team’s supporters, if their conduct is such as to
                 warrant this. This will keep Forces aware of how their
                 own club’s supporters behave away from home.

I          (d)   Some clubs have a section of supporters who are notorious
                 for hooligan behaviour.       It would assist in future
                 investigations into serious disorder at other grounds if
I                the host Forces of these clubs prepared video recordings
                 and photographs of their hooligan element and established
                 the identity of those involved. Then by comparing this
                 recording and the photographs with those of the incident
I                under investigation, identification should be greatly
                 assisted.

I          (e)   Known hooligans should be targetted and followed in video.
                 This requires local officers operating the video who can
                 be assisted by officers from the visiting team!s home

I          (f)
                 Force.
                 Identified fans displaying consistently aggressive
                 behaviour, not amounting to a chargeable offence on a
I                single occasion, but who can be identified on other video
                recordings displaying similar conduct, should be traced
                and charged on this evidence of system.
        (g)     The video recording of a football fixture is a valuable
                source of intelligence which is often overlooked in the
                absence of identified disorder.           It is strongly
                recommended that all video recordings be viewed for
                intelligence purposes, and that tapes be retained until
                the corresponding fixture in the following season has been
                played.
        I denti fi cati on
4.13   In the event of large-scale and serious disorder at a sporting
       fixture, there will be a need to develop a strategy to identify
       and arrest offenders, using the evidence obtained by video
       recording and still photography. Practical guidance in this
       process is as follows:-
       (a)      Photographs or stills from video recordings should be
                displayed for public view and identification wherever
                possible, e.g. T.V., newspapers, match programmes,
                posters, etc.
       (b)      A viewing studio should be created not only for the use of
                police officers, but for the public as well as such
                organisations as supporters’ clubs, stewards, residents’
                associations, social workers, probation officers, etc.
       (c)      Immediately after the incident, all press photographs and
                other media evidence should be obtained and statements
                taken from those responsible for taking the photographs,
                video recordings, etc. Attempts should also be made to
                obtain all amateur videos and photographs, and the
                appropriate statements taken. All this material, together
                with police photographs and video recordings, should then
                form part of the viewing studio exhibits.
       (d)      Officers from the host Force should visit the visiting
                team’s area and other areas containing supporters’ clubs
                of the visiting team, where they should exhibit
                photographs and video recordings for identifiation
                purposes as at (b) above.
       (e)     The size of the police team working on identification is
               critical. There should be sufficient to do the work, but
               it should be kept small enough to be cohesive.
       (f)     The task of viewing video recordings and photographs many
               times is tedious, therefore it is recommended that staff
               should be selected who are interested in the sport
               involved.
       (g)     Once identified and traced, offenders should be invited to
               view the video recordings and if they are able, to
               identify themselves whilst in non controversial
               circumstances before being questioned about alleged
               offences on video recordings and photographs.
I          (h)    Where people identify themselves in photographs, they
                  should be invited to indicate this on the reverse of the
                  photograph over their signature.

l          (i)    Consideration should be given to videoing suspects whilst
                  they are watching the recording of the incident. Facial
                  expressions, bodily movements and verbal exchanges may
I                 form vital supporting evidence.
           Use of Video in Connection with Poltctng of Football Supporters
I   4.14   British Transport Police are provided with both static and
           portable video equipment which is widely used for monitoring fans
           passing through stations and travelling on the railway. A close
I          liaison should be maintained with this Force for information
           exchange, intelligence gathering and assistance with the
           subsequent identification of offenders in the event of
I          large-scale and serious disorder associated with a sporting
           fixture.

I   4.15
           Si~ti c Instal latt ons
           Comprehensive static systems are located at the following main
           line British Rail stations and are controlled and monitored on a
I          twenty-four hour basis by police officers:-
                                 London St. Pancras
I                                London Euston
                                 London Victoria
                                 Birmingham New Street

I                                Manchester Piccadilly
                                 Glasgow Central
           Portable Equipment
I   4.16   All British Transport Police divisions operate portable colour
           video equipment, which is used extensively for videoing fans
I          travelling to and from sporting fixtures.
           The British Transport Police also use video graphic printers in
           connection with the subsequent identification of offenders from
I          video recordings and the circulation of intelligence gathered
           from these tapes.

I          Forces seeking to utilise the video facilities and intelligence
           gathered by British Transport Police should direct their
           enquiries to the Football Liaison Unit at their Headquarters at:
           15 Tavistock Place, London, WCIH 9SJ. Telephone: 01-388 7541.
I
I         SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS’ ACT, 1975 CERTIFICATES
                                              -

    5.1    The Safety at Sports Grounds’ Act, 1975, provides for the
I          certification of designated football grounds specified within the
           Act, which includes all Football League and Rugby League Clubs.
           On application for certification the management of the football

I          club concerned must satisfy the local authority that certain
           standards of public safety are available within the ground. The
           legislation requires the local authority to consult with the
           Chief Constable of the area in which the ground is located
I          regarding the terms and conditions to be included before any such
           certificate can be issued.
    5.2   The following recommendations on matters that should be included
          in safety certificates have been compiled from certificates
          issued across Force areas. It is felt that the recommendations
          meet the needs of police and should be considered for inclusion
          in safety certificates.
    5.3    Before the stadium is used on any occasion:-
           (a)    The Holder shall notify the Chief Constable of a
                  specified Activity at least 28 days before such an
                  Activity takes place (or such shorter time as the Chief
                  Constable may require).
           (b)    The Holder shall make an agreement on his own behalf and
I                 on behalf of the occupier of the premises under Section
                  15, Police Act, 1964, to secure the attendance at the
                  specified Activity of such number of police officers as
I                 is in the opinion of the Chief Constable sufficient to
                  ensure decent and orderly behaviour at the specified
                  Activity.
I          (c)    The Holder shall comply with such directions as the Chief
                  Constable deems fit, as to:-

I                 (i)     methods of admission of spectators to the
                          specified Activity to ensure public order and
                          safety; and
I                (ii)     methods of control employed to ensure the
                          segregation of spectators supporting one team

I   5.4
                          from those supporting the other.

          The Holder shall ensure the attendance at every specified
          Activity of a Chief Safety Steward and an adequate number of
I         Safety Stewards to the satisfaction of the local authority and
          the Chief Constable, and the Safety Stewards shall be:-
          (a)     Trained and instructed to deal with any emergency
                  relating to fire or evacuation.
          (b)     They should be given written instructions about the
                  actions to be taken in case of emergency.
          (c)     They should receive practical instruction and training
                  appropriate to their responsibility.
            (d)     No one should be employed as a steward unless they have
                    been so instructed and trained.
            (e)     They should be adequate in number, physically and
I                   mentally capable of performing their duties, effectively
                    deployed, effectively supervised and readily identifiable
                    by coloured tabards.
I    5.5    In the event of a fixture being arranged as a result of a draw in
            a Football/Rugby League or Football Association Cup Competition,

I           which would indicate the attendance of a club from a higher
            division, who by the nature of the club or by local interest
            would attract a crowd well in excess of the current ground
            capacity, or the forward information is such that a public order
I           situation may arise, then in consultation with the opposing club
            and the local police commander, one of the following alternatives
            must be agreed or otherwise must be implemented if the local
I           police commander so directs:-
            (a)   Insisting the match is ’all ticketl.

I           (b)   Requiring the game to be played at an alternative venue.
            (c)    Controlling the day and time of kick off.
I
    5.6     The Holder shall provide:-

I           (a)   Metering devices to record all admissions and to indicate
                  the number of spectators in each part of the ground.
            (b)   Suitable separation and segregation fencing.
I           (c)   Elevated observation points giving uninterrupted views of
                  the stadium.
I          (d)    An efficient P.A. system with a facility for use by
                  police.

I          (e)    Adequate indications of exit routes and numbering of gates
                  in fluorescent paint.

I   5.7    No accumulation of rubbish, bricks, stones or other materials
           which in the opinion of the Chief Constable are capable of use as
           missiles shall be permitted to remain in any part of the stadium
I   5.8
           to which spectators have access.
           Portable television cameras and ancillary equipment shall be
           placed in such positions as may be agreed between the Holder and
I          the Chief Constable.
    5.9    No vehicles other than emergency (i.e. police, fire, ambulance)
I          shall be parked in any part of the stadium except as shown on any
           plan or as agreed with the Chief Constable or senior police
           officer.

I   5.10   When owing to the condition of the ground a cancellation of the
           match is likely a police representative should be present when
           the ground is inspected.
I
I   5.11   No turnstiles should be classed as a means of escape.
    5.12   Under Section lO (Emergency Procedures) of the Safety at Sports
I          Grounds’ Act, 1975, a Local Authority is empowered, if it
           considers that due to any deficiency in safety procedures at a
           designated sports ground, to take certain steps to minimise the

I          risk to spectators. The Local Authority may apply to the courts
           for an order prohibiting or restricting admission to the whole or
           any part of the ground until such steps have been taken to reduce
           the risk to spectators.
I   5.13   If the court is satisfied, on the application of the Local
           Authority, that the risk to spectators at a sports ground is so
I          great that, until steps have been taken to reduce it to a
           reasonable level, their admission ought to be prohibited, or
           restricted, the court may order, prohibit, or restrict, to the
           extent they consider appropriate in the circumstances of the
I          case, the admission of spectators to the whole or any part of the
           ground, until such steps have been taken as, in the opinion of
           the court, are necessary to reduce the risk to a reasonable
I   5.14
           level.
           If spectators are admitted to a sports ground in contravention of

I          an order made under Section lO of the Sports Grounds’ Act, 1975,
           any responsible person, and if a safety certificate is in
           operation, the holder of the certificate, shall be guilty of an
           offence.
I   5.15   N.B. The Fire Safety and Places of Sport Bill currently before
           Parliament amends the procedure under Section lO of the 1975
I          Safety at Sports Grounds’ Act by allowing the local authority to
           place an order of prohibition on sports ground management if in
           their opinion the criteria at paragraph 16.12 above is satisfied.

I          Thus disposing of the need to apply to a court for an appropriate
           order. The club management or holder of the safety certificate
           may appeal to the Magistrates for cancellation or modification of
           the order.
i
II
II
II
Ii
I
II
I                        OUTLINE   PROPOSALS   FOR
     ©
II
                  NATIONAL   FOOTBALL INTELLIGENCE   UNIT
II
II
II
l
!    or.-,,....




II
II
II
I
It
I
il
I                                                 -2-


I       Football hooliganism is probably unique in the way that it involves different Police
        Forces dealing with offenders who are from other Police districts. The key technique
        of hooliganism is the trouble that occurs in relation to visiting supporters; they
I       may be of course the target of attack from home supporters or marauding hooligans
        themselves.

I       The nature of the conflict is no longer simple if it ever was. We now find gangs
        organised about football clubs who will go out of their way to attack groups of
        supporters simply passing through their "territory". Hooligan gangs transfer their
        allegience accordiD~ to the event and are primarily involved in disturbances when
I       their Home Club has no fixture and on other than match days.
       We have achieved a great deal to contain disorder and the regular conduct in the
I      mainstream of football attendances.
       Whilst at most games the opportunity to make trouble is restricted, the atmosphere

I      r~mains unpleasant and the potential for disorder fairly obvious. At the same time,
       outside the net of police control, football hooligans succeed in violent encounters.


l
I      The strategy has got to be based upon the identification of persistent hooligans and
       gangs with a view to targetting Police efforts on them.

I      The existing football liaison system is concerned with match information (numbers of
       travelling fans, modes of transport, train times etc.) rather than intelligence as
       such. Intelligence can be more properly defined as information as to the identity
I      and background of persistent hooligans and hooligan gangs and their known strategies
       and future plans. (The general purpose of a National Football Intelligence Unit is
       to receive, evaluate and disseminate football intelligence of this kind and to

I      promote the development of intelligence in participant Forces. )



I   --~ It is proposed that the National Football Intelligence Unit (N.F.I.U.) be located in
    ~-J London. The reasons for this are as follows:

i        (i)The    major international football stadium is located at Wembley, within London.
        (ii) London has the largest concentration of Football League Clubs of any city in
               the United ngdom.
I      (iii)   London is the major nodal point for football fans travelling to and from
               matches.
I       (iv) The British Transport Police Headquarters is situated within London. They
               have responsibility for both travelling fans and house the United

I              Permanent Correspondent in the TREVI organisation.

         (v)The offices of the Football Association are in London.
I       (vi) Other important liaison bodies are also located here, e.g.D.O.T., Interpol,
               British Rail, etc.

I
I
i
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
l
I
I
                                                   -4-
               (iv)TO receive local intelligence reports.
                (v)Liaision with National Membership Scheme.
                      In light of the provisions of the Data Protection Act, it would be
                      advisable if a condition of meml~rship of the scheme was agreesent that
                      the members’ details would be made available on request by Police for
                      the purposes of crime prevention or the investigation of crime.
               (vi) Index of local football intelligence officers/officers or contact
                      points within United Kingdom Police Forces.
    SZ%FFING

    It is proposed that the Police staff be seoonded from their home Forces to the Home
!   Office for duty in the N.F.I.U.
    A provisional structure might be as follows:
!            Officer in Charge of the Unit. In the early years of this Unit he will be
             r e_sponsible for ensuring that the Unit is soundly structured and financed. He
!            will h~ll have an important role visiting and liaising with other Police Forces to
             establish a national football intelligence network.
             It may be possible eventually for this post to be shared part time with other
             Home Office funded posts based at New Scotland Yard.


!            Respalsible for the day to day running of the office.


I   -        Monitoring and liaison functions. Deputy to the ChiefInspector.
    Detective Se~:jem]~s (3)
             Intelligence officers.
    z..te].].t,:jeex~ ~ (3)
!-         Assistants to the Intelligence Officers/Computer Operators.

             Typist
    Hours of duty in this office may need to take into account the pattern and timing of
    football retches. Some shiftwork would be inevitable. A suggested format would be:
    M3NE~Y            8.00 a.m. - 4.00 p.m.        One officer (should be an Officer who
                                                   performed duty on the preceeding Saturday).

i   %~JESDAY               a.m.
                             9.00
                                i    5.00
                                        p.m. )
                      3.00 p.m. - 11.00 p.m.)

!   WEDNESDAY         9.00 a.m. - 5.00 p.m. )
                                              ,)   Duties as required taking account of
                                                   midweek matches.
                      3.00 p.m. -11.00 p.m. )
i   %~RSE~Y           8.00 a.m. - 4.00 p.m.        Updating of intelligence, preparation of
                                                   bulletins etc.
I     FRII~Y           8.00 a.m. - 12 midnight
                                                  -5-
                                                    Officers on duty to include a Supervisor.
I                                                   Anticipated collatic~ of covertly gathered
                                                    intelligence.
      SATUFJ3AY        9.00 a.m.      5.00 p.m.
I                      3.00 p.m.   - 11.00 p.m.
                       Duties as directed for occasional Sunday games otherwise this is
I     D0Cm~KTION
                       normally a rest day for the full office.


I     It is essential that nationally recognised and standardised formats are adopted for
      the recording of all information and intelligence of interest to the N.F.I.U.

I     This will enable the local Force football intelligence systems to mirror the national
      requirement and allow for efficient information exchanga.

I     The systems adopted should also be such that they may be readily transposed onto
      computer, since it is clear that ccmputerisaticn of the information will greatly
           ce the evaluative process.
    ~The manual documentation system will require some wider consultation before agreement
i     to ensure that indices are complementary and meet the necessary requirements.

I     Sores draft forms for this documentatic~ are included at Appendix ’A’.
      ~BZSRIC&L AIDS

I     Clearly, a cc~m!ter with automatic cross indexing and random search facilities is
      highly desirable for the National Unit. Such a configuration already exists at
      S.O.11 Branch of the Metropolitan Police. Initial enquiries have indicated that the
I     computer has ample capacity to absorb the workload and that the existing fields of
      search are largely compatible with the identified need.

I     A decisic~ to pursue this course would undoubtedly speed the process of
      implementation.
      At a local Force level, it is unlikely that ccmputerised intelligence systems would
I   ~-be neoessary, except in the case of thDse Forces responsible for a large ~ of
    -.~foothall clubs.

I     Enquiry will need to be made with the Metropolitan Police regarding reimbursement for
      the use of the facility but any such cost would be only a fraction of that incurred
      through purct~m~e of a new system.
I     In addition to the computer, the provision of a FAX facility would clearly be
      beneficial for the accurate and quick trans~ssi(m of information. It is
      particularly valuable in relation to receipt of information from abroad where
I     language difficulties can create opportunity for mistakes and misinterpretation.


!     A recent meeting at the Horns Office suggested that funding could be made available
      from central govermment to finance this unit.

I     No total cost may be placed on the unit at this stage, however, a Metropolitan Police
      Finance Branch Ready R~.kDner of costs is attached for guida~e and an initial
      estimate follows:
I
!   Estimated cost of N.F.I.U.
                                            -6-



I   Assumes all Police Officers from Provincial Forces and all Civil Staff from
    Metropolitan Police.

I   (a)    Police Salary Costs:
          Superintendent
                                                             £
                                                              37,200
!         Chief Inspector
          Ins~r
           3 Sergeants
                                                              27,000
                                                              28,100
                                                              84,600

I   (b)   Civil Staff Salary:                                £
          3 Clerical Officers                                 32,400
          Specialist Typist                                   10 r 800

!                                                            220,100
          VAT                                                    33r015
          ~tal Salary Cost

    (c)    Miscellaneous Costs:                                  1,000

    (d)    Transport:
           10,000 miles at 27p per mile =                        2,700

    (e)    Office A~tic~:                                    ,~o Fto


           Superintendent                                    160
           5 Officers                                        250
           3 Clerical Officers                               240
           Special Typist                                     80
                                                             730
           Plus 25% for corridors & lobbies                  182.5
                                                             912.5

           912.5 Sq. Ft. at £42 per Sq. Ft. =                £38,325
I
    (f)   Personal Accummodaticn (for Provincial Officers)
I         Based cn the flat rate rent allowance
          Superintendent                                         1,875
          ~ef Inspector                                          1,616
                                                                 1,616
           3 Sergeants                                           4 8.,.~48
I         TOTAL

I
                                                -7-
        (g)   Basic Staff Costs:
              (Telephones and other office overheads)            £28,650

        (h)   Expenses:
              (Travel and subsistence for Provincial Officers)
              Estimated at £5,000 per Officer + VAT              30,000
                                               VAT                4t500
              TOTAL                                              34t000

        (i) Provision of Computer:
              This depends up~ the level of sophistication necessary and will require
              further consultatic~ before notificatic~ can be given of the likely cost.
              Su~ez~ (excluding co~0uter costs) :
              Police and Civil Staff Salaries                    253,115
    ©         Miscellaneous
              Transport                                            1,000
                                                                   2,700
              Office Accomscdatic~                                38,325
              Personal Accommodation                               9,955
              Basic Staff Costs                                   28,650
              Expenses                                            34t500
              TOTAL                                              368t245


!
!




              ~.1/J~/J~
              22nd July, 1988.
     RM No.

~!o  RNAME.
      .b.
                                  FORENAME.
                                                              Ref. No.
                                                              U.R.N.
                                                              C.R.O.

’~DDRESS.                           BEAT No.


f   e]. No.                OCCUPATION.


~   LUB{s) SUPPORTED.
     EHICLES OWNED/USED.
                                                            PHOTOGRAPH.

     ODE OF TRAVEL TO FOOTBALL MATCH.
p
      DESCRIPTION.
      HEIGHT.                 ACCENT.

                              MODE OF DRESS.
      BUILD.


      HAIR.


~,OLE PLAYED AS A SUPPORTER: re ringleader, spotter: etc.
F’              ASSOCIATES.

                    EO~ 0.o.8



 !
P
P                                                               APPENDIX ’A’



P
    LvaavBl,~s/~ ¯
    (* ~ ~)



    ~oN              (~I~))
I
!
!
I

I
I
!
!
!
I                        N.F.I.U. 2

|
          ROGUE ~ ~




    ©



           e


|         ~.
|         ~-
    : ~ ]I~E~IIR%TIGN ~."
    \j-




!
I
I
I
!
I                           N.F.I.U. 3

I
I
l
I    N.I.B. ~:


i
I
I
I
!°
 !
 !
 I
 !
le
 !
 !
 !
 !
 !
 I               N.F.I.U. 4
 !
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I   PROPOSALS FOR THE IDENTIFICATION/PROSECUTION
       OF HOOLIGAN GANGS AND THE RAISING OF

I   BEHAVIOURAL THRESHOLDS AT FOOTBALL GROIJNDS


I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I    IXI’RODU(:TION

I                The end of season play-offs and more starkly the gross

I   misconduct of English so-called footbaTT fans in Europe, have once again

    thrust "football hooliganism" centre stage. Whilst media coverage no doubt
I   plays a part in adrenalising the hooligans it is nonetheless unmistakeable

I   that regardless of police endeavour and the range of initiatives from

    Government and the football institutions, the ranks of the sport’s

I   miscreants remain undiminished and their brazen aggression undaunted.


l                It is true that the game itself has heavy responsibilities and


n   must do more to close its doors to undesirables. Much has yet to be

    discussed and tested to examine w~Ys to make exclusion (of either

l   hooligans in particular or ’away support’ in general) effective.

    Certainly the problems are considerable; how do the administrators
i   determine genuine identity?; does any scheme for exclusion begin by


i   including and authenticating exactly all those who eventually should be

    excluded; how is identity determined at the turnstiles where many

l   thousands will crush to gain admission, at say up to 90 gateways? what is

    to be the ruling on multiple membership?, what about ’derby games’ and

l   will segregation be affected? These are just a few of the many questions
    to be answered. Certainly the attempts to legislate for exclusion to
i   date, the exclusion orders under Section 30, Public Order Act, 1986, have

I   proved a dismal failure. Courts have sometimes been reluctant to impose

    bans and, where they have, the bans have been of so short a duration as to

l   make them irrelevant. This is an issue which clearly needs addressing - a

    complex legal power, on the face of it the utmost legal sanction against
l   the football hooligan, that in some cases for example results in banning


!   him from games for three months from the last game of the season (there
I    are several examples) is little short of laughable.

I
                Aside from these issues it is also clear that hooliganism in

I   football is not as separable and distinct as is so often made out.


I   Aggressive masculinity, if not channelled elsewhere, is regrettably more

    evident as criminal rowdyism and assault in our daily lives than certainly

I   it ought to be. Whatever the reasons, ill-mannered, aggressive, violent
    group behaviour, wholly outside the expectations of reasonable people is

I   now commonplace. Football is not the only stage, albeit one of the most

    convenient, for this kind of disorder. There is it seems a common dynamic
I   which policeman have recognised for a long time and which it seems the

I   rest of society’ is coming to realise - silly the desire for violence and

    an unbridled contempt for decent standards and law enforcement.

I
                Consequently a specific strategy against football hooliganism,
l   whilst wholly appropriate, is not sufficient. To the general public this


l   tide of eruptive street mauling is far more alarming and destructive of a

    sense of well-being than minor property crime. When and wherever it occurs

I   it has to be recognised as a priority by Police and Courts alike.

    Ironically disorder as such does not register in national crime statistics
I   and traditionally, perhaps because of the way evidenc~ has been presented


I   {it is notoriously difficult in verbal testimony to recreate the

    circumstances of disorder), the courts have all too often dealt with the

I   violent and the troublesome with leniency, seemingly content that the

    trouble is past.

I
               Recent events in Germany have illustrated to both public and
I   indeed the affrayers themselves the sheer extent of disruption of which

I   they are capable. What is particularly ominous is the concerted and
!                  There are probably two possible overall strategies for dealing
      with football hooliganism which in a sense are complementary. The first
!     is ’containment’ and the second ’exclusion’. The idea of containment is

i     preventive and pre-emptive. It is largely embodied in the document
     referred to above and entails the supervision of crowds at every turn,

I    from their point of departure, through the transit system, to the match

     and on to their return. It involves active police supervision, segregation
i    of opposing fans and absolute control at football grounds. It is fair to

I    say that we have largely achieved this although inevitably on occasions

     the line is breached. Exclusion involves either regulatory methods of

l    dissuading travelling support and keeping malefactors out of football
     grounds, or the active prosecution of criminal behaviour to the extent
I    that it is brought under reasonable control. Regulatory methods remain


i    something of an enigma and may at best be only part of the answer.
     Assertive enforcment is an option which we have begun to explore by way of

!   covert operations but is capable of considerable extension in a variety of

    tactical responses.
I
I                 In short we have achieved containment, itself a considerable
    feat, but the cost is a regular and massive police presence to keep the

!   still overtly belligerent mobs in check. Current understanding of the

    deliberate and criminal aspects of hooliganism suggests that we can do

I   much more to target hooligan gangs and enforce the law against them.


I   BEHAVIOUP..eU. ll.IRBHOLDS

i                Paradoxically, because they are protected by the Police, one of

!   the consequences of containment is that rival groups tend to be corralled
I
     planned nature of their debauch. Trouble is neither spontaneous nor
I   sporadic, it is organised and defiant.


I               Whatever longer term measures in respect of the regulation of

I   football become appropriate (and of course they are under active

    consideration) a strategy of law enforcement which gives a real sense of

I   priority has got to be professionally determined and resolved upon. It is

    surely timely to question whether, with all the considerable resources we
I   already deploy, we cannot make them more directly effective so that those

I   who challenge the rule of law can state their case in the courts.



I   PROGRESS TO DATE


I               During the last three years, the ACPO Sub-Committee on


I   Hooliganism in Sport has developed a comprehensive guidance document on

    the policing of football; CCTV systems have been introduced universally;

I   a national intelligence system has been developed; conferences are now

    organised annually for Match Commanders and their intelligence officers;
I   liaison with the F.A., the League, Government departments, the Traffic


I   Commissioners, and other agencies is now well structured. A great deal of

    co-ordination and co-operation has been achieved but to be critical, in

!   two areas at least, we have not achieved as much as may be possible. CCTV

    systems were introduced with necessary haste and we have paid the price.

I   Generally they are not technically capable of effective evidence gathering

    and in most cases the operators are untrained in technique and their
I   efforts unco-ordinated. Intelligence gathering, whilst now standard in

I   form, provides an excellent match information system, as to travelling,

    nu,~)ers, mode of transport, train times, coach operators and so on. It

I   does not provide much by way of "intelligence".
I
    together so that they can demonstrate their allegience and aggression
I   towards each other without restraint. Equally and regrettably we have come


l   to accept and condone very low standards of behaviour particularly in the

    obscene chantings and ritual taunting of hooligan groups.

I              Also, whilst it is often argued that since the introduction of

I   CCTV most of the violence is outside the ground, the trouble which occurs


i   in the transport system or City Centres often stems directly from the

    allegience demonstrated on the terraces.

I              Aside from the issue of targetting hooligan groups there is a

!   need to raise the thresholds of acceptable behaviour at football grounds

    in general terms. We cannot expect anything other than trouble if
I   contained supporters are allowed to scream hostilities at each other week


I   in and week out with impugnity.


I   INTELLIGENCE


!              As we have said there is a distinction between ’match
    information’ and ’intelligence’. The match information system is based
I   upon local Football Liaison officers who have a responsibility for

I   individual clubs. Match reports on every game are retained locally and
    circulated to the away Force, who in turn build up a record of their
I   club’s supporters away from home. Football Liaison Officers are able to
    forecast fairly accurately general match information as to crowd numbers,
I   modes of travel and the general demeanour of fans and so on.

I   Intelligence, more particularly, may be defined as the identification of
    football hooligans, their associations and strategies and knowledge of

I   their immediate plans.
I
I
i                 At the present time the existing Football Liaison Officers are
    neither equipped nor trained to develop this latter kind of intelligence
I   to any significant degree. Put in stark terms, and despite the great


I   number of police officers regularly deployed to football grounds, we have

    to ask the following questions.:

l
                  Are the vociferous groups readily identifiable on the terraces
I   regularly made up of the same people?


I                 Do they assemble in the same place each week?

I
               Do we know their identities?
I
I              Do we routinely identify their presence and movements?



I              Are they involved in trouble at away games together?


I              Where else do they associate and what else are they involved in
    as a group?
I
I             Are they the same people who for example waylay other fans
    outside City Centre Stations later in the night?

I
I
I
I
I
I
l
I                Undoubtedly effective policing depends on intelligence and
      there is a strong case for the appointment of Intelligence officers
I    complementing the Football Liaison officers scheme (for smaller ’Clubs’ it

I    may of course be the same person as the Football Liaison Officer), who

      should be trained in ’Anacapa’ techniques.      Their role should be to

I    develop a portfolio of known hooligans and gangs, and to co-ordinate

     operational activities so as to enhance intelligence gathering.
I
I
I
 I
I
I
I    A STRATEGY FOR INTELLIGENCE AND CCTV


I               The potential for gathering evidence and intelligence by

I    optical means is enormous and largely untapped. During the last twelve
     months, under the auspices of ACPO, we have developed a training course
I    for operations which is now nationally available. Whilst training in
     technique is vital, it is however not sufficient. Match Commanders need
I    to develop a complete strategy with a suggested three objectives in mind:

i    (i)       the development of intelligence about home and away groups;
I
I
I
     (ii)        the targetting of known hooligan gangs and the development of
!    evidence against them;


I    (iii)       the general raising of behavioural thresholds by assertive

I    enforcement against unacceptable behaviour.


I               A comprehensive strategy would involve the following stages.


I    (a)        The appointment of an        Intelligence Officer rsponsible for

I    directing the optical evidence
     intelligence matters.
                                             gathering team and co-ordinating


I
     (b)        On match days, the appointment of a "Director" to be
I    responsible for the optical evidence gathering team and specifically

I   directing them when and where to film.



I   (c)         The development and enhancement of equipment for optical

    evidence gathering. Existing fixed CCTV systems need to be brought up to
I   their original specifications and the far more effective portable systems


I   used in support. Likewise, still photography should also be considered as

    complementary to other systems. (Conscious of the deficiences in the

I   existing CCTV systems, a Technical Committee by ACPO has been set up to

    advise on all future expenditure of monies from the Football Trust and a

I   member of SRDB has been made available for twelve months to act as an

    advisor to the Committee and to Forces on their existing installations).
I
    (d)        An arrest strategy needs to be determined and designated arrest
    teams deployed if appropriate. For example, if a dozen youths are filmed
    chanting obscenely for long periods and perhaps at several games, they
I
     should be identified to the arrest team and there should be a plan to

I   apprehend them by say ’filter cordon’ at the end of the game.

i    (e)        The Intelligence Officer should routinely scrutinise all video

I   and film records after the game, regardless of the outcome, and if

    necessary develop follow-up enquiries.

I
    (f)         A follow-up enquiry team to identify target hooligans and
I   collate additional information should be part of the strategy.

I               The training courses held to date have been evaluated and

I   re-designed, and the G.M.P. have taken on the responsibility of making

    places available for both operators and intelligence officers throughout
I   England and Wales. This is likely to be an ongoing commitment.


I              DEVELOPMENT IN CCTY

I
    (a)        BACKGROUI)
I
               The Football Trust is a non-profit making organisation which is
I   represented by Trustees from all areas of football as well as from the

I   Police, local Government and the Football Pools companies. The Trust is
    totally financed by annual contributions from the Pools companies.
I
               In 1981 the Trust funded the purchase and installation of the
I   first purpose-built (football) closed circuit television system(CCTV) at

I   the ground of Aston Villa F.C. in Birmingham.



               The success of that system prompted CCTV pilot schemes at
m
!    football grounds in Manchester, Birmingham and Edinburgh.

i
                 Following these pilot schemes the Trust undertook a programme
I    which was ultimately aimed at installing CCTV systems at every Football


I    League ground in England and Scotland.



U               To date the Football Trust has committed two million pounds to
     that programme. CCTV systems are now in operation at every ground in the

I    leading two divisions of the Football League and in the Scottish Premier
     Division. Progress is being made in the remaining divisions where 81
I    systems are now operating.

I    (b)       PROeLEMS
I
m               Unfortunately these systems were introduced before any
    effective evaluation could be undertaken, largely because of the priority


!   which government afforded the subject of football hooliganism. Some

    experience was at hand based on the prototype schemes in Birmingham,

!   Manchester and Edinburgh, and after consultation, a paper offering general

    advice as to the requirement was circulatdd. SRDB did liaise with members
I   of the ACPO Sub-Committee, but at that time they were not prepared to


I   endorse anything other than monochrome systems. The Service wanted

    colour.

n              Based upon the views of match commanders obtained at the
I   national annual conferences, organised by ACPO, the observatons of the


I   many officers who have been through the training courses and evaluation by

    the members of the ACPO Working Party on CCTV and still photography, the

I   following deficiencies are general across all systems:-
!    (a)         The requirement was never fully laid down and was usually
     ambiguous. No clear distinction was made between the "evidence and
!    intelligence gathering role" on the one hand and the "command and control"

!    function on the other.


i    (b)         The configuration of existing systems reflects this ambiguity.
    The compromise usually entails that neither function is adequately
I   fulfilled.

I    (c)         The evidence and intelligence gathering role should have clear

I   priority whereas it is often secondary.


I   (d)          The technical efficiency of the systems, particularly in

l   relation to the effectiveness of remote control systems is poor.



I   {e)          Almost the entire investment is in fixed CCTV systems whereas

    current information suggests that complementary CCTV/portable TV. still
I   photography systems are likely to be the most effective.


I   (f)          Aside from those who have benefitted from experimental training

I   courses conducted by the G.M.P. for Forces in the North of England, few

    operators have received much training of a technical nature or, more
i   importantly, in technique.


I   {g)          Few Forces have evolved any strategy in relation to the

I   development of intelligence or arrests, or in the post-match analysis of
    films and the potential of the system remains unrealised.

I
     It is a sobering thought, that despite the injection of two million pounds

     by the Football Trust into CCTV systems throughout the Football League

     little has been achieved. As indicated fundamental errors have been made

     either in the equipment purchased, its sighting, its maintenance, its

     operational use, the role that was being required of the equipment or a
     combination of several or all of these problem areas.



                It has been argued that the very existence of CCTV systems in

     grounds provides a deterrent effect to hooliganism. Whilst true that

     effect is only likely to continue if positive results are seen to come
     from the use of these systems. If the equipment is not used, or is

     operationally ineffective its limitations will eventually become known and

     the preventive aspect will quickly fade.



     (c)        TECHNICAL CO#~II’FEE



!               As a result of the above problems, the Football Trust has

    established a Technical Committee to advise it on the technical and

I   operational aspects of all applications for new systems and the

    enhancement of existing systems.
I
!               It is anticipated that the Technical Committee will meet to

    examine a number of applications at a time and may well be able to resolve

I   some applications on this basis. In other cases, it would be beneficial
    for ground visits to be made to give advice and to evaluate the
I   performance of contractors. Ideally, these visits should include someone


!   with the expertise of Mr.Ford.



               Andrew Ford from the S.R.D.B. has played a significant role in
     reviewing the existing CCTV systems installed in football grounds, and has
     been instrumental in determining the most appropriate options and

     possibilities for the future. Because of his considerable investment in

     this programme he now has a complete knolwedge of practical police

     requirements. It is largely because of his insistence upon examining
     alternative systems that we are now recommending much greater use of

     portable cameras as the primary evidence gathering source.



                The new procedure also offers a system of accountability which
     is currently lacking.


                This revised procedure has been endorsed by both the Football
    Trust and the ACPO Sub-Committee on Hooliganism at Sporting Events and

    Chief Constables are to be asked to nominate a liaison officer.



                FUTURE DEVELOR~k"I’S.


                As to the future, the most demanding issue is the sheer growth

    which can be anticipated in the use of all kinds of photographic means for

    intelligence and evidence gathering.



I              Aside from the substantial football programme there is now a

    major extension of photographic usage in situations of public disorder.

I   Equally, in policing major demonstrations and confrontations, and in

    surveilling areas of high crime there is a marked uptake. Experience in
I   the courts has been dramatically positive. Confronted with this kind of


I   evidence defendants have been far more likely to plead guilty; far more

    likely to be convicted and far more likely to be sufficiently sentenced.

I
!
               With all these things in mind, the ACPO Sub-Committee on

!   Hooliganism at Sporting Events extended its work in football


!   vldeolng and a Working Party was set up to examine the legal,

    technical, professional and practical issues and to develop codes


!   of best practice and advice on usage. This report is now almost

    complete and recommends a wide and general usage of photographic

    means in all aspects of police work.



               It seems inevitable that ever greater demands will be made

    to evaluate new equipment and examine or modify kit for specialist

    purposes.      This is particularly so as the state of the art is

    changing, such that there is now much greater versatility both in

    terms of equipment and techniques.



    PRIORITY



               On a weekly basis for most of the year, thousands of

    policemen perform sometimes hazardous duty throughout England and

    Wales.     Only some 30% of the cost of police manpower is recoverable

    and the real burden in terms of lost opportunity for other kinds

    of policing is immense. The Service has achieved an enormous amount

    and in most cases successfully contains these public sporting

    occasions, but it has to be said that almost always there remains

    a sinister potential for savage crowd violence. A great deal is

    being done to develop intelligence and attack the organlslng

    elements, but we can never be satisfied so long as routinely

    offensive and belligerent behavlour on the terraces is manifest

    and blatent. The effective use of CCTV taken far beyond what we

    have achieved to date, allows for the possibility of the conduct

    being eliminated. For these reasons, support in all respects for

    the programme deserves a high priority.        If, admittedly over a

    period of some years, a sea-change can be
!   effected in crowd behaviour the savings for the Police Service would be

I   enormous. If we do not make full use of this oppotunity it is likely we

    will spend the next decade assembling ever larger numbers of men to stand
!   on guard between an assembly of troublesome hordes.


!   NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE CELL (PAPER ATTACHED)

I
    CONCLUSIONS
I
                 It is not enough to develop intelligence. There must be some
!   means of making effective use of it. Equally, assertive enforcement that

!   is not targetted on the main gangs will miss the mark. There is a need to

    bring together intelligence and enforcement tactics.

!
                 The use of optical evidence gathering teams is central to both
I   these issues. Such equipment is capable of producing compelling evidence


!   in the Courts and it will be the life blood of most intelligence

    operations. Targetting the hard core gangs has got to be central to our

I   purposes. Equally, effective use of CCTV offers the means to do something

    about general thresholds of behaviour and enforce better standards on the
I   terracing.


!                Containment is preventive but costly. At the worst it

I   maintains the peace whilst paradoxically providing the very environment in

    which hooligan gangs prosper. We are dealing with organised criminality

!   which is ongoing, not single events, albeit of unpleasant frequency and a


!   real strategy of enforcement, based on intelligence and backed by the
    professional use of technical evidence gathering means, is the logical

I   next step.
I    NOTES OF THE FIRST DIVISION FOOTBALL LEAGUE
     17TH JUNE, 1986

I   Safety Evacuation
    The need for the annual inspection of grounds covered by safety certificates
I   had been strongly recommended by the Sub-Committee, this had been endorsed by
    Mr. Justice Popplewell in his final report. There was also a need for an
    "expert" in each force who was fully aware of the provisions of the Home
    Office Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds(Green Guide) to advise during the
I   certification process. Mr. Phillips strongly recommended annual inspection
    both as to grounds and stewarding.

I   NOTES OF M SECOND DIVISION FOOTBALL LEAGUE CONFEREN~R
    28T. MAY AND 29TH MAY 1986
I   Blackburn

    Gates have fallen considerably. Early arrivals had caused some difficulties
I   but the main problem encountered had been with the all ticket rule for Leeds.
    It had been necessary to allow entry to ground to 350 unticketed fans at
    selected turnstiles.
I   Mr. Phillips said that the difficulties had been previously identified by the
    Sub-Committee and it was hoped that the message had now got through that all
    ticket matches were only practicable where capacity crowds were anticipated.
I   Brighton

I   Questions were asked about the policy of.full pitch perimeter fencing.
    Mr. Phillips summarised the ACPO view and pointed out where there was good
    crowd behaviour perimeter fencing was not mandatory.
I   C~stal Palace
    Ground sharing meant a minimum of 50 matches per season at the club doubled
    the commitment of local Police. An encouraging factor was that club favours
    were beginning to be worn again. Derby matches where there was ground
    sharing were particularly difficult as each set of supporters considered
    themselves to be at home.        There were also stewarding problems and
    conflicting arrangements between the Clubs.


I   Safet~ Evacuation

    The need for the annual inspection of grounds covered by safety certificates
    had been strongly recommended by the Sub-Committee. this had been endorsed by
I   Mr. Justice Popplewell in his final report. There was also a need for an
    "expert" in each force who was fully aware of the provisions of the Home
    Office Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (Green Guide) to advise during the

I   certification process. Mr. Phillips strongly recommended annual inspection
    both as to grounds and stewarding.

    British Transport Pollce

    3)    The problem of evacuation was discussed. It was accepted that under
    most circumstances the police would take control. Mr. Phillips referred the
    meeting to the Green Guide Code and evacuation plans and the standard message
    for evacuation at sporting events.
                                                     -2-

         NOTES OF THE S_P_DO~ DIVISION FOC)TI3,Ar.r. ’l’.V~C~..j~
         26~, AND 2~J~x.I M&¥ 1987
         2.        L~alson Off~ce_~ Report.-
                   e)      Play-offs
I                         Two clubs (Crystal Palace, Birmingham) had experienced further
                          problems with the play-offs.      Neither club was directly

I                         involved, but both their grounds had been selected for the
                          ’finals’. At Crystal Palace no consultations had taken place
                          with the police and the game had been arranged for a Friday
                          night, a night that is never used for games because of joint
l                         car parking arrangements with a local supermarket.         At
                          Birmingham the ticket allocation was split 50:50, giving 12,500
                          to both Leeds and Charlton fans, although Leeds alone requested
l              f)
                          30,000.
                          All ticket matches - the stipulation of an all ticket match
                          does not help policing unless a capacity crowd attends. Often
I                         tickets are obtained by one team’s fans for areas reserved for
                          the other team’s fans with the consequent policing problems.
                          To reduce this problem it is essential to police the ticket
l                         sales at both outlets. For the first game of the season,
                          2/3,000 Leeds supporters arrived at the Blackburn ground
                         without tickets and because of the public disorder potential
n                        were allowed in. This set the tone for the season for these
                         fans and they frequently arrived at away grounds in large
                         numbers without money or tickets in an attempt to force the
                         police ground commander into allowing them admittance. The
i                        meeting agreed that this was a difficult situation to resolve,
                         but felt that a firm stand should be taken and entry refused,
                         the consequent problems outside the ground being resolved by
I                        prior planning. The police must be seen to ’win’ in these
                         situations.
              g)         Late kick-offs - another situation where supporters were seen
I                        to be forcing the police into taking action against their
                        better judgement. It has become increasingly apparent that
                        large numbers of spectators are arriving extremely late at the
I                       ground, this may be related to the restricted access to alcohol
                        in grounds and the prohibition on taking alcohol into grounds.
                        Because of the potential for disorder amongst those waiting
I                       entry, police ground commanders have occasionally requested
                        that the kick-off be delayed. It was the opinion o£ the
                        meeting that this pressure should not be acceded to in future,
                        the police should not be dictated to by supporters.
    NOTE_ OF THE FIRST DIVISION FOOT~T.r T.R.a.~NI’J~’
    7z~ AND lv~ JUNE 1987
    2.        LtaJ.son Officer Report-

              e)        Pitch Invastoa’JR - seen as a problem by some clubs (Coventry,
i                       Charlton, Q.P.R.) and not by others (Arsenal, Warlord, West
                        Ham) who do not have any pitch perimeter fencing. After
                        discussion, it was agreed that whether perimeter fencing should
I                       or should not be installed was a local decision to be made
                        after considering the ground conditions and the experience of
                                         -3-
I
                   fan behaviour. However, it was generally agreed that pitch
                   invasions should be stopped as they have the potential to
                   degenerate to major disorder.

          f)      Evacuation - evacuation exercises were practiced at some
                  grounds (Manchester United, Everton, Liverpool) where public
                  announcements are made, emergency bells checked and all
                  evacuation doors opened and checked by police. This does not
                  involve the actual evacuation of the ground, but tests the
                  mechanical parts of the system. At most grounds certain police
                  officers are issued with universal lock keys.        Leicester
                  reported on the electrically operated exit gate system and
                  exercises which are practiced there with the fire and ambulance
I                 services to test call-out times.

          h)      Niscellaneous - many representatives reported pressure from

I                 clubs to reduce manpower levels. Mr. Phillips pointed out that
                  it was a condition of the General Safety Certificate that the
                  responsibility to decide on manpower levels was the Chief

I                 Constable’s.

                  At one club (Arsenal) ticket sales were allowed immediately
                  after a game, this was not recommended as both sets of fans
I                 mingled whilst trying to purchase these tickets with obvious
                  disorder potential.


I   NOTES OF THE FIRST DIVISION FOOTBALL LEAGUE
    ISTAND 2ND JUNE 1988
    Safet¥ of Sports Grounds
I   Mr. Phillips stated that ground commanders should inspect details of the
    certificate annually and submit recommendations for work perhaps to be
I   carried out incrementally so that it doesn’t overawe the club. Safety
    requirements varied in accordance with changing patterns of use.

I   Chief Superintendent Bruce, (Cleveland) stated that they had prepared a
    maintenance and good practice schedule which he was willing to supply to
    other forces. The meeting approved of the booklet and found it to be a
    useful reference.

    NOTE OF THE SECOND DIVISION FOOTBALL LEAGUE
    8TH AND ym JUNE 1988
    Closure of Public Houses
    It was suggested that where trouble is anticipated at certain venues,
i   consideration should be given to liaising with breweries upon the closure of
    public houses in the immediate vicinity of football grounds. Licensing
    magistrates in York had at the request of the police ordered the closure of
    certain public houses where trouble had ensued in the past.
    NOTE OF THE THIRD AND FOURTH DIVISION FOOTBALL LEAGUE
    15THAND 16TH JUNE 1988
    14.   Bans Imposed by the Football Association and Lea&,ue

          Chief Superintendent Stainton (Cumbria) posed the difficulties in
          policing football grounds and fixtures which involve a visiting club
          whose supporters have been banned and arrive on mass. In order to
I   maintain ACPO’S policy of keeping out banned visiting supporters, the
    cost of police resources were high. The repercussions from setting up

!   road blocks and keeping out banned spectators upon unsuspecting
    neighbouring police areas, together with allowing the spectators into
    the ground were discussed at length. It was acknowledged there was no
    easy solution to this problem but unless excluded supporters were
!   confronted they would continue to travel.
    plan to deter and contain them.
                                                 It was necessary to have a


I   All Ticket Fixtures Imposed by FA/League

    Chief Inspector Richardson (Durham) related experiences of difficulty
    in policing football matches that had been declared ’all ticket’ by the
I   FA/League without consulting the relevant police force as to whether
    such a restriction could be enforced successfully. Small clubs do not
    apply these restrictions rigidly because of their financial position.
I   Therefore he requested that ACPO consult with the authorities on this
    subject.




!
I
!
                                                                       APPENDIX ’ A’
m
                     NOTE OF THE NEETING OF THE FIRST DIVISION FOOTBALL LEAGUE
m              POLICE COlli.ANDER$ AND LIAISON OFFICERS HELD AT TALLY 140, BIRNINGHAM,
                                     ON TUESDAY 17th JUNE 1986.

m
                 The meeting was chaired by K.Evans Esq., Assistant Chief Constable,
            west Midlands Police, J.D.Phillips Es.4., Assistant Chief Constable,
m           Greater Hanchester Police, acted as Secretary.

                  Attendance was in accordance with the list circulated at the
           meeting. All First Division Clubs were represented. Hr. Evans opened the
           meeting by welcoming representatives and outlining the history and purpose
           of the Conference.
            ITENS FRON SECOND DIVISION CONFERENCE
                  Mr. Phillips appraised the Conference of the main points discussed
           at the Second Division Conference held at Hendon on 28/29th Hay 1986.

            [atad11 .
m                This topic had generated much discussion. The Football Match
          Summary had been well accepted and there was satisfaction with the format.
          Regrettably there was great disparity in the standard of Jnfomation
          suppllod. There had also been a suggestion for a Central Clearing House
          for intelligence and Hr. Phillips sought the views of the Conference on
          this matter. The Conference was against this suggestion. There was a
          danger that a bureaucracy could be created to collect information which
          would be quickly out of date. The need for up to date, precise
          information was recogntsed and it was felt that the current system was the
          best method.
m   c.c.T.V


m               There had been general agreement that the use of CCTV had proved
           beneficial in reducing levels of disorder. Superintendent George              A
           Gallaghan from Huddersfteld had given a presentation highlighting the
           potential wtde use of CCTV for Intelligence role at the Second Division
m          Conference and Hr. Phillips indicated that under the auspices of the
           Sub-Commmtttee gutdance was being established for eventual circulation.

m           Trave111N spotters
                 There had been much discussion on the use of travelling spotters
           which had been pioneered by Portsmouth and it was apparent that the use of
m          spotters was becoming widespread. The vtews of the Conference on the use
           of spotters was sought and there was general support for their use. The
           problem of costs was recogntsed although tt was suggested that the
I          effective use of spotters could reduce overall costs tn the long term. It
           became apparent that there were several verstons of the scheme and there
           was some concern properly expressed as to whether spotters travelling as
           policemen with away fans or stmply travelling to 11atse with the Home
i          Offtce. The Brtttsh Transport Poltce were unhapw wtth the prospect of
           poltce offtcers other than thetr own fulfilling a poltce role on the
           railway system. Equally the dangers of offtcers being recognlsed and
m          tsolated by hooltgan groups was a dangerous possibility. Hr. Phil]tps
           Indicated that these tssues would be addressed as the extsttng gutdance in


I
 ~’~.~..~’-...:4 ~ :--: ,.- ....
                                                                                                                  I
                the Public Order Manual on Football Hooliganism was being up-dated.
                                                                                                                  I
                       Mr. Phillips then reviewed the business of the ACPO Sub-Committee on
                 Hooliganism at Sporting Events.

                Alcohol Act
                                                                                                                 I
                      Overall the effects of the legislation had been beneficial. The
                legislation had been rushed through so there were deficiences. ~nendments                         I
                to the Act in the Public Order B111 will widen its scope to cover private
                hire mini coaches and were welcomed. Representatives discussed their
                reactions to the legislation and Clubs which were dry and those which were
                controlled stated that there had been an improvement. There was still
                                                                                                                 I
                some differences of opinon as to banning of alcohol but it was so
                acknowledged that the legislation allowed for whatever level of control
                was considered most appropriate.
                                                                                                                  I
--~-        ",
                 C.C.T.Y.                                         ":

                      . The use of C.C.T.V. had been pioneered through experiments carried
                                                                                                                  I
 ;:              out at Edinburgh, Manchester and Birmingham.          As a result ofthese’~:’:~         II
     "
 -;:.-: - ,:., )~iwperlments-the Sub-Committee had been able to advise both the Football,::-_.:,. ~.,:
~"                                                                                                      m
                                                                                                        m
:i~:: ¯ .@l<gu. st and the Department of the Environment regarding, its installation and:. L:_i::~::,~
 ’:/, : :      :~se.::i There was no standard package as it was recognlsed that s~ystems :: ,::." ~:
                 needed to be ground specific. Mr. Phillips indicated that whilst we have. - .....m
                 achieved installation we have properly not yet learnt how to make the best             l
_ ~:. _                                                                                                  :
:~     ........
         :       use of. the equipment.  He intended to approach the  Chairmwln (Mr..Ale(lemon)   ....
~~-!:’ ~-~to set up a Working Group to look at the best use of photographic                            ¯
~~:/:-~:*/:~- :- equipment and practice to be followed in investigation and in evldence,:.,-: ~:::.. :!:--_

::~-~~: : :   -: llmllw~hlp cards                                                    ~--:...!’~: .:,::~ :;: ......:~

:~::~!:;::!~ ~::- :, :. The Sub-(:~Ittee had discussed this topic in detal ow ng::!,tO!~:~~. .. ::-.-::::
 "~-: ::;~~’i~::~:: ~"g~t~tnterest shown by various pa~tles and,:partlcular.ly the Depa~~;:~--:-:.~,
 ~)k ! ::;: ; Environment. In addition to business carried out within the Sub~lommttee~!::::::::,--".
:,~               ~rs had been Involved in working groups and meetings with ~rous ......        : :i~ l
 ::: :~ -other; bodies which had generally reached the same-conclusion,- :~To~i:l-.,            .’,:
  : ~’r’~’’- " S ch~s "    were notfeaslble but that incluslve or family schemes should-be ....
  ~:~: " "        encouraged. Mr. Justice Popplewell had come tothis view in hlsfinai ......
                   report.                                                                                         I
     looktng at all ways of cutting costs.
           The issue depended in part of the outcome of Harris v Sheffield
     United Football Club which had gone to appeal.

     safer/Evacuation
m            The need for the annual inspection of grounds covered by safety
     certificates had been strongly recommended by the Sub-C~nmnittee, this had
m    been endorsed by Mr. Justice Popplawell in his final report. There was
     also a need for an "expert" in each force who was fully aware of the
     provisions of the Home Office Guide to Safety at Sports Ground (Green
     Guide) to advise during the certification process. Mr. Phillips strongly
m    recommended annual inspection both as to grounds and stewarding.

    REVIEW OF (2tOM) B[HAVIOUR

          Mr. Phillips appraised the Conference of the arrest figures which
m   showed a decrease of about 50%. It was acknawledged that arrest figures
    were not an accurate gauge of disorder and the Conference were asked for
    their views, There was a general opinion that post heysel there had been
m   a down turn in trouble but that by the end of the seasonwere   there the
    beginnings of the old hostilities. Mr. Evans felt that the Police would
    need to conttnue in a very ftm approach to policing before we can be
    confident there was any ’sea change’.
l   khavtovr tnstde ground.

m         it was generally felt that theimprovement Inside the ground WAS
    attributable to the Alcohol legislation and the widespread use of
    C.C.T.V.and the general mood follawing the tragedies of the previous
m   season. Although the Newcastle representative pointed out that the
    alcohol legislation had played no part in the improvement tn the levels of
    behavlour inside St. James’s Park as the Ground had been totally ’dry’ for
    some years. They saw the reduction tn arrests as directly attributable to
m   a large reduction tn the numbers of vistttng supporters. The @
    representative from Manchester Ctty spoke of the use of a ’No Hans’ land
    which they had been able to operate at the ground. Thts had the effect of
m   mtntatnlng a gap of at least 35 yards between home and away supporters
    and had played a significant role In the reduction of disorder although It
    was recogntsed that such a tactic could only be used when crowds were less
    than capacity.
!   Bekvtouroutstde grounds andawa~ fr~ustedtme.
!         It was felt that the standard of ~havtour outside stadiums had
    improved tn ltne wtth that lnstde there was an increasing awareness of
m   trouble away from the ground with incidents such as and)ushtng visiting
    supporters transport. Another area which was on the increase u~.re

m   differenttncldents~÷ crossoverpolntSof met.Such
                 o~s supporters                     ~e metonvayfroia
                                                representative  service areas where
                                                                     Nottingham
    suggested more could be done by the away Force by acting on Intelligence
    before supporters left for away grounds. He cited one partculartnctdent
    where the Police at Nottingham had recetved Intelligence which indicated
m
                                                                                                               I
               that a number of Nottingham Forest supporters intended travell"
                                                                                                               I
               Oxford carrying weapons intending to cause trouble. As a result olfngth~-
 ,-:,;         intelligence a considerable number of people were arrested for various
               offences before they had left Nottingham.            o                                          I
               C.C.T.V evaluatlon and p~,ress.
                     Support for the use of C.C.T.V. was unanimous numerous cases were
                                                                                                               I
               referred to where C.C.T.V. evidence had been used in prosecutions. Noting
               that~there was to be a presentation on this subject later in the agenda
               Mr. Phillips said that consideration was being given to forming a working
               party to look at the whole field of photography and at means of improving
                                                                                                               I
               the production of video evidence.
                     The Hoolivan was discussed and it was generally felt that its use in
                                                                                                               i
               relation to Football was extremely limited, its best use probably being at
               static known problem areas,                                    ~
                                                                                                               I
               EFFECTS OF PAC£
~+,:i          Powers of searc~
 ....                   Mr. Phillips.-opened d~cussion on this item by outlining the ACPO                        i
 :.               view, There was an urgent need for a statutory power to search both.~at.
~-,:~:,~ ,-and away, from grounds. The Sub-Comulttee had consistently pressed, fop ~:                            II
                 thts and had been strongly s4pported by Mr. Justice Popplewe11 in his.
                 final report. On the question of searching under the ground regulatlo¢E~ ......
                 Mr. Phillips added that this ’power’ was extremely tenuous and that legal
-                opinion was that ground regulations gave little protection in law and.in
 ::              any case there were still major difficulties away ,from~grounds at bus-&J~: ........ ¯
;~               rail stations. There was a generalondiscussion        .the subject wlth....
~ . members feeling that the power given in the grouhd.~ regulations.ws.:~ :.~:- :
                                                                                          some                   l
~+_~ ~.~:-_ ~:suf~f~¢i ent. however, the majority -fel t that there-was a-~.~erious-deffc’~~-~ - ~’:~
~i~:-i? :~iI~ t.llit:the Police found themselves in a ’Catch 22’ situation .....            !-,~I~i~.~        ~!l" i
~;~ .....-~
       , -.      searcltesane
            ......              not carried out eddttionai problems could be ~:rLNit~. ,-":     ’*~~:~°*:~"’
+++~++7+-..    ....  .    ,           .                                                     ..- ~-.*<:-: . - .. .
                                                                                                        ~   " -II
              i~rt~ of detmtt ...........
                  This matter was discussed briefly but it was felt that so far as
                                                                                                                I
            relates to Football there were no particular problems.
i: r ~ T :~
       I " FO0~ IMIELLIG£11:£ IUZPOIITS.                               " .... :. .....
                                                                                  .




                                                        -4-                               ,, ;L
 iii!
 ¯                                                                                                          "I
I       Jnfomation was made available it would enable liaison officers to provide

I       better intelligence for subsequent matches.
        HOOLIGANISN ON PUBLIC llL4/ISIM)RT.

I               Ian McGregor, Assistant Chief Constable, Operations, B.T.P. gave
        video presentation on the BTP in relation to football outlining their
        intelligence role both nationally and for games played abroad. He

!       emphasized that British Rail was a c~uercial organisation whose main aim
        was to operate at a profit. The co-ordinating role of British Transport
        Police and their willingness to provide what have proved to be excellent
        intelligence was outlined in some detail. Mr. Evans thanked the British
I       Transport Police for their assistance to Forces and encouraged greater
        exchange of information at a local level.

m       RETROSPECTIVEMItJEST$.

              The Conference then reviewed a presentation on the incidents at
        Bimingham and Heysal from Detecive Inspector Ross, West Midlands Police
                                                                                     Q
l       and Detective Chief Inspector Wright, Menseyside Police, outlining the
        methods used to detect offenders at the two incidents. It was apparent
        that video evidence had been used to good effect and had resulted in
i       numerous convictions in the use at the Birmingham incident. The Heysal
        inquiry was not yet complete.
              There were several points of good practice which come to notice as a
        result of the enquiries.

              Mr. Phillips indicated that the lessons learnt by the Merseyside and
i       West Midlands Police would be beneficial to all and that they would be
        consulted by the Working Group previously referred to when a package was
        put together.
l       SPORTING EWIENTS (CI)UTINOL OF ALCOHOL) ACT
               The legislation had been identified earlier as having a beneficial
l       effect on levels of disorder. ~rs views were sought on practices in
        relation to the Act. Some mbers felt very strongly that there should         @
        be a total ban even to the extent that agreement should be sought of
l       retail outlets outside grounds not to supply alcohol on matchday. The
        majority however favoured control. It was pointed out that if alcohol is
        banned inside the ground people drink outside and do not go into the
        ground until the last minute. ~ene there is no alcohol in the vicinity
m       of the ground fans will goaway from the ground even to the extent in
        certain circumstances of drinking in another Force area and so becoming a
        potential problem for a Force who has no responsibility for policing the
m       football match. Mr. Phillips said that it was for precisely these reasons
        that the ACPO had favoured control as opposed to bans. He also pointed
        out that there was no evidence based on arrest figures that a total ban
        was more beneficial than control.
I
        LUTON TOMN IEINBERS
              Chief Superintendent Spalding of the Bedfordshire Police outltned
        the proposed Meebens Plan to be introduced at Luton Town for the season
         19845/87. The scheme is designed to ban away support and has the backing
        of the Bedfordshire Police. The system is to be computentsed and wtll
    l   allow members only to attend togethe~ ~lth a limited numer of accredited


I
                                                                               I
guests. To facilitate the system the capacity had been reduced to 14,000       I
and crowd segregation was impossible. The catchment area for membership
application had been clearly defined and any applicant from outside that
area would have to provide proof that he was a supporter of Luton Town.
In addition any members who did not attend on a regular basis would be
                                                                               I
identified by the computer and membership would be withdrawn.
      It was anticipated that the club would have approximately 30,000         !
members by the start of the season. The Club were determined that the
scheme would succeed to the extent that they were willing to play all F.A.
Cup games in the future away from home. The assistance of all Liaison
Officers was requested in getting the message across to other Clubs and
                                                                               I
supporters clubs that they would not gain admission at Luton.
      Mr. Evans thanked Mr. Spalding for his presentation and said that
                                                                               i
all parties would watch the experiment with great interest.
ANY OTHER BIJSINES.~                                                           I
Political actlvlt~ in footlwmll                                                i
      PC Connor of the A8 Branch Metropolitan Police addressed the             i
Conference on this topic. Following the tragedies of tile previous season
the media had attempted to connect various political factions with             I
disorder at Football Matches. His enquiries with the relevant department
in his force revealed that there was no evidence of National Front or
British Movement involvement in Football. Members concurred with this          ¯
view. There may be memberso   f          poll tical organisations who attend
                                   various                                     |
football matches but there had been no orchestrated effort to cause
disorder.

Transpor~ Btll                                                                 I
       Mr. Phillips spoke on the effects of the Transport Bill the             ¯
provisions of which will come into effect in October 1986. The
Netropolitan Forces would be affected and the indications are that
                                                                               |
football specials would cease to operate because they are not cost             atom
effective.   The problems this could cause are obvious and in Greater          ¯am
Manchester there were urgent talks going on in an effort to preserve some
type of service.

Mr. Evans closed the meeting and thanked delegates for their attendance.
On behalf of a11 who had attended Mr. Phillips thanked Mr. Evans and the
West Midlands Police for their hospitality.


                                                                               I

                                                                               I
                                                                               I
      NOTES OF THE CONFERENCE OF THE SECOND DIVISION FOOTBALL LEA4;UE POLICE
        ~S ANI) LIAISON OFFICERS CONFERENCE HELD AT THE PEEL CENTRE
                   HENIX)N, ON WEDNESDAY 28t.h IMY and 29th HAY 1986


I         The meeting was chaired by J.S.Evans,Esq., Deputy Chief Constable,
    Surrey Constabulary, J.D.Phillips Esq., Assistant Chief Constable,
I   Operations, Greater Manchester Police acted as Secretary and was assisted
    by Chief Superintendent Harrison, Hampshire Constabulary.


I         Attendance was in accordance with the list circulated at the
    meeting, the only club not represented, being West Bromwich Albion. Mr.
    Evans opened the meeting with a welcome to a11 representatives and
    reviewed the timetable.
I   CLUB REPORTS.
          The evening session was confined to input by Divisional Commanders
    and Liaison Officers in respect of the individual clubs:-

    BARNSLEY
l   No problems, there had been reduced attendances,              resulting in
    reduced arrests and ejections. This was attributed to CCTV
    and no alcohol, the ground being "dry".

    SHEFFIELD UNITED
    Problems were encountered when police advice on routes       for coaches for
    away support was not followed. It was considered that a closer liaison was
    required with Traffic Commissioners in respect of routes and timing and a
i   possible prohibition of attendance at the ground prior to one hour before
    k~ck-off. It was suggested that the Commissioners be asked to consider
    the inclusion of a clause in a licence for the notification of any
    conveyance of supporter to footbe11 league matches.
    (Mr. Phillips on behalf of the Sub-Committee on Hooliganism undertook to       O
    consider this issue but in light of the Transport Act felt there was
    little that could now be done)
    BLACKBURN
i   Gates have fallen considerably. Early arrivals
    difficulties but the main problem encountered had
                                                       had caused some
                                                      been with the all
    ticket rule for Leeds.It had been necessary to allow entry to ground
    to 350 unticketed fans at selected turnstiles.
           Mr. Phillips said that the difficulties had been previously
    identified by the Sub-Committee and it was hoped that the message had now
    got through that a11 ticket matches were only pnactlcable where capacitx
    crowds were anticipated.


                                                                                   o
    Problems had arisen for Bradford wtth no home ground and having to plaLY at
    Leeds and Huddersffeld which resulted In additional problems for the
    police with three sets of supporters. 1 They. are now at Ordsa11, Bradford
                                                                              I
                                                                              I
until 1988, when it is hoped that Valley Parade will have been
re-furbished.                                                                 I
Another issue of interest raised was the position when the local authority
were the issuing authority and certificate holder.

BRIGHTON
                                                                              I
A ’Spotter Squad’ which was introduced last season appears to
have reduced problems both at home and away games.
                                                                              I
Comment was made on the standard of behaviour by players and officials of
clubs, and it was suggested that cautioning of players by the Police for
bad behaviour be introduced as a policy. It was recognised that problems
                                                                              I
may arise arise if the Police prosecute. Examples were quoted of visiting
bench being cautioned three times in one match. This topic was extended
to cover match officials and concern was expressed at the major variations
                                                                              I
in attitudes to discipline.

Questions’,were asked about the policy of full pitch perimeter fencing.
Mr. Phillips summari sed the ACPO view and pointed out where there was good
                                                                              I
crowd behaviour perimeter fencing was not mandatory.

~RLISLE
                                                                              I
A problem had occurred when young programme sellers had been
robbed when outside the ground. It was recommended that programmes be
sold only within the confines of the ground.
 Sponsorship under the en~olem of the ’Sun Wheelers’ (British National
Party) at Hull had been received which allowed advertising in the Club
programme before the connection was discovered.                               I
Racist chanting appeared to be general amongst visiting supporters.           []
Intelligence reports had not suggested there was any racist activity
(although press comment did). If there was racist chanting it should be
counted on in the Intelligence Report.
                                                                              I
                                                                              []
Obscene chanting was still a problem and it was suggested that CCTV and       ¯
the ’Spotter System’ could assist in identification.                          |
CllMl.TOli AIllLETIC
CRYSTAL PALACE                                                                i
Ground sharing meant a minimum of 50 matches per season at the club and       []
doubled the commitment of local Police. An encouraging factor was that
club favours were beginning to be worn again. Derby matches where there
                                                                              |
was ground sharing were particularly difficult as each set of supporters
considered themselves to be at home. There were also stewarding problems      1
and conflicting arrangements between the Clubs.                               I

It was accepted there was a need for discussions with the FA on ground
sharing schemes, both present and proposed.                          1
Mr. Phtlltps recommended a "re-certification" of grounds, current or          ml
contemplating ground sharing schemes, to clarify usage.                       ¯i

                                                                              I
    An additional problem raised in discussion was ’third force elements, BTP
    and local forces required detailed intelligence concerning identifiable
    groups (ostensibly not of either club) visiting games.
    MILLWkLL

    There is a culture of violence associated with the Club. They have a
    measure of organisation with their own printed visiting cards and revel in
    an unholy reputation.
    Troublemakers attempt to ambush coaches, or travel in vehicles alongside
    and cause damage. One fan boarded a visiting coach, threw bricks along
    the corridors injuring passengers. Ambushes were well planned and
    constant escorting is necessary. Recentlyat       a match with a gate of
    5,000, 450 police officers were deployed and there were still problems. A
    new ploy to draw police officers in, is mock fights and the lighting of
    fires. Police officers therefore are never in less than pairs and remain~
    in line of eight.

    In discussion BTP commended the package deal for rail, bus and match
    ticket distribution, which in the case of Millwall appears to reduce
    aggravation.

    FULHAN
    No problems.

    WINBLEDOm
    No problems.

    m aY
    DLF DERBY LUNATIC FRINGE          caused
                                        had some   problems and the clubs still
    enjoyed good support.. Some problems had been encountered with special
    trains, and escorting fans to and from the ground due to the dlstanCeAm~
    between the station and the ground.

    ~INSIY
    No major problems.
    H~FIEIa

    No problems, Arrests had been considerably         reduced.   There had been
    extensive use of CCTV for intelligence purposes.


    There had been noticeably less problems in Division Two than in Division
    Three. The use of spotters and CCTV was advocated.

    IPSWIOI
I   Gates and arrests were down. Problems had only been encountered on a ’one
    off’ game wtth 200 away fans,
    A proposal was made that Justices of the Peace be taken to the games to
                                          -3-
I
                                                                             m
 see the problems at first hand.                                             I
 NIDOLESBOROUGH
Now relegated to the Third Division. Intelligence has identified 200
                                                                             i
trouble makers, instances have occurred where they have travelled to
ground two weeks prior to games to obtain tickets for the opposing
enc I osu res.
                                                                             I
NORWICH
Ground is completely dry. Problems have occurred in seated areas where
                                                                             I
fans have avoided segregation. Another area of concern were matches on
Bank Holiday week-ends, when fans were inclined to stay overnight. The
’Spotter System’ was used and recommended.
                                                                             I
OLDIL414
No major problems. All ticket arrangements with Leeds had not been
                                                                             I
successful. Also "Away fans" had avoided segregation by getting in seated
areas,                                                                       l
PLYleXJTH
Newly Promoted    There was a problem in identifying coach operators who
carry supporters to away matches because of the extremely wide catchment
                                                                             I
area,
~TSNOUIII
                                                                             I
The Conference discussed the intercept tactics used when Millwall played
at Portsmouth. Visting supporters had been stopped from approaching
Portsmouth by intercepting them on the M3. No Millwall fans had gained
                                                                             I
access. These tactics require good liaison with B.T.P. Both Mr. Evans
and Mr. Phillips had some reservations on this as a general strategy which
might create displacemmnt of the problem when turning back large numbers.
                                                                             i
There would need to be spectal circumstances.                                ¯
REAOING
No problems.

SNR~Y
                                                                             I
The use of CCTV was advocated. Video evidence had been used successfully
to obtain convictions. Good liaison with Middlesborough,had produced 30
plus arrests on video. On conviction the Magistrates had imposed fines of
                                                                             m
£2,000 plus. There was a "no ejections policy", all offenders being
arrested. Mr. Evans pointed out that if detained persons were subsequently
not charged this differed little from ejection.
                                                                             m
STOKE                                                                        II
Both crowds and arrests were reported to be well down. CCTV had been
particularly successful. The Conference was then informed of the
’Matchmates System’ which had been operating at Stoke for several years.
                                                                             i
The idea was to encourage young people and famtltes to attend matches by
involving them in pre-match activity. It was anticipated that efforts
                                                                             i
                                                                             l
                                       4-


                                                                             1
    would be made to widen the scope of the system to other clubs.
    SUNDERLAND
    Spotters had been used for specific games and had been successful. Some
    alcohol had been available at the grounds and had not caused a problem.
    The need for a statutory power of search on entry was raised.

    WEST BRONMICH ALBION
    No input.
    The meeting was adjourned unti] 9.00 am. Thursday 29th May 1986.

    Hr. Phillips opened the second meeting on Thursday 29th Nay 1986, with
    a review of the business of the ACPO Sub-Committee on Hooliganism at~
    Sporting Events.                                                   V


    The main (ssues discussed were :-
    ALCOHOL ACT
    Overall the effects of the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol) Act 1985
    appear to have been beneficial. Amendments to the Act contained in the
    Public Order Bill which widen its scope to cover private hire mini-coahces
    were welcomed and should be on the statute books for the start of the new
    season.

    It should also be noted that, as far as arrests indicated, control of
    alcohol at grounds had produced the same results as total bans.

    CCTV
    ~-e-use of CCTV had been pioneered through experiments at Edinburgh,
l   Hanchester and Birmingham and as a result the Sub-Committee had had aA
    major input by way of advice to both the Department of the Environmentan   dW
    the Football Trust regarding its installation and use. There was no
    standard package as it was recognised that each ground had its own special
m   features and each system had to be ground specific.
    The ’Hooltvan’ had produced limited results and the lack of speed in pan
    and tilt restricted its value. Whilst it may have had some preventative
    effect initially it was felt that this had quickly diminished. It was
    accepted that it was not designed for football and that its best use in
    relation to football was probably at static points such as bus and rail
    stations.
    IDENTIFICATION CARDS MI) SOIBES
    Members of the Sub-Committee had taken part in a Football League Working
    Group on Me~d~ershtp schemes which had concluded that total membership
m   schemes were feasible. This had confirmed the previously held ACPO view.
    It had also been noted that although in his interim report Nr. Justice
    Popplewe11 had recommended such schemes the final report recommended ’sow
    form’ of me~ershlp schemes. This fell into line with the ACPO vlewthat
m   inclusive or family club schemes should be encouraged.
                                          5-
There were several reasons why total schemes had been seen as unworkable
                                                                             I
but the most serious difficulty had been the problem of member               ¯
verification. Only the Police were in a position to verify the bona-fades    |
of applicants and determine who, because of convictions say, should be
excluded, but clearly such information was held confidentially.
It was noted that Luton Town are to introduce a total scheme for the
lgB6/B7 season and this would be watched with interest.
                                                                             m
                                                                             m

SEAROIIIIG

The Sub-Committee had frequently and consistently voiced their disquiet at
                                                                             I
the lack of a statutory power to search. They had been supported in their    mm
stance by Mr. Justice Popplewe11 in his final report although the            ¯mm
Government had as yet taken no action in respect of this recommendation.
Whilst the Football League had included searching as a condition of entry
in its Ground Regulations legal opinion was that Ground Regulations would    ¯
give little protection in law to the officers..
In addition to problems at grounds the lack of a power to search fans in
transit or at Railway Stations also caused difficulties.                     I
This matter is currently the subject of a review by the Sub-Committee as a
need had been identified for a move towards a common approach in respect
                                                                             I
of charges. It had been recognised that Football Clubs do talk to each
other and in times of financial hardship were looking at all ways of
cutting costs.
                                                                             I
The issue depended in part on the outcome of Harris -v- Sheffield United
F.C. which had gone to appeal.                                               I
SAFETY EVAI~TION
The need for the annual inspection of grounds covered by safety
                                                                             I
certificates had been strongly recommended by the Sub-Committee, this had
been endorsed by Mr. Justice Popplewe11 in his final report. There was ¯
also a need for an "expert" in each force who was fully aware of the
provisions of the Home Office Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (Green
Guide) to advise during the certification process. Mr. Phillips strongly
recommended annual inspection both as to grounds and stewarding.             |
 clAonVide° film of the Bradford fire was shown at this stage. At theI"
     uston Mr. Evans expressed the condolences of all the officers
present.

USE OF CCTY                                                                  ¯
Superintendent Callaghan gave an update on the use of CCTV in West
Yorkshire indicating that there had been noticeably fewer problems during
the season.      Troublemakers had been banned as a result of video
identification and many troublemakers had been identified at away grounds.
He then made several suggestions as points of good practice in the use of
                                                                             I
CCTV.
 1)Crowds should be ftlmed even if there is no trouble.
                                                                             I
This helps to form a pattern.
                                                                             I
                                      -6-
    2)For evidential purposes record all cameras simultaneously.
I   3)Take still photographs inside the ground.


I   4)Identification marks in grounds assist with exact locations.
    5)Disguise is now being used to avoid detection by video including
    fancy dress, face painting and multi-clothes swapping.
I   6)The lack of a retrospective power of arrest for Section 5 Public
    Order Act was a difficulty. The Sub Committee had pressed for this to be
I   included in the Public Order Bill and were supported by Popplewell but
    without success.
    7)Consider showing arresting officer the tape before he completes
    his evidence.
    8)Lighting at the rear of stands with flash facility, controlled
    by the officer in charge in the Police Control Box can be put
    on, and at times stops crowd reaction or disorder.

    Mr. Callaghan also said that research was required on tape cleaning for
    incidental purposes there was a need for a tape exchange system.

l   Mr. Phillips said the amended section in the ACPO guidelines would include
    guidance and CCTV and hoped to get together the best information on
    evidential use of film.
m   SEARCHING TACTICS

    Chief Superintendent Bruce, Cleveland Constabulary spoke on police
I   tactics, re searching. The system in Cleveland relies on accurate
    intelligence to institute stop check points to search for weapons in
    vehtcles etc., There was an urgent need for a statutory power to search

I   awayfr~m, grounds. Mr. Bruce then appraised the conference of the Publi~
    Order Intelligence Unit in Cleveland developed during the Miners’ dispute,~
    of one Inspector, two Sergeants and six Constables. Much use has been
    made of graphic displays.
!
    Chief Inspector Fttzstmmons, West Yorkshire, introduced the topic of
    sche(lultng of fixtures. Re-scheduling of fixtures at short notice had
    caused problems. Soe~ certificates dtd not include the provision of at
    least 28 days notice as per the following.
m   (t) "At least 28 days before a Specified Activity takes place(or
          such shorter time as the Chtef Constable may require) the
m         Holder shall notify the Chief Constable of the Speci ft ed
          Activity;"

    (tt)   The holder shall make an agreement on his behalf and on behalf
m          of                       premises
              the occupier of the under 515 Poltce Act 1964 to
           secure the attendance at the Specified Activity of such number
           of police officers as is In the opinion of the Chief Constable
m          sufficient to ensure decent and orderly behavloun at the
           Specl fted Actl vlty.


I                                         _7_
                                                                               I
                                                                    included
                                                                               I
        Mr. Phillips said that similar provisions had been
                                                                  that all
      in G.M.P. certificates and it was recommended
      certificates pay attention to this point.                                I
GROUND REGULATIONS
Superintendent Dawes, Hampshire Constabulary addressed the conference on
                                                                               I
standardisation of ground regulations. It would be beneficial if ground
regulations could be standardised allowing the possibility of ejecting for
any infringement. Home fans appear to accept control but visiting
supporters objected to the local ground rules. If the regulations were
                                                                               I
standardised all would know what to expect.
Mr. Evans said that common rules for the League had been achieved the
                                                                               I
problem had been that there was no uniformity of enforcement. There was
often a case for ejecting people who had contravened ground regulations
but whose behaviour had fallen short of an actual offence. Such action
could often prevent the spread of trouble. He recommended officers be made
                                                                               I
aware of ground regulations through briefings.
INTELLIGENCE FORM - CENTRAL CLEARING IN)USE
                                                                               I
Superintendent Stuart, South Yorkshire, then spoke on the intelligence
form and the possibility of a central clearing house. The ACPO form was        I
effective if properly completed, but honesty was needed with the
interchange of information at liaison officer level. If the intelligence
was inaccurate the result was either a waste or a shortage of manpower.        I
He then identified the problems of "crossroads", specially in the
Yorkshire area, where the travelling fans meet at service and other areas,
resulting in disorder.
                                                                               I
A general discussion ensued on the intelligence system.
                                                                               I
A member referred to the use of CS gas sprays which he had discovered by
chance and which a clearing house would have identified. Mr. Phillips      m
said the idea of a Central Clearing House had been looked at but basically
it was only the receiving Force who required day to day intelligence (i.e.
numbers, modes f travel). The ACPO requirement ~ for such unusual m
incidents to I~ reported to the Sub-Committee, r discussion and
dtsemmtnatton by them to all interested parties.

Concern was expressed at long delays in the despatch of post match m
summaries. The need for prompt completion and dispatch was highlighted.
It was emphasized that the quality of pre-match intelligence was often
dependant on accurate recent post match intelligence. There was also a
need for close co-operation between liaison officers.
                                                                               m
 USE OF SPOTTERS                                                               I
 Chief Superintendent Harrison, Hampshire updated the meeting on the
  ’Spotters System as used at Portsmouth. Travelling Spotters had been used~
 at 13 of the 24 away matches plaLYed by Portsmouth and they have been able
 to provide accurate pre-match Intelligence to identify problems in areas-
                                                                               I
 other than the ground. There were now stx clubs in the     second Otvtston m
 and two in the First operating a spotter system.

                                       -8-
I   The problem of costs was raised and it was suggested that the system could
    be cost effective if the pre-match intelligence enabled the correct level

I   of policing.

    Mr. Evans whilst supportive of the principle said there could be other
    difficulties as he was aware of Chief Constables constraints in allowing
I   officers to travel. There followed a general discussion on this item
    which concluded that there was a need for guidelines on the use of
    spotters. Mr. Phillips said that he would look at the matter further.

I   LI~ITISH TIPJAJqSPORT POLICE
    fan McGregor, Assistant Chief Constable, Operations BTP, gave a
l   presentation with video of the rote of the B.T.P. emphasizing the point
    that British Rail was a commercial organisation. He also outlined the
    intelligence role of the B.T.P both nationally and for games played abroad
                                                                                      @
l   on the question of travelling by spotters In uniform. He was of the
    opinion that this could result in some conflict and felt only BTP officers
    should be in uniform on trains.

n   Mr. McGregor thanked A8 and all forces For their co-operation.



m                                                                Points raised were
    Mr. Evans then opened the meeting for general debate.
    as follows :-

I   1)It had been noted that although the alcohol legislation had proved
    beneficial to some extent it had the effect of displacing the problem in
    that many fans now arrived earlier and travelled into cities for drink
    before returning to grounds.
    2) It was felt that as crowds reduced there was potentialclubs for which crowd
    disorder and therefore to police problems increased. Those
l   had been relegated felt third and four division representatives should be
    invited to these conferences.

l   3)The problem of evacuation was discussed. It was accepted that under
    most circumstances the police would take control. Mr. Phillips referred
    the meeting to the Green Guide Code and evacuation plans and the standard
    message for evacuation at sporting event.
    Mr. Evans summarised the meeting and reminded the members that the ACPO
                          Hooliganism at Sporting Events contained one
l    Sub-Committee
     representative °~rom each Region and they should know their own
     representative. On behalf of the delegates he gave his thanks to Mr.
     Phillips and Chief Inspector Jennings for their input and especially to
     Chief Superintendent Harrison, by whose efforts the Conference had been
     originated.
     Thanks were also expresed to the Peel Centre Staff for their hospitality.

     The meeting closed with lunch.




l
I
I                    NOTES OF TilE IEETII~ OF FIRST 9IVISION FOO’IBN.L
                               POLICE ~$ AM) LIAISON OFFICERS
I                         HELl) AT SURREY COflSTMUI~¥ 11~IllINg

I                            ON TUESOAYiqdEI)IESi)AYt 9/10111! JImlEt 1987.


I
    o~.


m                The meeting was chaired by J.S. Evans Esq., Deputy Chief Constable,

          Surrey Constabulary and d.D. Phillips Esq., Assistant Chief Constable,
m~
          Greater Hanchester Police performed the duties of Secretary.

I
I               Attendance was in accordance wtth the attached list. All clubs in


I         the First Otvtsion were represented at the meeting.



I
          1. Open|n9 kklms
I
                Mr. Evans opened the meeting and welcomed all present. He asked

m                                                   reports, to include the
          representatives, when making their seasonal
          following:-

I
                 (a) membership schemes
I
I                (b) intelligence



I                (c) C.C.T.V.


I
I                                                   -1-
                                                                               m
        (d)    spotters                                                        |
        (e)    problems                                                        m
        (f)    any changes to be recommended
                                                                               m
                                                                               m
2. Liaison Officer Reports
                                                                               l
        Contributions were made on behalf of all clubs on the 1986/7 season,

the main points of interest being as follows:-
                                                                               m
                                                                               m
      (a)It~rshlp Schemes - progress achieved in the required preparation

        of membership schemes varied from a full scheme in force all last      m
        season (Luton) to no start made (Tottenham, Coventry and Arsenal).
                                                                               m
        Luton, who have a no away supporters policy, and a 100% home
        membership scheme, reported being able to reduce manpower levels

        at games four times during the season to an eventual figure of 41
         (inside and outside the ground). However, membership cards did

        fall into the wrong hands and it was agreed that photographs were
        essential on such cards to assist in this problem.Some clubs           I
        had set up schemes which complied with League guidelines(Manchester
                                                                               m


        United, Everton, Leicester) whilst others were in negotiation          !
        with the ’Appeals Group’ set up by the Football League (Aston
                                                                               m
                                                                               m
         Villa, Liverpool).



(b)      Intelligence - it was generally agreed thatintelligence fell into
                                                                               !
        two distinct types:-                                                   m
                                       -2-
I         (i) match information, such as the number of coaches and
          spectators expected to travel and, the history and
I         importance of the fixture.

I         (ii) intelligence about known trouble causers and, their

I         plans and methods.


          In all cases match information was found to be excellent but many


I         representatives found the latter type of intelligence to be
          insufficient (Norwich, West Ham, Derby, Nottingham Forest,

I         Sheffield Wednesday, Coventry, Aston Villa). Because the police
          had become more effective in policing within grounds, it was felt
I         that some of the problems had been displaced and were occurring

          away from grounds whilst ’fans’ were in transit. It was generally
I         agreed that this area of intelligence also required increased

          attention.



    (c)   C.C.T.V. -generally agreed to have had a positive effect on

          reducing crowd disorder within grounds. However, problems with

          the systems installed in grounds were identified - not enough for
          identifications (Newcastle), cameras wear out quickly (Oxford),

          only black and white (Tottenham, Nottingham Forest). It was
          suggested that installed systems could be supple~nted by the

          ’Evidence Gathering Cameras’ (Southa~N~ton), or hand held video
I
          camera and still cameras (Arsenal, Tottenham). One club
          (Leicester) used the city centre cameras, installed for monitoring
I
          traffic flows, in connection with the movement of football
          supporters through the city.         This had received much local

          publicity and was accepted. Another club (Nottingham Forest) had
I                                        -3-
      sought to use this facility, but had been refused permission.



(d)   Spotters - the use of spotters, both overt and covert, was            I
      welcomed by almost all representatives. It was agreed that

      spotters should not be sent without the authority of the ground
                                                                            I
      commander of the host club, but increased use was seen as having      I
      a positive effect on policing disorder. ’Please send me your
      spotters, I would love to accommodate them’ (Arsenal). ’Covert        I
      operations have resulted in a 100% manning reduction at matches’

      (West Ham).
                                                                            I
                                                                            I
(e)   Pitch Invasions - seen as a problem by some clubs (Coventry,

      Charlton, Q.P.R.) and not by others (Arsenal, Watford, West Ham)      I
      who do not have any pitch perimeter fencing. After discussion, it

      was agreed that whether perimeter fencing should or should not be
                                                                            I
      installed was a local decision to be made after considering the
                                                                            I
      ground conditions and the experience of fan behaviour. However,
      it was generally agreed that pitch invasions should be stopped as     I
      they has the potential to degenerate to major disorder.
                                                                            I
(f)   Evacuklt|On - evacuation exercises were practiced at some grounds
      (Manchester United, Everton, Liverpool) where public announcements
                                                                            I
      are made, emergency bells checked and all evacuation doors opened     I
      and checked by police. This does not involve the actual evacuation

      of the ground, but tests the mechanical parts of the system. At       I
      most grounds certain police officers are issued with universal lock

      keys. Leicester reported on the electrically operated exit gate
                                                                            I
      system and exercises which are practiced there with the fire and      I
      ambulance services to test call-out times.
                                                                            I
                                     -4-
                                                                            I
    (g)   Fixture Problms - one ground (Aston Villa) was selected to host a
I         cup semi-final when this was inappropriate because of extended

i         roadworks, but there was no consultation with the police prior to

          the decision, Mr. Phillips explained that the League had agreed

I         to consult the police on all matters affecting them. If the League

          were not complying with this agreement then he should be informed

          of the circumstances and he would take up the matter with them. A
          number of clubs had postponed games at short notice, leaving the

          police with the problem of officers working rest days unnecessarily.

I         It was felt that costs resulting from short notice cancellations

          should be billed to the club.
I
I   (h)   NfscellaMous - many representatives reported pressure from clubs

          to reduce manpower levels. Mr. Phillips pointed out that it was a

I         condition of the General Safety Certificate that the responsibility

          to decide on manpower levels was the Chief Constable’s.

I
          Although searching was undertaken by officers at every game (Q.P.R.)
          the fans were becoming more devious in hiding weapons on their

I         person. Some clubs use metal detectors (Chelsea, West Ham) and
          weapons have been found dumped outside the grounds.

I
          At one club (Arsenal) ticket sales were a11owed immediately after a
m         game, this was not recommended as both sets of fans mingled whilst

I         trying to purchase these tickets with obvious disorder potential.




          A.C.P.O. Update On Current Events



i                                       -   5-
       Mr. Phillips suggested that the past season appeared to have been a

better season than we had experienced for some time. However, it was

difficult to judge and arrest statistics were not to be regarded as an index

of the problem      they may merely reflect a change in the acceptable
behaviour threshold.     Policing football is becoming more effective as

C.C.T.V. and better intelligence start to pay off. Organised football
hooliganism is still there, using football as a scenario for a kind of war

game and developing strategies to out-manoevre the police. Atmosphere was

the critical factor and perhaps the next stage was to stop concerted
offensive chanting and posturing and break up the hooligan groups.         The

problem of football is fundamentally a criminal problem and therefore one

for the police.



(a)     Finance - Mr. Phillips described this as an "iceberg" issue as the

        enormous cost continued to rise - particularly in Regulation 26 and
        27 overtime. Whatever the circumstances only a small part would be

        recovered from clubs and then , in most forces, this did not
        translate directly into funds available to be spent on overtime.


        The financial issue was of growing concern to Police, Police
                                                                                       m
        Authorities and no doubt auditors. There was little police control

        over fixtures and programmes and we were being asked to police                 I
         football to higher levels out of existing resources.                    The

        opportunity cost of not doing routine policing and depleted night              i
           shifts was becoming unsupportable.
                                                                                       I

                                                                                       m
 (b)    Inte11I~e - Mr. Phillips pointed out that at the Second                        m
        Division Conference the representatives held strong vie~ about the
                                                                                       m
                                       o. o                                            m
          importance of increasing the level and content of intelligence. He

          agreed that there were two levels of intelligence and that the
I         second level was an area in need of considerable expansion. The

I         probloms had spread from the grounds, sometimes into city centres

          many miles from the clubs involved, and often police commanders

I         were unaware of the problems their team’s supporters were creating

          whilst away from home. There were strong arguments for a National

          Football Intelligence Ceil as the football hooligan is involved in
          much more than just football disorder.



    (c)   Spotters - There had been a very enthusiastic response from the

          Second Division Conference for the use of spotters. However, as
I
          they were of more use to the host Force, he felt that reciprocity


I         was only fair. The practice was discussed in line with document
          "Pol i ci ng Foot hal I".

I
    (d)   C.C.T.V.- Mr. Phillips argued that the primary use of C.C.T.V.
I         inside grounds was for evidence and intelligence gathering. In
          this regard it was better to cover the critica~l 25°/o of the ground
          effectively than to try to cover all the ground and finish up with

          poor quality recordings,          insufficient for evidence and

          intelligence purposes. He pointed out that the Football Trust may

          have money available for the enhancement of existing systems and

          that he would write in this respect. The use of video recording
I
          was to be extended to Third and Fourth Division Clubs.          A11
          representatives from both conferences found that C.C.T.V. had had a
          marked impact on crowd behaviour.




I
                                                                               m
(e)    Pollce Costs - A synopsis of methods of costing had been circulated
                                                                               m
       to all Forces. This matter was being further discussed by               I
       A.C.P.O..       Such problems as cancelled fixtures, short notice

       games and play-offs were discussed.
                                                                               I
(f)    Documents - two recent documents had been circulated:-
                                                                               m
                                                                               I
      (i)"Directory     of Coach Operators", which will shortly be updated.

             Proprietors had been made aware of the regulations and if
                                                                               m
             operators were not adhering to them, evidence of this should      I
             be forwarded to Mr. Phillips when he would take the matter up

             with the Traffic Commissioners.                                   m
              "Policing Football", (guidance on policing) was circulated and
                                                                               m
      (ii)
             will be included in the "mini" Public Order Manual in due
                                                                               I
             course,
             It will be subjected to annual review and views on the document   I
             were requested.
                                                                               I
(g)   Power of Search - Mr. Phillips explained that there were no routine

      powers under P.A.C.E. and that the legal opinion he had obtained was
                                                                               m
      that the widely accepted ’power’ under the Ground Regulations would      I
      give little protection in law. He explained that the Home Office

      had been pressed on the point but suggested that if there was a          m
      problem in this respect the police should provide evidence of it.

      In effect, until our practice was successfully challenged, nothing
                                                                               m
      further could be done.                                                   m
                                                                               m
I
I   (h)    Permanent Correspondents - Each country in the E.E.C. had now

           appointed a "permanent correspondent" to advise the appropriate

I          police contact of any club in his country involved overseas.




    4. Exclusion Orders


           Inspector Harrison, Greater Manchester Police, gave details of the

    legislation and procedure to be adopted in recording and retrieving current

I   exclusion orders and the process of termination of such orders. Details

    of this procedure will be circulated.
I
I   5. C.C.T.V.

I
           At last year’s Football Conference, Mr. Phillips indicated that he

    would approach Mr. Anderton (Chairman of the Hooliganism at Sporting Events
    Sub-Committee), with a view to establishing a Working Party into the

    Police Use of Video Evidence. Members of that Working Party were present

I   to answer any questions from those present, they also showed a video

    explaining their work and produced a written section in the A.C.P.O.
I   Document ’Pollcing’.


I          Detective Inspector Ross, West Midlands Police, gave a presentatlon

I   of his enquiry Into the public disorder during the Birmingham -v- Leeds

    match on the llth, may, 1985.

I
I
                                          -g-
I
                                                                              I
       Mr. James Aldridge (S.R.D.B.) asked for feedback on the C.C.T.V.       I
systems installed in the various grounds to help him ascertain a standard

to compare other systems with.      The early advice offered by S.R.D.B.,     I
although supported on technical grounds by Mr. Aldridge, was not considered

practical       by ground commanders. He also asked for the impressions of
                                                                              I
those present of the hoolivan. The reaction was almost totally negative       I
and several (West Midlands, Metropolitan, Greater Manchester) advised Mr.

A1dridge that they had forwarded evaluation reports to the S.R.D.B. about     I
the hoolivan.
                                                                              l
                                                                              I
6. Nembershlp Schemes
                                                                              I
       Mr. Phillips      highlighted some of the problems connected with

                        - the casual supporter; closely located teams;
                                                                                  i
membership schemes

checking applicants;      multiple memberships; multiple applications using
                                                                              I
different names; turnstile checking; derby games.           The Police had

expressed concern as to the viability of the 100°/o schemes in many areas     I
and the 50°/o scheme had now been agreed. This may not be without merit
and if the clubs take up the spirit of the scheme it could help to create a
                                                                              I
better atmosphere in grounds. Whether it works or not, is out of the
hands of the police, but it should be given every support. The present
                                                                              I
scheme does not apply to away support (a management consultancy firm is       I
examining such a scheme at the moment) and so in 12 months the whole

system may have to be revised. Mr. Phillips pointed out that 14 points of     I
guidance for membership schemes had been circulated to Forces from Greater
Manchester Police, but because of the general lack of knowledge of this
                                                                              I
displayed by the representatives, further copies were distributed at the      I
meeting. Mr. Phillips argued that photographs on the membership cards
                                                                              I
                                       - 10-                                  I
I
i   were essential and if Forces were finding that membership schemes were


I   being set up without photographs or contrary to the other points of

    guidance then he would write to the Department of the Environment pointing

I   out that the system needed tightening up.


I          Mr. A.Norbury (F.8 Division, Home Office) suggested that the police


I   should be aware of the possibility of the Football League using their

    response, if too negative, as an excuse for not complying with membership

I   s chemes.


I
           He also warned that Home Office legal opinion was that some
I   conditions in General Safety Certificates were ’ultra vires’ and that such


I   conditions should be directly related to safety.



I
       Intelligence Gathering




            These inputs were received wlth much enthusiasm by the conference
    and there was a good deal of interest and discussion.



    8. Travel 11 n9 Fans                                                       I
           Inspector Temporal, British Transport Police, gave a synopsis of    I
    the season, stressing the increasing use of video recording at railway

    stations and showed a video tape to stress the point.
                                                                               I
                                                                               I
    g. Conclusions                                                             I
           Mr. Evans summarised the main points which had emerged during the
                                                                               I
           conference.                                                         I
            (a) Most      ground commanders agreed that the information
                                                                               i
o
                  about, and identification of, travelling hooligans

                  supplied by away spotters, provided an invaluable
                                                                               I
                  aid to the policing of matches. Many examples were

                  quoted of spotters being able to identify their own
                                                                               I
                  club’s hooligan element resulting in either arrests          I
                  for offences already committed or preventative police

                  action. It was agreed that the following points were
                                                                               i
                  important:-
                                                                               !
                  (i)       increased use of spotters;


                   (ti)     as the use of spotters is primarily of value to    I
                            the host Force (i.e. not the Force supplying the
                            spotters) there is a need for reciprocity if the
                                                                               I
                                             - 12 -
                                                                               I
                                                                               I
I
I                system is to succeed;


I        (iii) ground commanders of the host force must be

I                 informed prior to the match and consent to the

                 attendance of away spotters.
I
i   (b) There   are two levels of intelligence:-

l       (i)      match information such as numbers attending,

I                vehicles to be used etc., and


!       (ii)     hooligan intelligence, known trouble makers


I               attending, weapons carried, flash points in

                transit, plans for violence etc.

I
        It was agreed that the provision of (i) was excellent,

        but (ii) was insufficient. Because of the displacement

        effect of the more effective policing of grounds, there

        was a tendency for trouble to be caused by fans in transit,

I       often in towns or areas far from the natural route between

        the two clubs. To collate, evaluate and disseminate this

I       nationwide intelligence it was generally suggested that a

        National Intelligence Ceil was required. It may also act
I       as a clearing house for exclusion orders.

I
i
I                                 - 13 -
                                                                              I
                                                                              I
                                                                              i
              Most C.C.T.V. operators at football grounds had only the
        (d)
              skills obtained by frequent use of the equipment. They did
                                                                              I
              not have the skills or knowledge necessary to obtain good
              evidential coverage if disorder should occur. A training
                                                                              I
              course was required to redirect the attention of these          I
              operators away from overall pictures of crowds towards
              objective intelligence gathering in normal circumstances
                                                                              i
              and evidence gathering and identifications in circumstances
              of public disorder.
                                                                              I
                                                                              I
        (e)   The annual conferences for the First and Second Divisions       I
              were warmly supported and it was agreed that they should be

              continued.        There was also a strong recommendation from
                                                                              I
              those present that a similar facility should be afforded the    !
              Third and Fourth Divisions.
                                                                              I
       Mr. Evans closed the meeting and thanked all those present for their

attendance and participation.




                                       - 14 -
I                       MOTES OF THE ~I~ OF SECOND DIVISION FOOTBALL LEkGIJE

I                               POLICE ~ I LI~ OFFICERS
                          HELD AT GRJU~ NICIESTER POLICE ~HIIG

i                                    ~AY/FRIDAY~ Z8/~ MY~ 1967

                     The meeting was chaired by J.D. Phillips Esq., Assistant Chief
              Constable, Greater Manchester Police and Chief Inspector Appleby of
              Greater Hanchester Police performed the duties of Secretary.
I                     Attendance was in accordance with the list circulated at the
              meeting. The only club not represented was Brighton (relegated from
              Division 2), however both Hanchester City (relegated to Division 2) and

I             Bournenmuth (promoted to Division 2) had representatives at the meeting.

              z. opeat j Address
i
                      Hr. Phillips opened the meeting and welcomed all present. Fie asked
i             the Club Liaison Officers, when Itng their contribution, to include the
              following points:-

        --"   (a)     the method used for calculating police costs payable by the club;

              (b)     the effectiveness of the present intelligence system;

              (c)     any problems caused by the new plq-off system,

    I         2. Llalr, om Officer

                     All Club Liaison Officers present reported on their experiences of
               the 1986/7 season, the Itn points of interest being as follows:-

I              (a)    Poltce Charges - the methods of fixing poltce charges were as
                      various as the number of Police Forces involved. Some clubs use a
I                     seasonally agreed formula (Grimby), a periodically agreed manpower
                      level (Stoke) or an attendance figure ratio (West BroItch Albion).

l                     A nler of others categortse matches dependent on the opposition
                      and charge accordingly. One club (Derby) has its policing bills

I                     payed by the local authority and another (Mtllwall) also receives
      considerable financial assistance from its own authority. Two
                                                                            I
      clubs (Sheffield United and Portsmouth) have declined to pay for
      police duties for some time, but in the former case the High Court
                                                                            I
      have found them liable.
                                                                            m
      No matter what system of calculating the charges was adopted it was
      generally agreed that these charges went nowhere near to reflecting   I
      the actual costs of the police presence at football matches, and
      (bearing in mind the parlous financial state of some football
      clubs) a move towards a more accurate charging system should be
                                                                            I
      initiated.
                                                                            m
(b)   Inte11|gence - Chief Inspector Hoskins (Metropolitan) made the
      point that there are two levels of football intelligence, (i)
      number of coaches/supporters attending from visiting club and (ii)
      anticipation of trouble in transit, city centres, particular public   m
      houses, etc. It was generally agreed that the content and accuracy
      of (I) above was very good except in the instance of specific and
      known clubs (Leeds, Portsmouth, Millwall) where the hooligan
                                                                            m
      element refuse to conform to agreed routes and coach proprietors,
      These ’fans’ usually travel by transit vans, ’rebel’ coaches or by
                                                                            mm
      rail, entering or leaving the train some distance from where they
      would be monitored by police. The actions of this element fall
                                                                            m
                                                                            l
      into (ii) above and it is in this area that the available             m
      intelligence was not considered to be of sufficient quantity and          ~
      qual i ty.




(d)   C.C.T.V. - almost all liaison officers commented favourably on the
      effects of their C.C.T.V. system on the roudy element within their
             grounds. Many instances of arrests supported by video evidence
             were given, but the most striking effects on crowd behaviour were
             seen at those grounds where C.C.T.V. had most recently been

m            installed (Ipswich, Bradford, Blackburn, Plymouth, Grimby),
             indicating a possible ’honeymoon’ effect, A number of clubs
             (Millwa11, Derby, Huddersfield, Leeds, 01dham and Bimingham)
             forward video recordings of their own known hooligans 1:o clubs they
             are visiting. This was seen as especially helpful.


             In contrast, the ’hoolivan’ received a negative response, except as
I            a visible deterrent in areas known for disorder, such as city
             centres.


       (e)   Plo~f-offs - the officers representing clubs involved in the new
             pl~y-off system of promotion and relegation had found the games
             required special policing because of the emotive implications of
             the results. All the games had to be treated as top grade fixtures
             with the consequent police manpower and financial implications.
             Mr. Phillips pointed out that this system of play-offs had been
m            orgenlsed without anyconsultation with the police and as the
             Football League received 50% of the gate receipts, it may be that
  \J
l            the full costs of policing these fixtures should be borne by the
             League.

             Two clubs (Crystal Palace, Birmingham) had experienced further
             problams with the play-offs. Neither club was directly involved,
i            but both their grounds had been selected for the ’finals’. At
             Crystal Palace no consultations had taken place with the police and
             the game had been arranged for a Friday night, a night that is
             never used for games because of joint car parking arrangements with

I            a local supermarket. At Bimingham-the ticket allocation was split
             50:50, giving 12,500 to both Leeds and Charlten fans, although
             Leeds alone requested 30,000.
I            All ticket mt~s- the stipulation of an a11 ticket match does
       (f)
i            not help policing unless a capacil~y crowd attends. Often tickets
             are obtained by one team’s fans for areas reserved for the other

I            team’s fans with the consequent policing preblms. To reduce this
      problem it is essential to police the ticket sales at both outlets.
      For the first game of the season, 2/3,000 Leeds supporters arrived
      at the Blackburn ground without tickets and because of the public
      disorder potential were allowed in. This set the tone for the
      season for these fans and they frequently arrived at away grounds       I
      in large numbers without money or tickets in an attempt to force        II
      the police ground commander into allowing them admittance. The          m
      meeting agreed that this was a difficult situation to resolve, but      ~m~

      felt that a firm stand should be taken and entry refused, the           mm
      consequent problems outside the ground being resolved by prior
      planning. The police must be seen to ’win’ in these situations,         m
                                                                              m
(g)   Late kick-offs - another situation where supporters were seen to be
      forcing the police into taking action against their better
      judgement. It has become increasingly apparent that large numbers        m
      of spectators are arriving extremely late at the groud, this may be     I
      related to the restricted access to alcohol in grounds and the
      prohibition on taking alcohol into grounds. Because of the              m
      potential for disorder amongst those waiting entry, police ground
      commanders have occasionally requested that the kick-off be             m
      delayed. It was the opinion of the meeting that this pressure           m
      should not be acceded to in future, the police should not be            m
      dictated to by supporters.                                              l

(h)   Turnstile searching - there was no pattern adopted by Forces in         1
      searching at turnstiles, some did it routinely at every match,
      whilst others did it at specific matches and yet others hardly at       II
                                                                               im
      all. There was some confusion as to what powers the police had for
      conductlng such searches and Mr. Phil11 ps explai ned that there were
      none under P.A.C.E. and that in his opinion, the widely accepted
      ’power’ under the Ground Regulations would give little protection
      in law. He explained that the Home Office had been pressed for a
      ruling but refused to be drawn, suggesting that if there was a
      problem in this respect the police should provide evidence of it.




                                   -4-
               (i)       Nt scellaneous:

                         Crystal Palace and Reading use dedicated staff at football matches
                         and the former has a special overtime allocation for policing
                         footbal 1.


                         Stoke had the problem of fans hiring vans from firms many miles
                         away to travel to away games, thus avoiding the intelligence
    m                    system.

                         South Yorkshire had problems with fans in transit using MI
                         services, but pointed out that vehicles turned back must be
                         policed.

                        Portsmouth warn the players, referee and officials before the game
                        that any misbehaviour on the pitch will result in that player being
                        arrested or ejected, either at half or full time. West Bromwich
                        Albion do the same but would only take action after the match.


I                       Birmingham had found that hooligans were now paying for the most
                        expensive seats where policing was at its lightest.

                         Ipswich insist on a stewards’ handbook.

m       ....


                         Reading had a membership scheme operated by a magnetic card to open
                         gates. However, technical problems and lack of publicity made it
i                        dlfflcult to work.


!                        Bradford found that the hooligans had studied police tactics and
                         realtsed that after the poltce horses followed the crowd, no more
                         poltce officers were about. They then re-appeared and created
I                        disorder.

m                    Exclustem Orders

                        Inspector Harrison, Greater Manchester Police, gave details of the
               legislation and procedure to be adopted in recording and retrieving current




                                                    - 5-
exclusion orders and the process of termination of such orders. Details of
this procedure will be circulated.
                                                                               I
4.   A.C.P.O. Document ’Pol|cin9 Football ’
                                                                               !
         Mr. Philips explained that the section in the A.C.P.O. Public Order
                                                                               i
Manual headed ’Football Hooliganism’ had been re-written, and that it was
his intention that this document should be updated annually. All present       i
were given a copy of the re-written section for their perusal.


5. C.C.T.V.
                                                                               i
        At last year’s Football Conferences, Mr. Phillips indicated that he
                                                                               I
would approach Mr. Anderton (Chairman of the Hooliganism at Sporting Events
Sub-Committee), with a view to establishing a Working Party into the Police    I
Use of Video Evidence. Members of that Working Party were present to
answer any questions from those present, they also showed a video              I
explaining their work and produced a written section in the A.C.P.O.
Document ’Policing Football’.                                                  I
Detective Inspector Ross, West Midlands Police, gave a presentation of his
enquiry into the public disorder during the Birmingham -v- Leeds match on
the 11th May, 1985.


.6. Nmbersh|p Schemes

         Mr. Phillips explained that the Government and Football League had
agreed a 50% of capacity membership scheme without consulting the police.
However, all schemes must be ground specific and each club had been asked
to submit their proposed plan to the Football League after consultation
with the local police. Some clubs were proposing to go ahead without
photographs on the membership cards, which would only mean that a
legitimate card has entered the ground, not necessarily a legitimate
carrier. Police Forces should pressure clubs insisting on membership cards
with photographs.      To assist the membership scheme, the Football
Association had agreed to change its rules regarding the a11ocation of
                                                                               I
                                                                               mm

tickets for F.A. Cup ties. Until the schemes had been produced and had         I
been seen in use next season, little more could be said, but the situation




                                         -6-
        required careful monitoring to avoid unenforceable schemes being foisted on
        police and spectators at the start of next season.


i       7. Travelling Fans


m               Inspector Temporal, British Transport Police, gave a synopsis of
        the season, stressing the inreastng use of video recording at railway
        stations, and showing a video tape to stress the point.
I


!
!
I

    r




!
I
I
I
I
1
I                                          _ "/ _
                                                                              I
        Since the inception of P.A.C.E., Mr. Phillips suggested,
interrogation evidence had to be replaced by ’caught in the act’ evidence,
                                                                              i
which was ideally suited to C.C.T.V. He accepted the distinction between
recognition (picking out somebody you already know) and identification        I
(picking out somebody only previously seen once and for a short time), and
agreed that we should concentrate on recognitions from video recordings of
disorder at football.
                                                                              I
        There was a strongly identfied need from m~mbers of the meeting for
                                                                              !
training of C.C.T.V. operators. Mr. Phillips thought that the Working
Party might look at this area and come up with a training package.            I
        Mr. Phillips asked the meeting whether they had found it useful and   I
whether it should be continued. There was a strong positive reaction to
both enquiries, the only criticism being that their own inputs had taken      m
too long.

        Mr. Phillips closed the meeting and thanked all those present for
                                                                              !
their attendance and participation.
                                                                              I
                                                                              !
                                                                              !
                                                                              I
                                                                              I



                                     -8-
I                        FIRST DIVISION FOOTBALL LIAISON OFFICERS’

I                                  SEMINAR 1987/88 SEASON
                                RAF CARDINGTON, BEDFORDSHIRE

l                                     IST/2ND JUNE 1988



    LIST OF PARTICIPANTS                                    FORCE

    Deputy Chief Constable J.S. EVANS                       Surrey
    Assistant Chief Constable J.D. PHILLIPS                 Greater Manchester
    Chief Superintendent M. BRIGGS                          Metropolitan
    Constable R. COLLISON                                   Metropolitan
    Chief Superintendent A.W. NEWLANDS                      Metropolitan
    Inspector JAMES                                         Metropolitan
    Superintendent D. MARTIN                                Metropolitan
    Constable D. CONNOR                                     Metropolitan
    Chief Inspector D. MATHIESON B.E.M.                     Metropolitan
    Constable BUTLER                                        Metropolitan
    Chief Inspector JORDAN                                  Metropolitan
    Sergeant BELL                                           Metropolitan
    Chief Inspector BOELRIJK                                Metropolitan
    Chief Inspector K. FOSTER                               Metropolitan
    Sergeant~                                               Metropolitan
    Chief Superintendent R.J. MELLER                        West Midlands
    Inspector BOULTON                                       West Midlands
    Constable                                               West Midlands
    Superintendent P. CLAY                                  West Midlands
    Superintendent G.W. BIRCH                               West Midlands
    Chief Inspector M.W. BROMWICH                           West Midlands
    Sergeant                                                West Midlands
    Chief Inspector M. ROSS                                 West Midlands
    Chief Superintendent A.E. ROBERTS                       Greater Manchester
    Sergeant                                                Greater Manchester
    Chief Inspector A. APPLEBY                              Greater Manchester
    Inspector P.J. HAMMOND                                  Greater Manchester
    Inspector H. F/TON                                      Greater Manchester
    Inspector A. PROVOOST                                   Greater Manchester
    Constable S. LLOYD                                      Greater Manchester
    Sergeantl                                               Surrey


!
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS                      FORCE


Mr. A. FORD                               Home Office
Inspector D.W. TEMPORAL                   British Transport
Superintendent I. MEE                     Derbyshire
Sergeant I         [                      Derbyshire
Constable[                                Derbyshire
Superintendent A.N. THOMPSON              Hampshire
Inspector PAYNE                           Northamptonshire
Constable l                               Northampton
Chief Superintendent A. BRUCE             Cleveland
ConstableI                                Cleveland
Chief Superintendent M.F.HOLFORD Q.P.M.   Nottinghamshire
Constable                                 Nottinghamshire
Chief Superintendent N. FRANKLAND         Merseyside
Inspector A. POPE                         Merseyside
Superintendent B. ELTRINCHAM              Northumbria
Constable                                 Northumbria
Chief Inspector D. BEAL                   South Yorkshire
Constable[                                South Yorkshire
Superintendent T.A.   MAXIM               Norfolk
Constable                                 Norfolk
Chief Superintendent G. SPALDING Q.P.M.   Bedfordshire
Superintendent BROWN                      Bedfordshire
                 NOTES 0FTHE MEETING OF IST DIVISION FOOTBALL LEAGUE
                         POLICE COMMANDER AND LIAISON OFFICERS
                        HELD AT R.A.F. CARDINGTON, BEDFORDSHIRE
                       ON WEDNESDAY/THURSDAY IST/2ND JUNE, 1988

The meeting was chaired by J.S. Evans Esq., Deputy Chief Constable, Surrey
Constabulary and Assistant Chief Constable J.D. Phillips, Greater Manchester
Police, performed the duties of Secretary.


The only club not represented was West Ham United.        Watford, Portmouth and
Chelsea (relegated from Division i). However, Middlesbrough, Aston Villa and
Millwall (promoted to Division i) had representatives at the meeting.

I.       Opening Address


         Mr. Evans opened the meeting, welcomed all present and introduced Chief
         Constable A. Dyer, Bedfordshire Constabulary.


         Mr. Dyer welcomed everyone to the meeting. He emphasised the need to
         critically examine the current method of policing football matches and
         expressed his disappointment in the lack of support and evidence given to
         the Luton Scheme which had been successful in diminishing the hooliganism
         element in the ground and in the town on match days at Luton, and asked
         for officers at the meeting to carefully consider whether the present
         method of policing football matches was right.       He conveyed his good
         wishes and hoped it would be a good meeting.


         Mr. Evans thanked Mr. Dyer for his warm welcome. He stated that the past
         season had been uncontraversial apart from the play-offs at the end of the
         season and the result of the trials of the covert operations in London.
         This presented a need for the police to address the way the hooliganism
         problem associated with football was policed, and gave an outline of the
         programme agenda which appeared to answer this point.


     .
         Update of the A.C.P.0. Sub-Committee Meetings on Hooli~ulism at
         Sporting Events

         Mr. Phillips related to the minutes of the last meeting. The first point
         concerned an examination of the membership scheme and alternatives like
         the Luton scheme.
    He referred to John Williams of the research group at Leicester University
    studying these methods and pointed out the merits and disadvantages of the
    alternatives to the present system. He pointed out that the problems of
    football hooliganism did not only relate to this country, but to other
    European countries and even in China and Russia.


    Mr. Phillips then expanded upon the options to policing football, i.e.,
    continued containment and its cost; a far greater level of enforcement and
    attacking target hooligans and gangs through intelligence methods, rather
    than accept and condone the present standard of belligerance; the Luton
    Scheme with exclusion of away supporters. Other points being considered
    by the Sub-Committee were the membership schemes; reciprocal membership
    schemes; and covert operations discussed in more detail later on in the
    meeting. Mr. Phillips stated the Sub-Committee was preparing a document
    on best practice in covert operations and the introduction of a National
    Football Intelligence Unit which was presented later on in the meeting.
    Mr. Phillips briefly outlined the progress of the working party on
    C.C.T.V., hand-held video and still photography and highlighted the
    practical legal issues. Photographic evidence gave dramatic results in
    court and this was an area to be studied. He mentioned policing the
    European Championships and B.T.P.’s involvement as the British
    correspondent to the TREVI organisation; the Sir Norman Chester Centre for
    football research which was largely funded by the Football Trust had
    circulated a questionnaire which was supported by the A.C.P.O. Sub-
    Committee, concerning a membership scheme. Mr. Phillips then expanded
    upon the work of the Football Trust and in particular in relation to
    transport problems in which the Trust were willing to help the police. He
    asked that Chief Officers should write to him if they had problems in this
    respect.


.
    Coach Operators


    Inspector Provoost (G.M.P.) gave a brief overview of the structure of the
    Traffic Commissioners and a resume of a sequence of events that led to the
    publication of the A.C.P.O. conditions, circulated by the Traffic
    Commissioners as a guideline to coach operators and later questioned the
    effectiveness of the guidelines.




                                                                                 !
!   He stressed the importance of co-ordinating the responses from football
    commanders on the problems of causinE coach operators to comply with the
    guidelines, in order that a concerted effort could be made to bring this
    to the attention of the Traffic Commissioners who may then provide
    effective enforcement against rogue coach operators.
                                                                                    !
    Inspector Exton also emphasised the number of crimes committed by football
                                                                                    !
                                                                                    m
    hooligans which were not related to football by the police because the i
                                                                              mm
    time and location of the crime was outside match times. Some incidents
    exposed the vulnerability of police officers, poor communications and a R
    lack of interest of individual officers.                                        D
    A video presentation showed an incident of a pre-arranged battle between !      a
    Manchester United and City factions some distance away from the football
    match at half-time, which confirmed the organisation of hooligan gangs to B
                                                                                    w
    promote violence.


    ConstableI          ~hen gave a slide presentation on a hooligan gang who had   !
    recorded their acts of violence and other crimes with photographs and
    newspaper cuttings which had been siezed by the police.        The slides
    depicted the gang engaged in "battle", photographing their victims, and
                                                                                    !
                                                                                    I
    mixing with police officers. He also showed illustrations of how the R
    hooligans concealed their weapons emphasising the vigilance to be
    undertaken by police officers conducting searches, particularly at
                                                                                    Ri
    turnstiles.

    Mr. Evans summarised on the importance of good match briefings with visual
    aids and hard core intelligence. The merits of using police officers of a
    particular standard for football matches and of using where possible, the
    same officers in specific posts and areas of football grounds.


    Superintendent Martin (Metropolitan), apprised the meeting on the position
    of the recent covert operations in the Metropolitan Police area and
    reassured the meeting that covert operations would continue.


    C.C.T.V. Operator’s Training Course
.



    Chief Inspector Ross (West Midlands), gave a brief outline of the course
                                                                                    i
    curriculum and explained the evidence gathering techniques taught on the
    C.C.T.V. and hand-held video operator’s course and the area of conflict B
                                                                                    Im
    that is likely to occur when the ground commanders require the cameras for
    purposes other than evidence gathering.         He pointed out that trained
                                                                                    n
    camera operators were to focus upon a certain area until they were              m
    satisfied they had recorded sufficient evidence. Ground commanders must
    appreciate that incidents could not be captured in every part of the            |
    ground at any one time and that it was better to record at least one

                                                                                    i
    incident with good evidence. If the evidence was good, but insufficient
    for an immediate arrest, then a strategy should be set out to record a
    sequence of incidents committed by the same people on different occasions
    in order to substantiate an arrest and be in a position to present the
    evidence before the court.

    Chief Inspector Ross then presented a video recording which illustrated a
    comparison of video recording by untrained and trained operators which
    illustrated the benefit of training. Another video presentation showed
    how the action of certain people in the ground could be monitored and used
    as evidence, also identifying targets at close range with a portable video
    camera which could either be hand-held or mounted on a tripod in a
    selected part of the football ground. He stressed the importance of
    training officers to analyse video tapes and photographs after each match
    to detect various incidents and to establish the identification of the
    perpetrators.


.
    Quality and Assessment of C.C.T.V. Systems

    Mr. Ford gave a video presentation which illustrated the faults and
    deficiencies of C.C.T.V. installations at 55 football grounds in England
    and Wales. This was a result of a questionnaire sent to each respective
    police force at the request of A.C.P.O. in order to ascertain the
    effectiveness of C.C.T.V. systems at each football ground.


    The faults included interference from radio transmission, damaged film,
    worn film, dirty lens, poor maintenance, inadequate lens.       Only one
    recording was suitable for evidence gathering purposes. 69% were barely
    adequate for command and control purposes and in most cases they were of
    little value.

    Mr. Ford suggested a number of ways to improve the existing systems. The
    most important thing was to have the cameras properly and regularly
    serviced. A number of cameras needed to be remounted and resited and the
    majority required bigger lens. He emphasised the importance of the care
    of video tapes, correct storage and a limit on maximum usage. He stated
    that an answer to the problem, would be to use the portable video camera
    on display, for evidence gathering purposes and outlined the added
    advantages of the camera.
    .
        C.C.T.V. Operational Systems

        Mr. Phillips gave a brief resume of the history of the installation of
        C.C.T.V. and the inadequacies of the present fixed systems outlining the
        dangers of adding to these systems without expert technical advice. He
        recommended the portable video camera equipment which was on view and
        stated it would accomplish the pictures required for evidence that the ’~
        fixed systems failed to produce. The portable camera would not replace
        the fixed systems but complement them.

        He explained that the A.C.P.O. Sub-Committee were in the process of
        recommending to the Football Trust the formation of a technical committee
        which would give advice on the best practical methods of enhancing
        existing C.C.T.V. systems efficiently and economically.     Mr. Phillips
        stated that it wasn’t enough to rely upon improved video equipment and
        trained operators. He suggested a strategy should be adopted by ground
        commanders in setting roles and training staff. He emphasised the need
        for a C.C.T.V. team with a director, (where possible the football
        intelligence officer) a camera operator and a photographer for still
        pictures. The team should be used in conjunction with an arrest strategy
        by deploying an arrest team and a follow-up enquiry team for post match
        analysis. The arrest strategy would be dependent upon the video evidence
        and other related matters.

        Mr. Phillips added it was necessary to sustain a reasonable level of
        successful prosecution from video evidence to prevent the credibility of
        C.C.T.V. diminishing.


.
        Membership Scheme and Peat Marwick Report

        Mr. Phillips gave a brief resum~ of the membership scheme and of the Peat
        Mar-wick Report of which the main recommendations in the report had been
        circulated. He stated the main difficulty was the configuration of the
        football grounds and also that reciprocal schemes meant that grounds had
        to be divided into segments which each required toilets, refreshment bars
        and other facilities which were not always available.

        An open discussion on this subject then took place on the problems
        encountered by various ground commanders. The points discussed were lack
        of consistency in the schemes: financial implications; minimum
              requirement; computerised turnstiles; logistical problems, suspension of
              the scheme for major games; no interest from the clubs; the Luton Scheme;
              introduction legislative measures and cost effectiveness.


          ,
              Referees’ Guidelines Violence On The Field

              Mr. Phillips gave a brief summary upon the circulated paper containing the
              guidelines which have subsequently been ratified by the A.C.P.O. Council.
              The guidelines were produced as a result of a meeting with representatives
              from the Football Association, Professional Footballers’ Association and
              the Referees and Linesmen Association in which concern was expressed as to
              the different practices and standards adopted by various ground commanders
              and that police officers needed to be cognizant of the Football
              Association’s disciplinary system. Mr. Phillips said he had pointed out
              to the Football Association that the police would not allow any other body
              to have the right to decide to investigate criminal matters at football
              grounds in England and Wales.


              The guidelines were welcomed as a measure of uniformity of police action.

    11.       Issues Relating to A.C.P.O. Document ’Policing Football’

              Mr. Evans invited members at the meeting for their comments upon any of
              the items in the Policing Football booklet and added that there would be
              an update on the C.C.T.V. section incorporating the availability of
              training courses.


              PhotoKraphs


              The question as to the authority for the police to take photographs of
              persons ejected from football grounds was raised. It was suggested that
              such authority could be incorporated in the club’s ground regulations.



!             Spotters

              Mr. Evans stated there was a mixed response to this aspect and advised
!             that they should only be used with the ground commanders approval. He
              believed the system had merit.

!
!
Briefing


Mr. Evans stated that there was a need to remind officers of their common
courtesies as complaints are made about the attitude of some officers.
Suggested that a plan of the ground and immediate vicinity should be made
available. Perhaps a laminated card with a plan of the ground on one side
and the ground regulations on the other.


Exclusion Orders


Problems were occurring, particularly in London where photographs were not
a requirement on the Court order. It was suggested that where possible,
photographs should be taken at arrest centres which would obviate the
requirement at court.


A recommendation be made for a minimum of 6 copies of the photograph to be B
taken for distribution.                                                      I

The meeting agreed that the exclusion orders should be for a minimum
one season for them to be effective.


Derbyshire and West Midlands stated they had meetings with the magistrates
                                                                             I
and Crown Prosecuting Solicitors reminding them of their powers under
Act.                                                                     the I


Debriefings                                                                  I
Mr. Evans pointed out that debriefings with supervisors was vitally
important in order to improve upon policing operations.


Coach Operators

Chief Inspector Jordan, (Metropolitan - Millwall), suggested the role of
the Traffic Commissioners should be included.




                                                                             I
                                                                             I
i
!         Safety of Sports Grounds

!         Mr. Phillips stated that ground commanders should inspect details of the
          certificate annually and submit recommendations for work perhaps to be
I         carried out incrementally so that it doesn’t overawe the club.
          requirements varied in accordance with changing patterns of use.
                                                                               Safety


I         Chief Superintendent Bruce, (Cleveland) stated that they had prepared a

i         maintenance and good practice schedule which he was willing to supply to
          other forces. The meeting approved of the booklet and found it to be a
          useful reference.

    12.   The Football Supporters’ Associations Suggestions

          Inspector Hammond (Greater Manchester) informed the meeting of the
          suggestions the Football Supporters’ Association had referred to concern
          about the policing of travelling supporters in respect of retention of the
          away supporters after a match, and how it affected those who had to make
          their own way unescorted back to cars and vans parked away from a ground.
          Also a method of providing a liaison with the local police at the football
          ground. These points were left for an open discussion. It was concluded
          that travellers should write to the clubs for identified parking places
          near to the ground and for the association to appoint a liaison officer
          and identify that person with a tabard or armband.


          Open Forum

          Discussions took place on the problems of the membership schemes and the
          Luton Scheme and also the cost of policing football matches and the
          charges made to football clubs.



I         Difficulties in respect of charges to football clubs were related by Chief
          Superintendent Holford (Nottinghamshire), who were aware of some clubs
          seeking legal advice concerning the levels of policing at matches. West
I         Midlands stated they were to impose increased charges to each of the six
          clubs in the force area. Chief Superintendent Newlands (Metropolitan -

!         Arsenal), stated they had reduced costs as a result of ground improvements
          which reflected on a reduction in manpower to police the ground. Also a

i         vast increase in the number of stewards would replace policing at the
          ground, whilst a police contingent remained on standby.        Derbyshire

I
                                                                            m
explained their membership scheme and the positive effect on reducing
                                                                            !
manpower. Mr. Phillips concluded that he would appreciate any ideas which
could be suggested to football clubs for them to take the initiative in     I
reducing hooliganism at the grounds.
                                                                            I
Intercept

Inspector Payne. Northamptonshire. explained the ’Intercept’ operation
                                                                            I
they had introduced at the Motorway Service areas and the motorway
junctions throughout Northamptonshire in response to the trouble they had
                                                                            I
experienced with football supporters enroute to other destinations and i
advised other forces of the information they required and also of the       l
benefits that could be reciprocated (telephone P.C. Spriggs 700700).

Mr. Evans suggested the operation should be included in the ’Policing
Football’ booklet.


European Championships

Inspector Temporal, (B.T.P.), gave an update on the current position of
the championships and the policing operations.

                                                                            I
Mr. Evans closed the meeting by conveying his appreciation to those l
present for their attendance and participation and looked forward to the
meeting next year.




                                                                            !
                     SECOND DIVISION F(XYrBALL POLICE COMMANDERS
                          AND LIAISON OFFICER’S CONFERENCE
                                   1987/88 SEASON
                     GREATER MANCHESTER POLICE TRAINING SCHOOL,
                               PRESTWICH, MANCHESTER.

LIST OF PARTICIPANTS

Assistant Chief Constable J.D. PHILLIPS (Chairman)           Greater Manchester

Inspector P.J. HAMMOND (Secretary)                           Greater Manchester

Inspector A. PROVOOST                                        Greater Manchester

Inspector H. EXTON                                           Greater Manchester
Chief Inspector A. APPLEBY                                   Greater Manchester
Constable S. LLOYD                                           Greater Manchester
Chief Inspector M. ROSS                                      West Midlands
Constable[                                                   British Transport
Mr. A. FORD                                                  SRDB Home Office
Chief Inspector HOGG                                         Northamptonshire

Constable        I                                           West Midlands
Assistant Chief Constable A.G. ELLIOTT                       West Midlands
Chief Superintendent MILLS                                   West Midlands
Sergeant                                                     West Midlands
Chief Inspector B.A. MASON                                   West Midlands
Chief Superintendent PEMBERTON                              West Midlands
Sergeant                                                     West Midlands
Inspector OWEN                                               West Midlands
Chief Inspector NICHOLSON                                    West Midlands
Inspector BOULTON                                            West Midlands

Constable[                                                   West Midlands

ConstableI                                                   West Midlands
Mr. A. NORBURY                                               Home Office
Chief Superintendent E. TUSHINGHAM                           Greater Manchester
Inspector E.I. CAMPBELL                                      Greater Manchester
                                                                   I
                     SECOND DIVISION FOOTBALL POLICE COMMANDERS
                          AND LIAISON OFFICER’S CONFERENCE
                                   1987/88 SEASON
                                                                   I
                     GREATER ~t%NCHESTER POLICE TRAINING SCHOOL,
                               PRESTWICH, ~t%NCHESTER.
                                                                   I
Superintendent CHESTNI!rr                     Greater Manchester
Inspector S. DAVIS                            Greater Manchester

Superintendent LANGFORD                       West Midlands

Inspector PARROTT                             West Midlands

Chief Inspector SCHUCK                        Metropolitan

Constable                                     Metropolitan

Constable                                     Metropolitan

Chief Inspector R. PERRY                      Metropolitan

Constable                                     Metropolitan

Superintendent T. STUART                      South Yorkshire

Chief Inspector HELLEWELL                     South Yorkshire

Constable                                     South Yorkshire

Superintendent R McALLISTER                   Northumbria

Constable                                     Northumbria
Chief Inspector M.G. BULLEY                   Hampshire

Superintendent M.G. HOWLEY                    Hertfordshire

Inspector R. McPHILLIPS                       Hertfordshire

Superintendent J. ACTON                       West Yorkshire

Constable                                     West Yorkshire

Superintendent J.K. CLAPHAM                   West Yorkshire

Constable                                     West Yorkshire

Chief Inspector W. SLrFIDN                    West Yorkshire

Constable                                     West Yorkshire

Superintendent SEABRIDGE                      Staffordshire
Sergeant[                                     Staffordshire

Superintendent W.I. KIRKE                     Humberside
                   SECOND DIVISION FOOTBALL POLICE COMMANDERS
                        AND LIAISON OFFICER’S CONFERENCE
                                 1987/88 SEASON
                   GREATER MANCHESTER POLICE TRAINING SCHOOL,
                             PRESTWICH ~ MANCHESTER.


Constable[                                  Humberside
Superintendent G.M. ROGERS                  WILTSHIRE
Inspector GOFFIN                            Devon and Cornwall
SergeantI                                   Devon and Cornwall
Superintendent L.C. JOLLY                   Suffolk

Constable[                                 Suffolk
Superintendent L. BURNS                    Dorset
Inspector PEEK                             Dorset
ConstableI                                 Dorset
Superintendent WALSH                       Lancashire
Chief Inspector WHILLIS                    Lancashire
Superintendent WILSON                      West Mercia
Sergeant[                                  West Mercia
Superintendent P.E. EVERLEY                Thames Valley

Constable                                  Thames Valley
Inspector ARCHER                           Leicestershire
Constable                                  Leicestershire
Chief Inspector CRAWFORD                   Sussex
Sergeant[                                  Sussex
                         NOTES OF THE MEETING OF
                      2ND DIVISION FOOTBALL LEAGUE
                 POLICE COMMANDERS AND LIAISON OFFICERS
                     HELD AT THE GREATER MANCHESTER
             POLICE TRAINING SCHOOL, SEDGLEY PARK, PRESTWICH
                ON WEDNESDAY/THURSDAY 8TH/gTH JUNE, 1988.



    The meeting was Chaired by J.D. Phillips Esq., Assistant Chief
    Constable,    Greater Manchester Police and Inspector Hammond,
    Greater Manchester Police performed the duties of Secretary.


    All the football clubs in the second division              for the forth-
    coming season were represented.



.
    OPENING ADDRESS


    Mr. Phillips opened the meeting and welcomed all present. Copies of the
    following papers were distributed and later referred to in the meeting:
    Recommendations of the Peat Marwick Report; Police Involvement
    concerning Player Behaviour; CCTV Operators/Intelligence Officers Course
    Curriculum; Requirement for a National Football Intelligence Unit and
    A.C.P.0. Public Order Guide Policing Football.
         COACH OPERATORS
    .



         Inspector Provoost (Greater Manchester) gave a brief overview of the
        structure of the Traffic Commissioners and a resume of a sequence of
        events that led to the publication of the A.C.P.O. conditions,
        circulated by the Traffic Commissioners as a guideline to coach
        operators and later questioned the effectiveness of the guidelines.


        He stressed the importance of co-ordinating the responses from football
        commanders on the problems of causing coach operators to comply with the
        guidelines, in order that a concerted effort could be made to bring this
        to the attention of the Traffic Commissioners who may then provide
        effective enforcement against rogue coach operators.

        MATCH INFORMATION AND INTELLIGENCE
    .



        Mr. Phillips outlined the distinction between ’match information’ and
         ’intelligence’      The match information had reached a good standard.
        This was based on match reports and liaison officers ability to forecast
        crowd numbers, modes of travel and the demeanour of fans etc.
         Intelligence was relatively poor, it should focus upon the
         identification of football hooligans, their associations, strategies and
        plans. Mr. Phillips pointed out the problems associated with football
        hooliganism which related to "gang tactics" and "strategies" and
        questioned how well the police knew unruly elements that attended
        football matches on a regular basis. He emphasised the need to form an
        intelligence system and identifM the hooliK~




!
!
                                                 -2-
!
          I
          !
          I
          !
          I
          I
          !
          i
          i
          I
          i
          I
          l
          I
          I
          I
          I
          I
          i
-3-   I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I   Q   QUALITY AND ASSESSMENT OF CCTV SYSTEMS

I       Mr. Ford (S.R.D.B.) gave a video presentation which illustrated the
        faults and deficiencies of CCTV installations at 55 football grounds in
I       England and Wales. This was a result of a questionnaire sent to each
        respective police force at the request of A.C.P.O. in order to ascertain

I       the effectiveness of CCTV systems at each football ground. The faults
        included interference from radio transmission, damaged film, worn film,

I       dirty lens, poor maintenance, and inadequate lens. 0nly one recording
        was suitable for evidence gathering purposes. 69% were barely adequate
        for command and control purposes and in most cases they were of little
        value.

        Mr. Ford suggested a number of ways to improve the existing systems.
        The most important thing was to have the cameras properly and regularly
        serviced. A number of cameras needed to be remounted and resited and
                                                                               I
    the majority required larger lens. He emphasised the importance of the
    care of video tapes, correct storage and a limit on maximum usage. He
                                                                               I
    stated that an answer to the problem, would be to use the portable video
    camera on display, for evidence gathering purposes and outlined the        I
    added advantages of the camera.


    Mr. Phillips gave a brief resume of the history of the installation of
                                                                               I
    CCTV and the reasons for the inadequacies of the present fixed systems
    for evidence gathering purposes and the Football Trust’s disappointment
                                                                               I
    in the systems being used for command and control. He pointed out the
    dangers of adding to these systems without expert technical advice,        I
    despite many claims that police forces were satisfied with what they
    had. He recommended the portable video camea equipment which was on
    view and stated it would accomplish the pictures required for evidence
                                                                               I
    that the fixed systems were incapable of producing.        However the
    portable camera would not replace the CCTV installation, but complement
                                                                               I
    them.
                                                                               I
    Mr. Phillips informed the conference that the A.C.P.O. Sub-Committee
    were in the process of recommending to the Football Trust the formation    I
    of a technical committee which would give expert advice on the best
    practical methods of enhancing existing CCTV systems efficiently and
    economically at individual grounds and also the equipment required at
                                                                               I
    grounds where CCTV systems had not been installed.
                                                                               I
.
    REFEREES GUIDELINES VIOLENCE ON THE FIELD
                                                                               I
    Mr. Phillips gave a brief summary of the document ’Police Involvement
    with Regard to Player Behaviour on the Field of Play’ which has            I
    subsequently been ratified by the A.C.P.O. Council. The guidelines were
    produced as a result of a meeting with representatives from the Football
    Association, the Professional Footballers Association, the Football
                                                                               I
    League and the Association of Football League Referees and Linesmen in
    which concern was expressed as to the different practices and standards
                                                                               I
    adopted by various ground commanders and that police officers needed to
    be cognizant of the Football Association’s disciplinary system. Mr.        I
    Phillips said he had pointed out to the Football Association that the
    police would not allow any other body to have the right to decide to       I
    investigate criminal matters at football grounds in England and Wales.

                                                                               I
                                            -5-                                |
I   9.   C.C.T.V OPERATIONAL SYSTEMS

         Mr. Phillips reiterated the importance of using trained operators for
I        gathering evidence and identifying target hooligans. However it wasn’t
         enough to rely upon improved video equipment and trained operators. He

I        suggested a strategy should be adopted by ground commanders in setting
         roles and training staff. He emphasised the need for a C.C.T.V team

I        with a director, where possible the football intelligence officer, a
         camera operator and a photographer for still pictures. The team should

I        be used in conjunction with an arrest strategy by developing an arrest
         team and a follow up enquiry team for post match analysis. The arrest
         strategy would be dependent upon the video evidence and other related
I        matters. Mr. Phillips related to a video film depicting belligerant
         behaviour and offensive language where a female and a girl left the

I        ground because of the intollerable behaviour of nearby supporters. This
         kind of evidence could be recorded on video and taken to court. It was

I        no longer necessary for us to accept a higher threshold of bad
         behaviour.     If we set standards, we can arrange a suitable arrest
         strategy. Post match analysis was the key to tackling the growing
I        problem of unacceptable behaviour.


I        Mr. Phillips concluded it was necessary to sustain a reasonable level of
         successful prosecution from video evidence to prevent the credibility of

I        CCTV deminishing.



I        Members of the Working Party answered questions appertaining to the use
         of CCTV and portable video cameras for evidence gathering.
         Mr. Phillips informed the conference of the working party preparing a
I        report into the police use of CCTV and still photography in which the
         Director of Public Prosecutions had been consulted in respect of the

I        presentation of best evidence.


I        Mr. Phillips also informed the meeting of the functions of the proposed
         Technical Committee of the Football Trust and stated that future
         applications for CCTV enhancement should be made by the police on behalf
I        of the clubs through the Technical Committee who will give advice and if
         necessary visit the grounds.
I

I                                                - 6 -
                                                                            I
It was suggested that the Football Summary reports include whether
arrests involved the use of CCTV in order to assess the effectiveness of
                                                                            I
CCTV.
                                                                            I
Problems were being encountered in the reciprocation of video recordings
for the police of the visiting football club. The introduction of           I
intelligence officers would probably alleviate this problem.

Video recordings and video printer photographs to
                                                                            I
                                                              assist with
identification of targets and incidents at railway
available from the British Transport Police.
                                                            stations were   I
Mr. Ford suggested monochrome cameras were more effective in low light      I
level video recordings. The Kodakchrome B 3200 film was good for covert
photography in low light.                                                   I
The conference was made aware of the vulnerability of the camera
operators when the hooligans realised they were being filmed. Where
                                                                            I
this was the case. it was suggested that the recommended portable video
camera kit could be mounted on a tripod in a safe area of the ground.
                                                                            I
The kit was capable of presenting sufficient pictures for identification
of any part of a football ground if positioned in the centre line area.     I
If necessary negotiations should be made with football clubs to provide
a platform in one of the stands where the camera kit could be set up.
In many cases hard wiring could be laid from this point to the police
                                                                            I
control room.                                                               I
Mr. Phillips informed the conference that the Crown Prosecution Service
advised officers to look at a video recording a number of times before
writing notes in their pocketbook if this was practicable.




                                        -7-°                                I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
i
I
I
I   -8-
ii.   THE FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS’ ASSOCIATION SUC~ESTIONS
                                                                                 I
      Inspector Hammond (Greater Manchester) informed the meeting of the         I
      suggestions the Football Supporters’ Association had referred to
      concerning the policing of travelling supporters in respect of retention   I
      of away supporters after a match, and how it affected those who had to
      make their own way unescorted back to cars andJ vans parked away from a
      ground. Also a method of providing a liaison system with the police at
                                                                                 I
      the football ground. These points were left for an open discussion. It
      was concluded that travellers should write to the clubs for identified
                                                                                 I
      parking places near to the ground and for the association to appoint a
      liaison officer, identifying that person with a tabard or armband. The     I
      club should be made aware of the supporters suggestions and that extra
      stewards be on hand to deal with enquiries and the liaison officer. It     I
      was also acknowledged that police officers should be properly briefed
      and familiar with the vicinity of the club.                                I
12.   MISCELLANEOUS ISSUES

      Superintendent Jolly (Suffolk) related an incident concerning policing
      the Ipswich -v- Millwall game where public service vehicles and mini       I
      buses were stopped and searched on the AI2 and A45 in pursuance of the
      Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol) Act 1985.       Difficulties were
      experienced concerning the interpretation of the Act in respect of the
                                                                                 I
      adaption of transit vans carrying 8 or more passengers. There were
      inconsistencies in various Magistrates decisions.
                                                                                 I
      Superintendent Stuart (South Yorkshire) related a similar case in which    I
      the Crown Prosecution Service withdrew the case. Two doubtful issues
      arose. Whether the vehicle was carrying passengers for hire or reward,     I
      and the interpretation implied with regard to adaption. It was agreed
      that the Director of Public Prosecutions should be consulted.              I
I
          Motorway Interception.       Chief Inspector Hogg (Northamptonshire)
I         explained the ’intercept’ operation they had introduced at the Motorway
          Service areas and junctions throughout the county in response to the

I         trouble they had experienced with football supporters enroute to and
          from other venues and asked other forces to forward information on coach

I         and private transport routes. He enlightened the conference upon the
          benefits that could be reciprocated from this operation each match day.
          (telephone PC Spriggs 700700).
I         MEMBERSHIP SCHEMES/PEAT MARWICK REPORT
I         Mr. Phillips gave a brief resume upon the situation of the Membership

l         Scheme by referring to the Luton Scheme, the conclusion of a research
          study conducted by John Williams at Leicester University and the present
          membership schemes. He stated the main difficulty was the configuration
I         of the football grounds and also the reciprocal scheme meant that
          grounds had to be divided into segments which each required toilets,
I         refreshment bars amongst many other facilities which were not always
          available.

I         An open discussion on this subject then took place on the problems

I         encountered by various ground commanders. The points discussed were
          lack of consistency in the schemes; financial implications; minimum
          requirement; computerised turnstiles; logistical problems; suspension of
I         the scheme for major games; no interest from the clubs; the Luton
          Scheme; introduction of legislative measures and cost effectiveness.

I   14.   OPEN FORUM

I         Exclusion Orders

I         The Conference was in agreement that Exclusion Orders issued for 3
          months were relatively ineffective.
I         Difficulty had been experienced in obtaining photographs. Mr. Phillips

I         stated that he would approach the Football League with a request for the
          provision of photographing persons ejected from the football grounds to

I         be included in the football clubs ground rules.




                                                  - i0 -
                                                                           I
Play-Offs
                                                                           I
Concern was expressed at the minimal amount of notice given to police
forces concerning match play-offs.                                         I
Assistant Chief Constable Elliott (West Midlands) stated problems had
occurred in policing the play-offs matches at Walsall and asked that
                                                                           I
this subject should be broached at the A.C.P.O. Sub-Committee meeting in
September.                                                                 I
Closure of Public Houses                                                   I
It was suggested that where trouble is anticipated at certain venues,
consideration should be given to liaising with breweries upon the
                                                                           I
closure of public houses in the immediate vicinity of football grounds.
Licensing magistrates in York had at the request of the police ordered
                                                                           I
the closure of certain public houses where trouble had ensued in the
past.                                                                      I
Mr. Phillips very briefly reiterated the main points of the conference.    I
Mr. Elliott remarked on the conference being very stimulating and of
enormous value and conveyed his appreciation on behalf of all in
                                                                           I
attendance for a successful meeting.        Mr. Phillips expressed his
appreciation to all those in attendance and for their participation, and   I
closed the conference.
                                                                           I
                                                                           I
                                                                           I
                                                                           I
                                                                           I
                                                                           I
                                                                           I
                                        - ii -
                                                                           I
I                       THIRD AND FOURTH DIVISION FOOTBALL COMMANDERS AND
                             LIAISON OFFICERS SEMINAR SEASON 1987/88

I                           (~ATER MANCHESTER POLICE TRAINING SCHOOL,
                               SEDGLEY PARK, PRESTWICH, MANCHESTER,
                                       i5TH/16TH JUNE, 1988.
I
I   LIST OF PARTICIPANTS                                       FORCE

I   Assistant Chief Constable D.J. PHILLIPS                    Greater Manchester
    Superintendent T. STUART
I   Superintendent KING
                                                               South Yorkshire
                                                               British Transport
    Chief Inspector M. ROSS                                    West Midlands
I   Sergeant
    Chief Inspector A. APPLEBY
                                                               West Midlands
                                                               Greater Manchester

I   Inspector P.J. HAMMOND
    Inspector A. PROVOOST
                                                              Greater Manchester
                                                              Greater Manchester

I   Constable
    Superintendent FINCH
                                                              Greater Manchester
                                                              Northamptonshire
    Superintendent McGINN
I                                                             Cambridgeshire
    Mr. A. FORD                                               Home Office S.R.D.B.
    Chief Superintendent MOORE                                Devon and Cornwall
I   Chief Inspector RICHARDSON
    Superintendent BRUNSKILL
                                                              Durham
                                                              Greater   Manchester

I   Inspector DAVIES
    Constable I
                                                              Greater
                                                              Greater
                                                                        Manchester
                                                                        Manchester
    Chief Superintendent H!LRGREAVES
I   Sergeant
                                                              Greater
                                                              Greater
                                                                        Manchester
                                                                        Manchester
    Constable [                                               Greater   Manchester
I   Chief Inspector I. JENNINGS                               Greater   Manchester
    Sergeant                                                  Greater   Manchester
I   Superintendent SWAYLES
    Inspector J. WALSH
                                                              Greater
                                                              Greater
                                                                        Manchester
                                                                        Manchester

I   Sergeant[
    Superintendent HEDLEY
                                                              Greater
                                                              Greater
                                                                        Manchester
                                                                        Manchester
    Constable [
I   Inspector D. EDGE
                                                              Greater
                                                              Greater
                                                                        Manchester
                                                                        Manchester
    Superintendent J.B. BARTLETT                              Greater Manchester
I   Superintendent A. JUDGE
    Superintendent PACKHAM
                                                              West Mercia
                                                              West Midlands
I
                    THIRD AND FOURTH DIVISION FOOTBALL COMMANDERS AND
                        LIAISON OFFICERS SEMINAR SEASON 1987/88
                                                                             I
                       ~TER MANCHESTER POLICE TRAINING S6~OOL,
                          SEDGLEY PARK, PBESII~ICH, MAN6~,                   I
                                  15TH/16TH JUNE, 1988.
                                                                             I
Constable[                                                 West Midlands
                                                                             I
Inspector GRIFFITHS
Inspector FRADLEY
                                                           West Midlands
                                                           West Midlands
                                                                             l
Inspector BROOK
Constable
                                                           West Yorkshire
                                                           West Yorkshire    I
Chief Inspector DANSKIN                                    West Yorkshire
Constable[
Constable
                                                           West Yorkshire
                                                           West Yorkshire
                                                                             I
Inspector CHARLES
Inspector FINCH
                                                           South Yorkshire
                                                           South Yorkshire
                                                                             i
Constable[
Superintendent T. SIWJART
                                                           South Yorkshire
                                                           South Yorkshire   I
Chief Inspector KING                                       South Yorkshire
Superintendent HOLMES                                      Merseyside        I
Inspector THOMAS                                           Merseyside
Chief Superintendent STAIN~DN
Sergeant[
                                                           Cumbria
                                                           Cdmbria
                                                                             I
Superintendent KENNEDY
Inspector STEWART
                                                           Lancashire
                                                           Lancashire
                                                                             I
Superintendent F0~ERGILL
Chief Inspector KEARNS
                                                           Lancashire
                                                           Lancashire        I
Sergeant                                                   Lancashire
Superintendent HOUGH
Sergeant
                                                           Cheshire          I
                                                           Cheshire
Inspector HAY
Constable
                                                           Cheshire
                                                           Cheshire
                                                                             I
Superintendent CLARK
Constable~
                                                           Thames Valley
                                                           Thames Valley
                                                                             l
Superintendent KENW0RI~HY
Inspector BURROWS
                                                           Derbyshire
                                                           Derbyshire        I
Chief Inspector BOW"fEB                                    Derbyshire
Superintendent HUDSON
Constable
                                                           North Yorkshire
                                                           North Yorkshire
                                                                             I
                                                                             I
I                        THIRD AND FOURTH DIVISION FOOTBALL COMMANDERS AND
                               LIAISON OFFICERS SEMINAR SEASON 1987/88

I                             GP.FATI~ MANCHESTER POLICE TRAINING SCHOOL,
                                   SEDGLEY PARK, PRESTWICH, MAN~,
                                         15TH/16TH JUNE, 1988.
I
I    Inspector KENDREW                                             North Yorkshire

I    Constable I
     Chief Inspector RICHES
                                                                    North Yorkshire
                                                                  Metropolitan
     Sergeant[
i    Constable I
                                                                   Metropolitan
                                                                   Metropolitan
     Sergeant I
                                                                   Staffordshire
I    Superintendent CHAWNER                                        Staffordshire
     Sergeant [                                                    Cambridgeshire
I    Sergean t                                                     Cambridgeshire
    Superintendent WATSON                                           South Wales
I   W/Constable I
    Superintendent MERREDITH
                                                                    South Wales
                                                                    South Wales
    Sergeant I
i   Inspector ARTHUR
                                                                    South Wales
                                                                   Devon and Cornwall
    Superintendent BAILEY                                          Devon and Cornwall
I   Sergeant                                                       Devon and Cornwall
    Chief Inspector MELLOR                                       No ttinghamshire
I   Inspector NAYLOR
    Chief Inspector DOSSETT
                                                                  Nottinghamshire
                                                                  Essex
    Inspector ANSELL
I   Inspector BAXTER
                                                                  Essex
                                                                  Lincolnshire
    Constable[
i   Chief Inspector SMITH
                                                                  Lincolnshire
                                                                  Metropolitan
    Constable                                                     Metropolitan
I   Chief Inspector KYNNEP, SLEY                                  Metropolitan
    Sergeant I                                                    Metropolitan
I   Superintendent O’CONNOR
    Sergeant ~
                                                                  Cleveland
                                                                  Cleveland
    Inspector PRETTY
I   Constable
                                                                  Hampshire
                                                                  Hampshire
    Inspector CASSIDY                                             Northamptonshlre
    Chief Inspector CAIRNS                                        Humberside
    Cons table                                                    Humberside
                 THIRD AND FOURTH DIVISION FOOTBALL COMMANDERS AND
                      LIAISON OFFICERS SEMINAR SEASON 1987/88
                                                                          I
                    GREATER MANCHESTER POLICE TRAINING ~OOL,
                       SEDGLEY PARK, PRESTWICH, MANCHESTER,               I
                              15TH/16TH JUNE, 1988.
                                                                          I
Constable I                                           Humberside
                                                                          I
Chief Inspector PULFORD
Superintendent JENKINS0N
                                                      North Wales
                                                      Avon and Somerset   I
ConstableI                                            Avon and Somerset
Chief Inspector OLIVER                                Avon and Somerset   I
Constable~                                            Avon and Somerset
Superintendent ROSE
Constable[
                                                      Kent
                                                      Kent
                                                                          I
                                                                          I
                                                                          I
                                                                          I
                                                                          I
                                                                          I
                                                                          I
                                                                          I
                                                                          I
                                                                          I
                                                                          I
                                                                          I
                                                                          I
                                                                          l
I
I                            NOTES OF THE REETING OF

I                 THIRD AND FOURTH DMSION FOOTBALL ~~S


I                             AND LIAISON OFFICERS


I               HELD AT (I~EATI~ ~ POLICE TRAINING       SCHOOL



I
                              15T"/i6T" ~, 1988.
I
I       The oeeti~ was chaired by J.D. Phillips Esq., Assistant Chief Constable
I       Greater Manchester Police. Inspector P.J. Ha~omd, Greater Manchester
        Police performed the duties of Secretary.

I
        OP~
I   .




        Mr. Phillips opened the meeting by welcoming all present to the first
I       seminar to be held for Football Commanders and Liaison Officers of 3rd
        and 4th Division Football Clubs. He gave a brief account of the purpose

I       of the conferences and outlined the format for the seminar. Copies of
        the following papers were distributed and later referred to in the
        meeting. Recommendations of the Peat Marwick Report. Police Involvement
I       concerning Player Behaviour; CCTV Operators ’/Intelligence Officers ’
        Course Curriculum; Requirement for a National Football Intelligence Unit
I       and A.C.P.0. Public Order Guide ’Policing Football’


I
I
I
I
I
2.   UPDATE OF THE A.C.P.O. SUB-~TTEE ~IN(~ ON HOOLIgaNISM AT SPORING
     ~1~
     Mr. Phillips informed the meeting of the current situation concerning
     the Membership Scheme. the Luton Scheme and the area of research
     undertaken by John Williams at Leicester University.


     He stated that the Sub-Committee had been commissioned with preparing a
     document on best practice in covert operations and the introduction of a
     National Football Intelligence Unit. He briefly explained the reason
     for the development of a C.C.T.V. Operators and Intelligence Officers
     Course and of the future courses to be held in Manchester. Mr. Phillips
     informed the meeting of the Football Trust’s function and of the areas
     in which they were willing to assist the police.


 .




     Inspector Provoost (Greater Manchester) gave a brief overview of the
     structure of the Traffic Commissioners and a resume of a sequence of
     events that led to the publication of the A.C.P.0. conditions.
     circulated by the Traffic Commissioners as a guideline to coach
     operators and later, questioned the effectiveness of the guidelines.


     He stressed the importance of co-ordinating the responses from football
     commanders on the problems and features of coach operators to comply
     with the guidelines, in order that a concerted effort could be made to
     bring this to the attention of the Traffic Commissioners. who may then
     provide effective enforcement against rogue coach operators.




                                    -2-
I
I
I
I
I
I
i
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
    o


I       Constable        (Greater Manchester) gave a commentary on a slide

I       presentation concerning a hooligan gang in the Greater Manchester area
        who affiliate themselves mainly to Leeds United and to a lesser extent

l       Liverpool and other clubs in the Football League. Some of the crimes
        were unrelated to football. The majority of slides had been reproduced


I
                                      -3-
l
I
    from photographs and newspaper cuttings siezed from the premises of a         I
    member of the gang.      The gang had recorded on photograph acts of
    violence, victims and their injuries, members mixing with police
    officers during football match operations. Constable~also            showed
                                                                                  I
    examples of concealment of weapons on the body which were undetectable
    when police officers executed body searches wearing gloves, particularly
                                                                                  I
    at turnstiles.
                                                                                  I
.



    Mr. Phillips outlined the distinction between ’match information’ and
                                                                                  I
     ’intelligence’. The match information had reached a good standard.
    This was based on match reports and liaison officers ability to forecast
                                                                                  I
    crowd numbers, modes of travel and the demeanour of fans etc.
    Intelligence was relatively poor, it should focus upon the                    I
    identification of football hooligans, their "associations", "strategies"
    and plans.     Mr. Phillips pointed out the problems associated with          I
    football hooliganism which related to "gang tactics" and "strategies"
    and questioned how well the police knew unruly elements that attended
    football matches on a regular basis. He emphasised the need to form an
                                                                                  I
    intelligence system and identify the hooligans. This could be done by
    using CCTV systems effectively with trained operators, and surveillance
                                                                                  I
    teams. He questioned whether it was sufficient to rely solely upon a
    football liaison officer and stressed the hooligans needed to be              I
    photographed and identified. Problems with hooligans seldom occurred
    with the home team supporters in the home ground, but often in the            I
    vicinity of the ground and at away venues and also en route to and from
    away venues. An intelligence officer could be trained to analyse video
    recordings, identify targets and administer follow up enquiries. The
                                                                                  I
    officer could develop a port folio of known hooligans and collate
    information from passive observers on surveillance at home and away
                                                                                  I
    matches and prepare a professional match briefing programme.
                                                                                  I

                                   -4-
I    O~V OP~~ ~D D~I~ O~I~ O~E
i   Chief Inspector Ross (West Midlands) expounded on the C.C.T.V operators
    and intelligence officers course curriculum and the development of the

I   course, explaining the evidence gathering techniques to be learned using
    the hand held video camera and C.C.T.V. systems. He commented on the

I   likely areas of conflict between the ground commanders requirements in
    respect of deployment and those of the intelligence officer in respect

I   of evidence gathering. Chief Inspector Ross pointed out that operators
    were trained to focus upon a certain area until they were satisfied they
    had recorded sufficient evidence. Ground commanders must appreciate
l   that incidents could not be captured in every part of the ground at any
    one time and that it was better to record at least one incident with

l   good evidence.     If the evidence was good, but insufficient for an
    immediate arrest, then a strategy should be set out to record a sequence

I   of incidents committed by the same people on different occasions in
    order to substantiate an arrest and be in a position to present the


I   evidence before the court.


    Chief Inspector Ross then presented a video recording which illustrated
I   a comparison of video recording by untrained and trained operators which
    emphasised the benefit of training. Another video presentation showed

I   how the action of certain people in the ground could be monitored and
    used as evidence, also identifying targets at close range with a

I   portable video camera which could either be hand held or mounted on a
    tripod in a selected part of the football ground. He stressed the
    importance of training officers to analyse video tapes and photographs
I   after each match to detect various incidents and to establish the
    identification of the perpetrators.
l
I   Mr. Ford (S.R.D.B.) gave a video presentation which illustrated the

I   faults and deficiencies of CCTV installations at 55 football grounds in
    England and Wales. This was a result of a questionnaire sent to each


I
                                   -5-
I
    respective police force at the request of A.C.P.O. in order to ascertain   I
    the effectiveness of CCTV systems at each football ground. The faults
    included interference from radio transmission, damaged film, worn film,
    dirty lens, poor maintenance, and inadequate lens. Only one recording
                                                                               I
    was suitable for evidence gathering purposes. 69% were barely adequate
    for command and control purposes which would complement the existing
                                                                               I
    system and in most cases they were of little value.
                                                                               I
    Mr. Ford suggested a number of ways to improve the existing systems.
    The most important thing was to have the cameras properly and regularly    I
    serviced. A number of cameras needed to be remounted and resited and
    the majority required larger lens. He emphasised the importance of the
    care of video tapes, correct storage and a limit on maximum usage. He
                                                                               I
    stated that an answer to the problem, would be to use the portable video
    camera on display, for evidence gathering purposes which would
                                                                               I
    complement the existing system and outlined the added advantages of the
    camera.                                                                    I
.
                                                                               I
    Mr. Phillips gave a brief resume of the history of the installation of
    CCTV and the reasons for the inadequacies of the present fixed systems
                                                                               I
    for evidence gathering purposes and the Football Trust’s disappointment
    in the systems being used for command and control. He pointed out the      1
    dangers of adding to these systems without expert technical advice,
    despite many claims that police forces were satisfied with what they       I
    had. He recommended the portable video camera equipment which was on
    view and stated it would accomplish the pictures required for evidence
    that the fixed systems were incapable of producing.        However the
                                                                               I
    portable camera would not replace the CCTV installation, but complement
    them.
                                                                               I
    Mr. Phillips informed the conference that the A.C.P.O. Sub-Committee       I
    were in the process of recommending to the Football Trust the formation
    of a technical committee which would give expert advice on the best        I
                                   -6-
                                                                               I
                                                                               I
I         practical methods of enhancing existing CCTV systems efficiently and
          economically at individual grounds and also the equipment required at
I         grounds where CCTV systems had not been installed.


I         Mr. Phillips reiterated the importance of using trained operators for
          gathering evidence and identifying target hooligans. It wasn’t enough

I         to rely upon improved video equipment and trained operators.
          suggested a strategy should be adopted by ground commanders in setting
                                                                                 He



I         roles and training staff. He emphasised the need for a C.C.T.V team
          with a director, (where possible the football intelligence officer) a
          camera operator and a photographer for still pictures. The team should
l         be used in conjunction with an arrest strategy by deploying an arrest
          team and a follow up enquiry team for post match analysis. The arrest

I         strategy would be dependent upon the video evidence and other related
          matters. Mr. Phillips related to a video film depicting belligerent

I         behaviour and offensive language where a female and a girl left the
          ground because of the intollerable behaviour of nearby supporters. This
          kind of evidence could be recorded on video and taken to court. It was
I         no longer necessary for the police to accept a higher threshold of bad
          behaviour. Post match analysis was the key to tackling the growing

I         problem of unacceptable behaviour.



I         Mr. Phillips concluded it was necessary to sustain a reasonable level of
          successful prosecution from video evidence to prevent the credibility of

I         CCTV deminishing.


    i0.
l         Mr. Phillips gave a brief summary upon the circulated paper containing

l         the guidelines which have subsequently been ratified by the A.C.P.0.
          Council. The guidelines were produced as a result of a meeting with

I         representatives from the Football Association, Professional Footballers’
          Association and the Referees and Linesmen Association in which concern

!         was expressed as to the different practices and standards adopted by
          various Eround commanders and that police officers needed to be


I
                                         -7-
!
                                              I
                                             I
      cognisant of the Football Association’s disciplinary system.         Mr.
      Phillips said he had pointed out to the Football Association that the
                                             I
      police would not allow any other body to have the right to decide to
      investigate criminal matters at football grounds in England and Wales.


ii.
                                             I
      MEMBERSHIP SCHEME AND PEAT MARWICK REPORT
                                             I
      Mr. Phillips gave a brief resume of the membership scheme and of the
      Peat Marwick Report of which the main recommendations in the report had
                                             I
      been circulated. He stated the main difficulty was the configuration of
      the football grounds and also the reciprocal schemes meant that grounds
                                             I
      had to be divided into segments which each required toilets, refreshment
      bars amongst many other facilities which were not always available.

                                              I
      An open discussion on this subject then took place on the problems

                                              I
      encountered by various ground commanders. The points discussed were
      lack of consistency in the schemes; financial implications; minimum
      requirement; computerised turnstiles; logistical problems, suspension of
                                              I
      the scheme for major games; no interest from the clubs; the Luton
      Scheme; introduction of legislative measures and cost effectiveness.


12.   T.R.E.V.I.
                                              I
      Superintendent King (BTP) explained the composition and functions of       I
      T.R.E.V.I. of which Assistant Chief Constable W.I. McGregor (BTP) is the
      British correspondent. He gave a brief overview of the information and     I
      intelligence collated and disseminated by British Transport Pol~ce and
      gave an update on the European Championships.                              I
      He urged intelligence officers and liaison officers to be aware of
      travelling fans and targets in relation to international matches as they
                                                                                 I
      were more difficult to identify, when in the main they attend matches in
      London and other countries. He then gave a video presentation on the       I
      T.R.E.V.I. organisation and B.T.P. involvement.
                                                                                 I
                                      -8-
l          EXCLUSION OF AWAY SUPPORTERS
!          Chief Superintendent Moore (Devon and Cornwall) related the experience
           of the exclusion of away supporters at Torquay United and the

!          effectiveness and reason for this. The exclusion of supporters was an
           agreement reached with the club in exchange for reduced policing costs.

I          Although there were a few weaknesses in the system for membership,
           overall, the scheme was a success and suggested similar agreements could
           be reached with other clubs.
l    14.   I~S ~ BY THE ~ ASSOCIATION AND LF~JE
!          Chief Superintendent Stainton (Cumbria) posed the difficulties in

l          policing football grounds and fixtures which involve a visiting club
           whose supporters have been banned and arrive on mass. In order to

!          maintain A.C.P.0.’s policy of keeping out banned visiting supporters,
           the cost of police resources were high. The repercussions from setting
           up road blocks and keeping out banned spectators upon unsuspecting
i          neighbouring police areas, together with allowing the spectators into
           the ground were discussed at length. It was acknowledged there was no

I          easy solution to this problem but unless excluded supporters were
           confronted they would continue to travel.    It was necessary to have a

!          plan to deter and contain them.


     15.   ALL TICKET ~ ]RH)SED BY FA/LEA(]~E
I
           Chief Inspector Richardson (Durham) related experiences of difficulty in
!          policing football matches that had been declared ’all ticket’ by the
           FA/League without consulting the relevant police force as to whether

l          such a restriction could be enforced successfully. Small clubs do not
           apply these restrictions rigidly because of their financial position.

i          Therefore he requested that A.C.P.0. consult with the authorities on
           this subject.


!
II                                        -9-
!
16.~SHIP ~ - A O~EN POLICY
      A discussion took place on the effectiveness of the membership schemes
      which have been undertaken by the clubs. It was generally acknowledged
                                                                                 I
      that many of the schemes created more problems than they solved.
                                                                                 I
17.
                                                                                 i
      Superintendent Finch (Northamptonshire) explained the motorway
      ’intercept’ operations introduced at the Motorway Service areas and
      junctions throughout the county in response to the trouble they had
                                                                                 I
      experienced with football supporters en route to and from other venues
      and asked other forces to forward information on coach and private
                                                                                 I
      transport and enlightened the conference upon the benefits that could be
      reciprocated from the operation each match day. Information should be      I
      forwarded to PCI
                       L
                                   }.
                                                                                 I
18.   THROU(R ROUTES OF TRAVELLING SUP~
      Superintendent McGinn related similar problems with football fans
                                                                                 I
      stopping off in unsuspecting villages and towns, in a force area that
      had no involvement with football, being subjected to hooliganism. He
                                                                                 I
      requested other forces to notify one another of routes fans are likely
      to take when travelling to away fixtures in the form of a pre-warning      I
      system. Prior warning would allow for police resources to be deployed
      effectively.      It was suggested that covert teams could help in this    I
      respect and also whenever the National Unit was in being.
                                                                                 i
      Mr. Phillips in closing the conference asked if those in attendance had
      felt the conference was of benefit.
                                                                                 I

                                                                                 m
                                     - 10 -
                                                                                 l
                                                                                 I
I
l    It was concluded that the conference was a success. However, it was
     acknowledged that it would be of greater benefit if separate conferences
!    could be arranged for the two divisions as there was a lot of business
     to discuss and to which more depth could have been given if the

l    conference had been extended another day.



!
I
!
i
i
II
!
!
I
i
I
I
I
l                                   - 11 -

II
l
I
I
I       APPENDIX ’E’


I
                                FOOTBALL COSTINGS 1987-88 SEASON
l
I   FORCE:
                      NO. OF" CLUBS      ACTUAL COST    CHARGE LEVIED   FOOTBALL
                                                        ( 3 Hours)
I
I        METROPOLITAN     12           £8,000,000
                                       (estimated)
                                                        £1,084,209        35%


I        GREATER

I        MANCHESTER         8          £1,807,926
                                       (total
                                        manpower)
                                                        £ 388,197         35%



I
I
I
i
I
I
I
I
I
I                                            -2-
                                             C. James Anderton C.B.E., C.St.J., Q.P.M., C.B.I.M.
                                             Chief Constable

                                             Chief Constable’s Office
                                             P O Box 22 (S.West PDO)
                                             Chester House
                                             Boyer Street
                                             Manchester M16 ORE
                                             Telephone 061 872 5050




                                            CC/JDP/BWM1/JD
                                            27 February 1989




I
!                           FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL


i         I write in my capacity as Chairman of the ACPO Sub-Comittee on
    Hooliganism at Sporting Events. You will appreciate that whilst we have
    had sight of the report of the Minister’s Working Party for some little
    time, the text of the Bill itself has only just been made available. I
I   thought it right therefore to convene an urgent and special meeting of the
    Sub-Conmnlttee so that you could be infomed of the view within ACPO. This
    has been done.
I         The comments I make here are still based upon limited consultation
    and I am, therefore, cowing this letter to my colleagues. If there are
i   other matters that they feel you should be made aware of I will write to
    you again. For the present, however, you may consider it expedient to
    consider our del t berattons.

m         Comments on the Bill have been sub-divided so as to distinguish the
    general from the particular and to reflect the clear distinction in the
    Bill between Part I and II.
I   IN GENERAL

i         The success of the proposals will eventually be judged at two levels.

f         First, there is the question as to whether this legislation will:-


I         (a) progressively remove hooligans from the football grounds and
          (b) deter the allegiance of those who are involved in trouble and
    violence but do not necessarily attend matches.
I         Second, and in a sense more fundamentally, the question remains
    whether or not the simple mechanics of processing membership cards through
I   turnstiles can actually be achieved.



I
I         The Police view over a long period of time has been that these
    provisions are, to a great extent, marginal to the problem, if for no other
I   reason than they cannot exclude the possibility of fraud by people who are,
    by definition, hellbent upon defeating the system, and because it will take
    a very long time before a significant number of potential hooligans are
I   excluded by the scheme. There are some countervailing advantages:

          (i) the deterrent effect may be considerable;

I         (ii) the Club disciplinary system may well be able to take strong
               action on the evidence of C.C.T.V. alone;

I         (iii) the game will be able to exclude many of the very worst
               offenders.
           Nonetheless, the Police view is that many of the measures that we
I   have already taken, which are summarised in the attached Appendix A, are
    having a significant effect and are far more critical to the problem of
    hool i gani sm.
I        The question, however, which most concerns Police officers relates to
    the efficacy of the technology. The Bill naturally does not detail how it
I   will work or what is required of it but, it is clear that, unless it is
    robust and virtually trouble-free, it will be counter-productive. In the
    worst case it could be massively counter-productive. At the least each
    turnstile must have access to a national database and must be able to
m   survey that database almost instantaneously. The machine itself must be
    durable against sabotage (for example, all machines with a groove to read
    magnetic tape could be easily defeated by using chewing gum or a similar
m   substance) and must work without persistent fault. Aston Villa has I
    believe, over 150 turnstiles. Halifax Town may have but few but its
    arrangements are, to say the least, basic. Inevitably the system has to be
I   universal.
          All our experience to date has been that computer salesmen have
    offered much and delivered little. The Police feel the~ must be involved
I   in the specification for any technolo~ and would need to be satisfied that
    it works before support could be ~iven to this schc~. The consequences ol
    repeated failure, hostile queues, interminable delays and the rest, are
I   unthinkable.
           The second level at which the technology causes concern relates to
l    procedures following a "red light" at the turnstiles. Policing at
     turnstiles at present is very selective and the Police Service could not
     countenance providing the sort of cover which would allow for a quick
     response to each turnstile in the event of a problem. The only powers
I    conferred in the Bill are on the Police and on the face of it every atta~q~t
     to enter which activates a "red light" suggests an offence is being
     committed. At Manchester United for example 30,000 people will pass
I    through the turnstiles in just over 20 minutes before kick-off. There are
     about a hundred turnstiles and the prospects of policing this system are
     absolutely daunting.
I          Many of these issues were, of course, raised within the Working Party
     but they were set against the blandJsl~nts that the physical arrangements
     could be delivered. The Police view is that the sche~ may work if these
I    physical conditions can be delivered but it needs to be demonstrated first.
l
    PART I
l         Part I of the Act is enabling legislation and to a great extent many

l   of the issues which will be crucial to the Police role in the scheme will
    be matters of detail which the "administrator" of the schemes will have a
    responsibility to draw up. So important are the working details that the
    Police feel there must be an opportunity for the Service to be full)’
l   consulted. It may be appropriate for Sect)on 4 Sub-Section (I) to require
    the administrator to consult the Police and Sub-Section (2) of the same
    Section to allow for the Secretary of State to take into account any
l   observations made by the Police. A similar caveat might apply to any
    alteration of the scheme.
           Section 5 Sub-Section (5) creates an offence which entails a
I   reasonable degree of investigation and it could be that many applications
    will in some respect be suspect or at least require clarification. The
    Police view is that the "administrator" of the scheme should have a
l   responsibility for determining such facts as it is possible for him to
    establish and that it should be open to the "administrator" to lay
    informatlons in respect of offences disclosed.

I         Whilst it is recognised that the "Relevant Evidence" Schedule is
    consistent with the provisions of the Exclusion Orders Scheme it is
    considered that this schedule might appropriately include offences under
l   Section 91Crtminal Justice Act 1967.
          Section 8 of the Bill refers to conditions which will attach to a
l   llcence to admit spectators. Sub-Section I0 of the same Section makes it an
    offence for a "responsible person" to contravene any of the conditions. As
    there is a possibility that police officers may, in accordance with the
    Working Party Report, allow the scheme to be suspended in the interests of
l   safety and order, they may stand in difficulty in respect of this
    Sub-Section. It is therefore suggested that the recommendations in the
    Working Party Report vlz: Chapter 4 paragraph 27 of the Working Party
I   Report (regarding allowance for breakdown of machinery and other short term
    emergencies beyond the Club’s control), be included in the Bill.


I   PART II


m         It has to be said that the proposals in Part II of the Bill were
    never discussed by the Working Party and are only loosely related to the
    arrangements for controlling spectators envisaged in Part I of the Bill.
m   The Bill refers only to "reporting agencies’ functions"; more pointedly the
    somewhat bland question and answer note from the Department of the
    Environment suggests that the Police may be a candidate for this role, yet

m   the detail of the Bill seems to envisage that the Police will play a major
    part.
I         There are two arguments which need to be put with some strength.
    Firstly, to take on the responsibilities of being a reporting agency in the
I   terms outlined in the Bill will be a very considerable task with an
    on-going administrative commitment and the potential for considerable
    investigative enquiries. The Police have always taken the view that any
I   provisions must be considered in the context that the Police commitment to
    policing football is already very considerable and cannot be increased
    without loss to the quality of service elsewhere. It has also to be noted
    that none of these provisions in any way benefits the policing in the areas
I   for which Chief Constables have a responsibility. If there are to be
    benefits, they relate on the one hand to our national reputation, which is
    not a matter for local police, and on the other for the policing of towns
I   in foreign lands. Our first position is therefore that the Service regrets
    it cannot support an~ Police involvement as the "Reporting Agency" or the
    deplo~nnent of resources undertaken as a result of the agency’s
I   respon si bl 1 i ties.
          Regardless of the Police role the Reporting Agency seems to have been
    conceived from the outset with only the Police in mind. The notions that
I   reporting will be a local responsibility and that passing information to
    reportees will be a local responsibility infer that police stations will be
    the point of reference. We are bound to ask, "What other institution will
I   be open at material times, available in every locality and capable of
    registering convicted criminals?"
          There are many practical difficulties:
I   (1)   The numbers of people who may be subject to an order of this kind
          could at least equate with those who are excluded under the scheme
I         and therefore potentially could be thousands;

    (2)
i         Reportees would be distributed randomly throughout the United
          Kingdom;


I   (3)   Some Reporting Agencies might have no more than one or two persons to
          cater for but would have to retain some sort of administration and
          staff preparation to fulfil their responsibilities;
I   (4)   Conversely, in other areas, there may be a number of clearly
          undesirable people, who will have to register and report at one time;
I
    (5)   How will proof of service be established in respect of notification
I         of designated games?

    (6)
I         What sort of enquiries would be necessary to determine deliberate
          failure to comply?

    (7)   What level of enquiry would there be to prove offences against people
          who did not comply?
I   (8)   In the event of English Clubs regaining entry to European competition
          there could be up to thirty designated matches per season.
I
          On the face of it,lt would seem far more sensible for there to be a
I   central agency who would receive a record of all restriction orders. Ther~
    does not seem to be any merit or purpose in the subject having to report to
    a local agency and register any change of address locally. A central
    registry could, by use of word processors, immediately distribute, by post,
I   notifications and state the location of the agency to whom the subject
    should report. Equally a central registry could send notification to the
    "agency" who would in due course return a record of reporting or
I   non-reporting. Further enquiry could be by immediate summons. For this to
    work the onus of providing a current address to the registry and of
    receiving documentation would have to lie with the subject.
I         In short, if there is to be such a system it would be much better run
    centrally. It is regrettable that this issue was not discussed properly
    before the Bill was drafted so that this argument might have been
I   considered, but it is hopefully not too late to consider amendment.




I
I
                                 Chief Constable
I

    G.L.Angel Esq.,
    Home Office
    50 Queen Anne’s Gate,
    London SWIA 9AT
    CC/EJH/MCJ                             6th March, 1989




i   Dear Colleague,
                        FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL

I   You will be aware that the Football Spectators Bill which
    contains provisions relating to membership      schemes is
    currently being progressed through Parliament.
I   At a special meeting of the ACPO General Purposes
    Sub-Committee on Hooliganism at Sporting Events, it was

I   agreed that I write a letter to Mr. Angel at the Home Office
    indicating the views of the Committee in response to the key
    elements of the Bill.

I   A copy of that letter is enclosed for your information.

    Should there be any comment or observations you wish to make

I   on either the letter or the provisions of the Bill itself, I
    would appreciate an early response.

                            Yours~ncerely,
I
                            Chief Constable
                    (Chairman - ACPO Sub-Committee
                  on Hooliganism at Sporting Events)




    To All Chief Constables in England, Wales & Northern Ireland
    Commissioner - Metropolitan Police
    Commissioner - City of London Police
I                                                                                  .÷




m
                                             ls Hay 1989                       + :-~.-. o




    Dear Mr. Goddard,
                            FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL
         I write in my capacity as Chei~n of the ~PO Sub-C~tt~ on , ...... ~
    Hool t gant me at Sporttng events.                        "~!.):~"ii+~

m         Further to nW discussion ~th Lord Ferrets and tn pursuance of
    discussions ! knov you have had with Davtd Philltps ! am nov tn a pusttton
    to wrtto to you further about the "agency" role.
m        we have taken tntoaccount that the provisions of Part II were tn
    pertat the Instigation of ACPO (I had personal discussions with Graham
    Angel and suggested that the 8tll should tnclude somesome provision to deal
m   with the problms of hooliganism abroad).
                                         road. Me recogntse too that the
    provisions can only be effective tf they are backed by the sanction of
    crtndnal liability and that therefore, those tn breach of the system will
m   ultimately be subject of police enquiry.
          As a. general rule Chief Constables are reluctant to accept
    poltctngresponsibilities
                r~ ;ponstbl Itte~
                                without additional
                                               tl resources and thts ws a
m   matter of concern. Equally however we are not convinced that the
    alternatives to pollce responsibility tn thts area are attractive, On
    balancetherefore
    balance   tl~ ~foreI ]am
                           amprepared
                              prepar dtot~
                                         gtve
                                           gtvguarded
                                               0 rded supp(
                                                      support’t to
                                                                to the notion of
I   the Police service accepting the "agency" role with certain substantial
    provisos.

m         in the first case, as I know you are well aware, it ts essential that
    the arrangements for registration and notification are dealt vlth centrally
    and not at local Police Stations. It ts considered that the administration
    system should be so geared that the only responsibility at loc81 Police
m   stations would be to check-tn reportaes and forward a record of thetr
    attendance at metorial times. It ~ also be that Chief Constables should
    be in a position to instruct the Central Agency as to which Police Stations
m   will be available as "reporting" stations. In short the Central Agency
    would receive information tn respect of those subject to "orders   m
                                                                      dtrect
    from the Courts; the reportee would be responsible for notifying to them
    any change of address; the Central Reporting Agency would maintain an index
m   and notify reportees of "designated matches’; and the reportae vould be
    required to present notification documents to 8 Police Station where
    particulars would be recorded and returned to the Central Agency.
I
m          Clearly the funding and organtsatton of the Central AgencY ~tlst tt
    would be some ktnd of Poltce responstbtltt~ has yet to be detemtned and tf
m                                                                    Unitm
    tt ts to be a part of the proposed "National Footbe11 Intelligence
    additional budgetttng wtll be required tn due course.
          I m conscious that these rotters are of some urgency and you v111 ~.~
    reallse I have not had the opportuntt~ to consult ~ colleagues wtdely
    although the mttor has been before the Sub-Comtttoe. Nonetheless in the
    circumtonces I feel it appropriate to wite in these toms and trust you ~;.:~
    v111 recognise that ve have come some way to meting the requirements of
    the Bt11.

m        T hope you realtse that thts c~proatse would very much depend upon
    good~11 tn ensurtng that the conditions to which I have referred can be
    accomodated.




                                Yoursjlst ncerelY,



I                               Chtef Constable

I   J.Goddard Esq.,

I   Home Office,
    F8 Dt vt st on,
    50, Queen Anne’s Gate,
    London SWIH 9AT
I
l
I
I
I
I             ASSOCIATION OF CHIEF POLICE OFFICERS
I          OF ENGLAND, WALES AND NORTHERN IRELAND

l
I
                            COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY
I                          INTO CROWD SAFETY AND
I                            CONTROL AT SPORTS
I                                 GROUNDS.

I
I
                                A.C.P.O EVIDENCE.
I
I
I
l                                             July 1985

I
i
I   PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY THE CHIEF CONSTABLE OF THE GREATER MANCHESTER POLICE FORCE ON BEHALF OF A.C.P.O.
                                                     ~’a cagrapll


    SEE £1ON O ~’~E :     FOOTBALL dOOLIC,\NiSM      1.1"-~ ~.9


    SECTION £WO:          CURRENT PRACTICE iN THE
                          POLiC£XG OF FOOTBALg       2. l - 2.24
                          Intelligence * ~           2.3 -- 2.6
                          Pre-Match Planaing         2.7
                          Uae of ’Away’ officer~     2.8

I                         Briefing
                          Away Supporters
                          Fla.~;l Point~
                                                     2.9
                                                     2. ~.0 - 2. il
                                                     2. 12

l                         ~cadium bearches
                          Offensive Weapods
                          Eatry into Lne Ground
                                                     2. ~’:1
                                                     2. 14
                                                     2. L5 2.16
                          Team Otficial~             2. L7
I                         Crowd l)istrisutioo
                          Contingency PianaLng
                          ~ost [4a~cL~ Escor~
                                                     ,.~ i~   o..iu
                                                     2.21 - 2.22
                                                     2.23

l   SEC°f iOLq YiiREE :
                          Traffic Arrangemen~

                          RECENT DEVELOP~.[ENTS
                                                     2.24

                                                     3. ~   3.3 1
                          Aico,lol                   3.2 -- 3. ~ J-
I                         ~mOersi,ip Card ~ci~emes
                          Aii Tici~.et M~acnes
                          Earl), Kic’~ O£ts
                                                     ~. iZ
                                                     3. i6
                                                     3.21
                                                            3. i7
                                                            3.2U
                                                            3,2.3

I                         Club I[li 5ia~ ires
                          CCTV
                                                     3.24
                                                     3.27 -
                                                                3.26
                                                                3.3i
    SECTION FOUR:         INtELLIGEnCE               4. i   -   4.2
I   SECTION FIVE:         POLICE POWERS
                                            .

                                                     5.1    -   5.8


l   ~ECT£ON S£X:          SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
                          ACT
                          Safetf Cer=ificares
                                                     b. i
                                                     6. i
                                                                6.6
                                                            - 6.4
                          S~ewards                   6.5    - 6.6
!   SF.C TIO~ SKV gN:     THE COST OF POLICING       7.1        7.7


l   SECTIO.~ EIGZIT:      GUIDANCE TO CHIEF POLICE
                          OFFICERS                   8. i       8.2

i   SECTION ~IINE:        CONCLUSION AND
                          R~COMMENDArlONS            9. ~   -   9.

!
I
                                                                         ..~_.~i~


I
I
I                 Following rue crageda.es ar Bradford City and
            8irmingnala ~ooraali ~round:~ on .Saturday Lirh May Z9~5.
            =he Home Sect’etary Mr. Leon Bri~tan, QC. 3~ announced
            in t-he House of Commou~ tsar ~e was ~o ~e~ up a
I           Cormnittee of Inquiry ....... Crowd Safe~y aud ConEcol at
            Sports Grounds.


I                 Mr. Ju,~rice Popplewe[l wa~ apf~o£n~ed Chairman of
            the Inquiry and Mr. a. Goodson. 08E. QPM. Chief
            Coa,~abie of Leicescer.~ilire and Mr. M. Killoran. QF~M.
            Lot’taeriy Caief Fire O[~icet~ of Greacer Manche:;cer were
I           appointed As~ea~or.,.

                  ]~he Com[~litKee’s rerms og refeL’ence ace :

I                   "To inquire witi~ par=[cuiar re~ecence to toe
           evenr:~ a= Bradford City and Birmia~am Football Gt’ouuds

I          on i[~0 May, into rlte operation of rue Saf,~.ty of 5pot-t~
           Grounds Act i975; and co recommend w,~at, if any.
           further steps si~ould be taken, including any kaa= may
           be necessary ut,der additlona.L powers =o improve ~or;~

I          crowd sa[ery and crowd control at ~porr.s grounds."

                  ~’oiLowing rae ~ragic scenes ar ci~e European Cup

I          Fit~ai in Brussei.,i on 3rd June. t,m Prime ~’.lini:~rer
           aoaounced taat Mr. Jug;rice Popp.Leweil ’ s inquiry w± ii
           ~ake account of any" lessons 7.o De learnt.


I                    The Association of Caief Police Officers of
           England, Wales and t~octnern [reiand has oeea znvit;ed Dy
           ."ae Chairman to suOmi.: written ev’idence ro C|m

I          i,lquiry.

                  The followiag cepor= ha:~ been produced 0y n~ember~
           of the A~socia~ions’ Generai ~urpo.~e.~ Suo-Cormmi~ee on

I          ~ooligani:~m a~ SporVing Events. which was recons~L~uted
           in 1984 an~ .~as ~le~ regularly :~ince ~i~en under tile
           Chair~au~t~ip o~ Greater H~ncheste~’ s C,~ie[ ConstabLe,

I          Y~r.G.J.Ander~ou.

                 Ma~i~rshlp of ti~e Sub-Co=mittee i~ a~ foLLows :-
    ....

I          C|la~m~n:      C.J.Ander~on ~-~q., CBE, C.S~.J. Q~M. CBIM
                          Cilie f Constable
                          Greac~r i, lanchester PoLice

I          5ec re ~ary:   J.O.PhiLlips Esq.. SA(Scoa)
                          Assistant Chief Cons=able,
                          Greater Ma~mhe~Cer Police
I
!
I
I
I                    d.A.Crawford Esq..

I                    As,~i~rant Cnie~ Constable
                     Me rseyside Police.

    "qo.2. Region    W.W.W. Jackson Esq..FBIM

I                    Assis=anr C,lier Co~,s~able
                     Sou~h York.~i~i~e Police



I   ~o.3. Region     K.J.Evan,~ Esq., QPM
                     Assi,~tan~ Chief Cons~abie
                     West Midiand~ Phi±re


I   No.4. Region     J.A. Weseiuy Esq.:
                     As:~is~anr C,lief Con~tabie
                     ~o ~ ~ingnam.~i t-e Constabulary.

I   No. 5. Region   K.N. Boochby Esq.,
                    As.~istanC Chief Constable
                    ,qampsiiire Con.~ £a~uiary.
I   ~u.6. Region    M. Popperweli Esq.,
                    Assi,~tanr, Chief Constable

l   No,7. Region
                    Avon & Somerset Constabulary

                    ~L. Davies Esq..
                    Assi,~ant Chief Co~,srabie
I   ~o.~. ~egion
                    South Wa Le.~ Con:~auulaL’y

                    K.tnne:~ Esq.. QPM

I                   Deputy Assis=anr Commi~s~uner
                    Metropo[i=an Police



I   General Purposes Committee Represen=a£ive Direct

                    J.S.Evans Esq., LiB FBIM
                    Deputy Cnief Constable.

I                   Surrey Con~tab~iary.




I   Briti~i~ Transpof~ Police Co-opted Member


                    W. [. l,~=Gregor Esq,.

I                   Assi-~can~ Cnie~ Constable
                    ~ritisi, rtanspot~ ~olice
I     i. i ’rc~e poiicins of profes.~.;-ona.L [ootball t~,=%r.ches =las
      meen a ma3or police commiLmen= over many yeaL’~. .~s tlie

I    game :~a:s become more and more the targe= of hooligans
     tt~ere has been a progressive iac ~ease in tile manpowe r
     a~d genera~ re~ou rce of the service                  requiL’ed ro

I    maintain order.             Equally as Police
     precaution~ ~ave ~pecialised to deal wi~h ~he ~roblum,
     so perversely rne ’ ~actics’ of ~he boo [iMa,,s have
                                                           tactics and


     varied to filld way:4 round those con=rols. This c~as ~ad
!    =~le effect of spreading the problem such the= in some
     matches policing begins as the fa~,d depart ~i~eir i~ome
     town a~d continue unri[ ~hey re~urn.             The p[anniqg of

I    ~uc:~ games is exten~ve auo wide-ravaging, :~eeKin6 ~o
     anticipa=e =i~e pt’oblems that may arise wi£~, supporters
     wi~o use ~ variety od rou~e:~ a~,d forms of ~ranspor~ and
     who may be i~] £ra|,sir for most oL ,the day.            In ~]~se
I    circumstances the duration oi the game a£ [~,e gt’OUt]~
     L&self is jus[ one aspect of [i~e entire opera=h,n.


I     i.2        Ti~e distribu=ion of ieague side~ means t;,at
     policing football i~ a problem w~|ich hit~ the Police
     Service somewl~a~ disproportionately.       Fooroali Clubs
If   ~end ~o be concentrated in ~i]e iar~er co|murba~ions
     ~nich are anyway nard pressed by ~,i~nez" ra~es of crime
     and simply the scale o~ demand for everyday police

I    services. Policing football is aK least a ,li~,e |.~ontn~y
     commi~|aen=: hence for .~ome force~ t~e de,rends made by
     foocoaii ma~erlal [] at’fec~ ~he ~e~lera [ [eve± of
     poiic i ng.
I    1.3      [t is o~ course not the policin~ of football
     crowds bur t~e hooligans amongs~ them w~lich are Khe

I    ntain problem and whilst perhaps obvious it should oe
     s~a~ed ~a~ ir is i|ooiiganism in "~por~ r~ol; crowds a~
     spur=inS events whic~ takes up police time ia such
     large mea~u re.
I.   1.4. Hooliganism itself is no= coo diff Lcult t:o
     characterize all;hough it;s causes may ~e co~.,iex a~d
i    m~[l m~re dif~icul~ ,ro analyse. Suffice i~ Co say ~haK
     ~e Police dea~ in realities and for ~e Poiice ~ne
     ~a~k is fairly clear cuC - ro maintain order and crowd
     saietF by reducing Che potential for con~lic£ and
i    conf roncar.ion.
      .,5. Some aspecr.s o£ r.he                  hooliganism
!    Itowever ~arranr, d£=cus:~ioa because r,h~lr re~oRntr.ioo
     has consequer~es for pol£ ing ~a~ice,           O~ mos~
     ~ignificance LS ~l~a~ ~he over~ acts o~ rio Lethe and
     displays o£ drun~n a~ressioo, ~|,e ob~:eoe c|u~s~inS
I    and sesc~rin~ by way o£ chailen~e ~o ~he opp~siz£on all
     of wtti~h we recoMsise as football hooliganism, are
     t ra|IsMressious co,~mi~ ~ed by youn~ males loosely

!    o~’ganlsed buC in common purpose and site.i~:ered by ~he
     cover of a large c~owd.
!
i     ¯ .b       It i, ~ili~ relative anouymxty afforded toe
      ,iooliga~ 0y beiu~ par= of a Large ccowd, many of unom
      may ~lave no wi~a =o cause ~rouble, whicll i:~ both ~ae

I     problem ~or toe Foiice and =he oppor, tunity fuc =~,e
      of fender.

     i. 7     It should ai=o be ~aid t,lat withifl clle Larger

I    crowd of ~uppor~ers ~iiere are group~, often formed
     ca~JuaiL7 but ~ome wi~a de~ini=e membership and existing
     a~ ’unotflcia± supporters’ clubs’, wil~ ciear tj are dent

I    on ~rouble and have ifttIe interest in ~ne game.rnis
     ha~ been ~een iq r_he way ~hey deliberately ge~ into ~ae
     ’wro~g =~,,
              ~ " ’ , or buy ~tand sea~s to avoid police
     s~l>ervision and after ~c game recommences cr~a~e an
i    incident. The impo~’~anc polo= i:~ =nat ~e,~e ~coup~ a~’e
     ~iot ca~ua.’ nooli~,a,i.~ our ~ ~ao and organi3e re crea~e
     ~rouble.

I!   I. ,~      A grea~ deal has been done ~o contain t,,e
     be~,aviour of crowd.~ but ~.’,e manner in which violeuce

!
     ha~ spilled over ~i~e barrie r~s in recen~ ,m ~che.~
     =uggest~ that there is a need re do more than reduce
     the opportunity for conflict and in positive term~
     concentrate policing tactics ~o remove tliaK :,eqse of

W    reia,~ive immunity =he hooligan depend~ upon by being
     i)ar= of a iar,;~e crowd. [t is precisely in =!le~e areas
     muc,~ of the ACPO cu~’ren= thinking i.i directed and c,~is

i    reporn will ~eek =o addres~ ti~ese matre=.~ iu detail.

     I.~ Lastly by way of opening ~’e~narks it is proper co
     make ~he poin~ ti~a~ crowd ~rou0ie a~d crowd safe~y are

I    not i.~sues ~ha~ can be separated. Whilst tae terrible
     co~equeaces oL the Bradford [ire are at =:~e ~ronc of
     our minds ~he fatal caaualtie8 of the ’iley~el Stadiura

!    disaster’ were t’ae victims of crowd disorder.
     segregation of supporters may be necessary in ti~e
                                                         The

     interests o~ crowd con=roi but =errata violence Li.~e
     fire can cause panic which in a crowd can be ~o

I    dangerous. The proper balance betwee~ policing and toe
     need ~o be able to evacuate large number.~ in an
     emergency rha~ co be our objective.

i    SF~TION Th~ - CURREh’r PRACTICE [N IRE POLICING OF


!    2. i AlChoug|, eaca Chief Coasgabie has an inuz"v’zdua~’
     operational cesponalbili~y an~ whils~ a varle~y of
     ~oca! considerations may allow for variation there i:~
!    nonetheless a good deal of common practice and
     co-operation ~mtionai£y in the Policing of footbalg.


I!   2.2 [~ca o, =he curren= practice i~ Oased on ~uidance
     to Senior Police OffLcers pubLl.~i~ed by ~he ACPO and it
     will perimp.~ be of advantage ¢o rei~ecate =i~e main
i    i:~ues.
I
I
I
I   ~. 4. [n=e L iige**ce is gache red fL’om a varie ~y of
    ~ources. particularly from (footoaLi) iialsutl o£ficers

I
    but a~o from ~i~e clubs. ~ranspor~ or~ani~ers, media
    repoc=~, supporters cluo~ and so on.     [i~i.s z.~ :set
    agai.,~s c the circumstances of =he fixture and its
    nis=o[/ and an informed a~sessme.t o~ current pointing

I
    2.5 ~he ’Folice Liaison O£ficer~’ who act as a point.
I   of contact for every ~,eague Club were e~aoiisi~ed £~
    ~975. They a~’e i:~sued wi~o detaiLe~ guidance and seek
    =o deve Io~ a 0aa~ o f in=eiiigence avai iao ie co
I   receiving clubs concerning =,~e ’away’ ~upporz.

    and     Suppor=er~ Club~.and      t~e
                                                           They
    are ~n co~=ac= Wi~h Coach Opera~or~. ~i~e Football Ciub~
                                             Bri~i~a Transport

I   Police .a~d are aole =o ~)a~s advice =o ~heir own
    ~raveiiing supporzer~ a.,~ well as ~o ~he Police of ~,le
    receivin& force.         [a ~,i~, way parking iota ~ion~.
    routes . 5ime :~. [~ao.~
                       ’      and so on can be di~z’iDu~ed ~)
i   acnieve co-opera~io~l and ai~.uw ef/icien~ ma~lage,ner,~ a~
    weli a~ hel~ ~,e public.


I   2.6     rhi.~  £el)orc will refuel, ~o " ti,e i:-~:~ue ok
    iaceiligeoce ~o explain curreo~ a£~emp~s ~o ~retl6~]en
    and develop i~l~eiiigeuce ga~i,er~,ig aud di:~.~emiL,a£1os
    (paragraph 4.1)
!   P re-Match Planning


I   2.7 For every maCch an officer is deie~a~ed Cite
    responsiotllcy o~ co-ordina=ing a [)fanned approach, l~
    will be hi.~ resi)onsiDili~y ~o liaise w~h ~he home
    ii~=eli~gem:e oEficer and wi=h o=i]er deparK~e~|,g~ ~u~n as
I   ~-;te MI0~e~ 5e~ ~ion, ~he Specials, ~,e Tra£ fic
    Oepar~m~n~. B~Lsn Transpor~ Police and so on. [c i.~
    us~all~ ~i%e case tha~ ~ne Division on ~,~ci~ cue ground

!   i:~ locate~ urgterr.ake;:~ ~ni.~Ca=...’"

    t~e o A ay Ofzxcers

!   2.~. Some ~orces employ officers from tl~ ’away t.eam’
    area who ~y ~e familiar wi~ likely offenders £n ~:~
    away supporcer~ and can help loc~L ~olice In

i   ide,~LfylnM ~rouble ~ker4 in a c~owd. Th£s i~ an
    option open ~o =he Police and i~s us~ depend~ upon,
    c i rcum~ ca nce~.
I   2.9    Empilao~.., ~., Miven in tile ACPO guidance to the
    J.mpo r ~ance of goou br ie [i~.         [ t Ls generally
!   advantageous to use =me same officers redularly in
    ane~e du’ies. AsJ.de from their familiarity wi=~ tae
    ground and large crowds i= al[ow~ foL" briefing to

I   concentt’a=e on ~ne critical and ~opicai issues.


    Away Supporters
I   2.lD     The Police generally sign and mouizor car and
    coac;1 parks in=ended for the use of away suppocters,

l   Thi:~ gives early inte iligeace and reduces the
    possibility of conflicts should home supporters seek to
    damage cars an~ coac~es. The Police generally maintain

!   a presence tltroughou=.


    2.~i      So~ groups of supporters are e~corted =o and

I   from =he stadium to limit the oppo rtuni~ie:~ to
    misbehave and =o protect timex from rival fans.
    Arrangements of this kiad are almost always made in

I   re,si)ect of train loads.

    Flas~ Points


I   2.12      Experience of polio Lag footba: 1 a& Lows £he
    o~ficer in charge to identify~f ias~1 p,)in~ where
    confrontation between rival fans may occur.     Equally

I   ~ile ~oiice :ave to examine rout:es fo [ lowed by
    supporters and give attention to any derelict si~es
    from which missiles     or offensive weapons can oe
    gatilered by hoollgan~.

I   S =adjure Searches



I   2.13 Wailst i= is a responsibili~M of t~ae Club and its
    stewards ~o ensure =he ground i~ in good shape before a
    game it i~ common practice for ~[~e Police also =o make
    an inspec [iota paying parriculac at~en=Lo,~ =o a~y

I   dama&ed fencing or lit~er which can be used as
    :i~siles.


I   Olfensive Weapons

    2.14 Them repor~ wl~.l ons!dec la~er the vexed
    question of police aearcnes of football supporters;

I   Regardiess i~ is al~.-~ys a ~er of commern for I=1-~
    PoLice cha~ hooligans ~y be armed wi~h offensive
    weapons and ~im Ins~ac~es of s~abbing and slashing

I   particularly by ~e use of S~anley knlve~ and g~,~de~ling
    kaives, ham increased dlstu~blngly in =he ~a~= year.



I
I
|
    En~cy into the Ground


I   2.15 The Police 9eek to ensure Chac turnstiles clearly
    itzdicace wnicl] group of supporcer.~ they are intedded co
    accotm~odate.    Turnstiles for t~,e popular parrs of tim

I   ground are often supervised by cae Police in an effort
    to en~ure segregation and
    against unruly elemen=s.
                                    to provide some filter
                                   Depending upon resources
    available and the lay out of the ground mounted

I   officers are often u.~ed in ensuring orderly queueing.

    2.16 It Ls a point worthy of note that in tim Light of

!   ,~ew legislation ~he polLcin~ o~ tut’nstiLe~ will be
    e~en more eric ical.

    Team Officials
!   2.17       The ACPO recommendation is t;|at all match
    officials saouid be made aware ol emergency policing

I   arrangements in t|~e event of pitci~ invasion or other
    emergency.


    C=ow_d Oistribution - Se_gregation an_d Gcoun__d ~oiicing

    2. i~ Safety certificate~ under the Safety or Bports

I   Ground ACt 1975 impose limits on each section of rue
    ground. [t  i~’~ a CLub ~e:~ponsibi iity ~o faun|cur
    turustile total|sots and crowd movement around the

!   ground to amintain these iitnics anu cust.omary foc the
    Police to ensure they are adhered to. £n co--operation
    with =he Clubs tim Police nave sought to ensure
    facilities allow for tlxe immediate segregation of rival

!   supporter:, as =hey enter rile stadium.         This is
    generally by way of barriers and it Ls important that
    eaca section of ti~e ground na.s its own refreshment

I   facilities, toilets, entrance and exits. Pitt|| barrier
    refining is general ~u= not universal.          Current
    eximrien~e ~ndlcates chat: i= troy be desirable ac most
    ~ro~n~ and i= remains a matter for Police Forcea =o

I   d~:ermAne in conjunction with others under the terms of
    cn~ Safety of Spor:.J Grounds Act.

    2. L9 It is common pt’accice for the Police to supervise
    gangways, bars, refreshment area~ attd toile~s.

    2.20 So~m officers are deployed in sad around rite

I   ground for =he dura~ion oi ~negr tour of duty and =|tey
    ere generaliy char~ed =o tim Club. Nrin8 r.ne cour,e
    O~ Elte ga~w~ tile number of officer.~ inaid~ the ground £a

I   i,acrea.~ed by those on traffi poiat~t end or.her d~=.Lee
    our.s~de. they generally becom~ a reserve ~.o I;he grou~l
    commander bur ~heir availability is not constant.


I
I
I    2.2[    ~ re -de~ermi~led planning should he available ~o
     con=ro~ one following con=ingencie~:

           a)            Unau~i~or i~ed ~ove,~eu~ el su|>por =e cs
I          b)
                   between ~egrega~ed par~ of ~;~e ground.

                   Seriou~ disorder occurring [n sec=ion~ of

I         c)
                   =~e ground.

                   £i=cn invaslon


!         d)       Where capacity has been rear;led or agains~
                   no ~icke~ no!tiers.

          e)       Emergency evacuation.


     2.21 Present advice is =ha= Police si~ouid De fa~niliar
     wi~** emergency evacuation procedures as should s~ewards
     aild si~ouid be iu a po~i~io~l ro a:~sis~ radzd eva~ua~iu~,
     of a s~adium if necessary.

     ~os= Ma~ch gscor~

     ?.23 In some c~raums~ance~ and depending upon ~afe~y
I    considerations ~,~e Police Com,0ander may decide      co l~oid
     ’away suppo~’~er~’ in one gruund until ,~ome oi ~e home
     suppot’~ is clear, gquaily arrangemen~ are usually nmde

I    ~o e6cor= certain sections of =~e cuowd =o Railway
     Stations and Coat, ParKs. [f ~he~’e are .3everai coaches
     o~" even large num~r~-~ of coacl,e~ i£ i~ co[0r,~on practice
     ~o a~e,aDie ti~e,, as a convoy and e~corK ri~em
I    ~:~-ough ~raff ic ensuring free flow so riley do no~
     oecome a marie=.


I    T raf fic Arran~eraencs
     2.24 Foc each march =here La usually a fairly detalied
     ~raf~i¢ plan seeking ~u keep :;o,,-~ emergency route clear
i    and[ac~.t~.=a~ng’’ " ¯ ready clearance of ~raffic.
     ability co .~mge the ,’rafiic problem may be ~evere~y
                                                          Poitce
     £imiced by ghe geograp;tleal layou= about the ground.
i    ~laay foogbaL£ ~rouads were h~il¢ ~a~y year~ ago in the
     midst of a compgex of narrow scc~ecs and terraced
     he us ~. ag.
     SE~.TION THREE -R~E,NT DEVKLO~MKh’~S

     3. i. Recen¢ even=s marka’d bF etadedy and disorder have
     resulted in much public and ~oii~icai conceru m,d
     deba~e.   C~verumeng l~aa urged nil .~ose involved wi~h
I.
     football and t~s problems ~o e~mi~’new initiation
     and has i~sei~ aden urge~t iegi~iacive ~eps. ~ny of
     ~;le sugge.~tions ~iia~ Imve been examined ace mer..terd
I    about waich ti~e aCPO and t.L,e Police Setice have
     already deveioped views in the llgh= of experience.


I
I
I
I   3.2 The mo,,~= strongly argued issue o~ all has been t;~e
    asset=ion     thar muc, of     ti~e ~/or~r be~tav iout" is
    a:~sociated wic,l drunkenne:~s. The ACPO does not depart

I   ~rom this general view altnouga t:~ere are a nu~aber o~
    re,~ervatio~is abou~ ;low the problem is bezt dealt with.

    3.3 Firstly the popular reactio,L that alcohol at rite
I   ground should be barred and public houses in tile
    vLcinity closed i3 nor conaxdered either helpful or
    equ[ta ble.      the problem of drunkenness at Foo$ba! i

I   Stadia i~ noc as a resulg of alcohoi consumed aL ~he
    ground but drinking en route. The worst pro01ems !lave
    aJ.wa]s been with ’away’ supper~. and pacticularly tlto~e
    who save travelled a long way. Befo~’e alcoholic drinks
I   were     s ~opped on Football Special trains quire
    definitely =he worst exat~pies were from =ha~ source.


I   3.4 Alcohol consumed ac t~,e grounds has generally not
    been t~le cause o~ the problem if for no ocher reason
    ~I~an it is ~imply noc possible ~o purchase ~ufficlen~
    ~o get drunk in the time available.
I                                               It should be
    pointed o~,£ that it ilas always oeen common practice ~o
    close bars whilst play is i:l progress and never to ope~l
    ~,em after the march.      ~u~[ic bar~ adjacent re open

I   seating acd terracitlg are in all cases out of view of
    the pitcn.


I   3.5     The Associauion has argued ti~at closing bars in
    grounds can be counter ~roductive in that it. will
    d L~courage some away supporters fro~ entering t~e
    ground until the last miuute in an attempt to find
I   alcohol elsewhere. It has long been a police strategy
    oy arrangements with Coach Operator:~ and British Rail
    for away supporters to arrive a= the ground one hour

I   before kic~ of[ to ensure taut t~]e away supporters are
    in the ground before the bulk of the home supper=
    arrives, thu.~ reducin~ clte ris& of confrontation
    outside tile ground.
I   3.6 Equally, restricting sales in premises near =o ~k~e

I   ~round ca~, result in groups of supportecs wanderln~ far
    afield to find ’open’ public houses and ~,tereby
    widening =he area of ~Lice supervision.       M~i~ ca(,
    depend on the circumstances o£ a par=icutar ~a~ and
I   there are ~tnm~ w~en licensees are encou£aged co close
    premi~es l~owe ve r.


I   3.7 The Police view is therefore very much direc~ed
    ~owards ~he desirability or coacrol~ rac|~r C~mn
    ou~righ~ bans at grounds. The maln problem rela~es ,’o
    excessive drinki~tg whils~ travellin~ and ~i~a~ i~ wh~re
I   effort clearly must be concee~ra~e4.



I
I
I
i   3. 13 Y:~e ACPO nave no objuction~ $o fne princlpies
    involved but nave raised a number o~ ~ unda;aen~al
    que~,ion,~ a~ ~o rne wofki;~g o~ .~uch schemes w;~ici~ would

i   i~ave =o be answered before ~hey were =ee~ a,~ an an~we[
       noo~ganz.~m.

    3. 14      £he purpose of any scheme must be to exclude

l   ~hose who Oecome i~entified a~ hooligans ei~ne¢ a~ ~:~e
    enrolment
    behaviour.
                  sgage or    because of   their sub,~equenc



I    3. i5 Tho~e reponsibie for controliing =he member:~i~p
     scheme :~ave ~erefore to ~e in a ~o.~i~ion ~o e,~abii~i~
     Cae ’bona-fide:~’ of applicants (ot1~erwi.~e ~here would

I   be nothing =o srol) the w~’oti6 people ob~aininj seceraL
    member~i~ip cards or cards in fai~e particulars), al~o
    they have to obtain sufficien~ informal, ion ~o cancel

I   one membership of people who should properly be
    e xc luded.

    3.16 At the present tithe guidance to the Police Service

I   ft’o~a the Home Office on the disclosure ot confidential
    information would certainly preven~ t~e police from
    being the intelligence source of any such scheme run by

I   a private comraercial Interest.    [t i.~ difficult co say
    wnar other source of informal, ion would be availaOie to
    the operacor~.


I        There are a !ot of oChe= que:~=iona :-

         a)     Would cancekia=ion apply =o ~ixose guil~y

I               of acts of hooli~anlsm ouc,~ide =he ground?

                Would cancelia=ion =elate =o people ci~ar~ed
                with criminal offences or only afceL" a

I       c)
                conviction?

                Would there be a sys=em of appeal? - in

I               which case would police officer~ ~e called
                upon =o
                ~xc fusion.
                            su~Can=ia=e   c~e ca u,~e    for



I       d}     Would cancellation follow fro~ b~eac!~e~ of
               club yules? - i~ so. how would the 0reach
               be e~c~Oki~hed and information passe~ Co

I       e)
               =he ope ca=or?

               Would any sys£em be of value uuless ic was
               ~nivevsal? - One ~a£n pzoblem relaCe~ co
I              away suppoc~.



I
I
I
3.o      A Briui~h Rail ban on al,.:mloL consumptLon o{l
’ ~oo~oall ~peciai~’ ~,a~s ha~ a marked affect our £t-J
~ucce~}~ has led ti~o~e e£elnenr,~ agalnsc whom i~ was
directed to ~eek other forms of rraa-~port, suca as
coacne.:~ and self-drive hit-e van~.            Thi:, kind or.
displacement make~ polLcitl& that muct-~ {m)ce diL’ilcu!t
wic’a ~m=’~ny mot-e away suppor~er.-j arriving at gruutld~ muci,
earlier tna~ .~caeduled and in smaLJ.eL" droup~.

3.9    the Criminal JustLce (ScoJland) Acr 19~b. w~licil
was ~camed co ~ackie similar probiem.~ .,.~ con:didered to
have had a good measure of succe,~ and its terms, under
mo,~c condigion~. Dan alconnl to .~upporters on pub~.ic
transport and ar grouad~4.      Tqe cu~-~r.om~ and groui~d
~acili~ie~ in Scotland are ,~owever so{,~ew~a~ diLtereat
=o t~ose of rae English Foorba’,i League and a simple
extension or rne Acr r~rougqour ti,e d.K.      wa._~ nuc
considered appropriate by rne ACPO.

3. iO li~e Sporting gvents (Co,tro/ ot Alcohol e~c..)
Bii~ picks up mo,~c of ,’-i~e relevanL pcovis/on.-~ of tl~e
Scot~i~n Act exce,tdlng r;te ball Otl alcohol cou,~um,~d by
,-;uppocter~ to trains carrying suppo~.’;ecs to and from
de:digtlaced ~por.’ing events. (SeL~ drive i~ire van.~ nave
not been included.) There are similar re~itr~ctu, n.; ac
ground3 as ro dt’unkenne~.~; possession of ’torn’coiled
conrainer~’; and possession o[ aicohuL. .bur exemption
i-i allowed under scricz co,ldirJ.on$.        J?he ACP’I) :sUppOrt
~i,ese provisions and ti~e power~ of enforcement bur
ri~ere     i’~    ~ome     re~ervarion aoour    ~:le e K,.,~’- ¯ o~
re.;rricci(,n of~a.,.e" ’ at       grounds, i’rivace Member.~ ooxe~.
aq      impor~anr      source     o£ revenue       ro Club~ and
Ct’oubLefcee.are r.~le only parts oL ti~¢. ground~ currently
licensed wtlic:°~ wiil be exciutled from exemption, finis
,owever i~, zz~ce a difiiculty for the Football CLubs as
l:Ize Police wi~o would only be affected if rae~e
conditions result in lost revenue to the ciubs many of
w:,om already struggle to meet ~;,e (:o~t of policing.

3.11      In short excessive drinking i.-~ considered a
conl:rihuto~y factor to noo.liganlsm and ti~e ;sew
provisions si,ould as~is= tzle [’olLce in coet£olii,~g =i,e
problem. The detail ol rile Bill however i~ ques~’ioa~d
and m~ doubt: su,~h difficultiea re flare ti,e speed wi~h
which the ieglsiation has bee,l pt’o~res:~ed.



3.12 g good deal of consideration ha’~ ~en given by
the ACPO Sub-Commit, tee on ~loolggani~m iz, Sporl~ ~.o- the
que.~tion o~ ’ membe rslzip card.~’     and    ’ mmmbe~ship
schemas’. £n s~ple ~erms the ~heury i~ ~iza~ entry ~o
the Football Ground would be res~ric~ed ~o ’oo~m-fid~
~uppur~ers Wild would have I:o apply for ~mbersizip and
who would lose i£ if guilty of misbeilaviour.
                   ~{uwwo~d~ suct~ a ~ys~em accommodate tho~e
                   at=ending for~ the first c~e? - any section
                   of .’he grou~d reserved fur none card
                   ’aolders would defea~ ~ne purpose of t~le
                   sc.eme,

    3.17 Having made these observations there doe3 seem
    ~cope however for clu~ co consider membership ~caemes
    for particular parts of the Ground e.g. family
    enc losu res.

    All Ticket ~L~tches

I   3.1o All- ticket ma~c~e’~ have been canvassed as one
    way o1 achieving .-~eg=egation and contro[iinj .to .,~ome

I   extent ti,o~e attending a game.      ~ar~iculariy i~ Cip
    compeKLtions wne~ ticker sales are s~rLcced ~o vouci~er
    holders or ~uppocter~ club members the police find all-
    ticket matches worthwhile bu~ only ~ere a capacity

I   crowd can reasonably be expec red.        Otherwise, it
    resuit~ in ol)en ticket Jales o. matcn days whici~
    weakens controlled segrejatioa and runs c~e risk of

I   rival supporters being mixed together in =~,e ~ame
    sections of the ground.



I   3.19     All- ticket ga{~es impose further pcobiem~ fo~
    ~;}e police in thar queues i,ave ~o ~e poiiced co
    maintain order and to prevent opposition fans

I   infiltrating on t~,e prescribed days for ticket ~ales.


    3.20    It remaLns the view o~ ~le ACPO =hat all- ~icke~
I   games are only suitaoie for capaci=y games.

    Early__ Kick- Ogfss

I            The Football League have considered arranging
    ma~ches w~h an early kick-- off (generally IL.~Oam)
    w~ a vie~ ~o diminishing ~he o~portuni.~y for
I   subduers ~o o~ain alcohol.         [~ has been considered
    ~1~ a game played ac ~ha~ ~ime would be less likely ~o
    a~=~ hooligans or to develop tt,e ~owdy atmosphere

I   r.{la~, goes wi~h excessive drinking.
    3.22    The p=op~sL=ion ~eem~ rea~u~le and some games
    [tare been p~ayed on ~his basis. The problem .as arisen
!    hough cha~ ol, re)me occas~.ons =he aoolisa~ elem~flz
    i%avieg ~cended ~heir own figIUt~ have ~hea gone ~o
    another game ~elag #layed ~ia ~he a£~ernoon WLlUi z,%e

!   sole in=euKiom evidenKly O[ eausl~ Krouble.

    3.23       Such schemes are l:i~erefore supporCed provided
    taey are arranged i,~ consultation with ~i~e Police to
I   avoid possible cla~hes o£ =ha= kind or o=her iocaL
    co nsidera=iot, s
    Ciuo Initiatives

    3.24     A number of other ideas I~ave been suggested
    particularly cite development of family facilities
    and/or the Idea of foo=ba!i being played ~efore an
    exclusively home crowd,

    3.25 ALl efforts Co improve cite envlronmeut and ti~e
    atmospi~ere aC a football &cou,ld are co be encouraged.
    If the c~ub provide~ good fact iiCtes and makes
    ~[ofes~/onal use of ~he public address system and other
    entertainment a coatr ibution can be made Co tae
    atmosphere at a game.       £!le development o~ family
    enclosures is equally co be supported.

    3.26. The ’aii home £ixtuve’ however, wniist probably
    desiraole in principle, raises difficulties.     Such a
    fixture may provide a tidal Lense for the
I                                                      ’away
    supporters’ and prove difficult toP    o~ice.~"     Thi~
    initiative floweret, i~ it were to be supported by the
    League, would have co be carefully considered and eac~l

I   matcu being a,~sessed [n the context of ocher games
    which might be affected.

    CCTV
I   3.27 :,k~st of the foresoin$ i~sues relate one way or
    another =o ways in which access co a footbal~ ground

I   can be limited oc controlled.   The develop~en~ of CCTV
    has as its p~’imary purpose con=roi of be~laviour once
    people are inside the s~adium, and as they enter oc

I
    ~ave.

    3.28 A good deal of careful co.sidera=ion has already
    been given to ti~is question and in 1964 ~he Football

I   Trus~    funded   experimental    schemes    in
    Manchester, the West ,.~tidland~, and Edinburgh.
                                                     Greate~
                                                       These
    schemes a~’e still in the process of being evaluated and
                                   In addition ~he use of
I   mUCh has been learn~.
    i~dividual video cameras aC some matches such as the
    fixture between ~uddersfleid [own and Leeds United has
    sl~own =hat e~eiLen£ eviden~:e capable of persuasive use

I   in ~he Cour=~ ¢aa be obtained.

    3.29 T~e ,~PO Sum-Co=mini=tee on ~ooli~aa/sm in Sport: has
    been moniCorin& cnese deveIopments and as a ,=after of
I   policy has ~ak~n ~i,e view that =he dev=lopmen~ of CCTV
    for bo~h manasemen~ inform~=ion and evidera=e gathering
    is beneficial and should be pursued.

!
I
I
I,
    ,

I        3.Jl fne Scientific Researcn and Development 3rancn a~
         the florae Office are party to these discus:~ions aad use
         od a vehicle for observing crowd bei~aviour ~,ich ha~
         been developed by S.R.D.B. is also bein& evaluated.
i        SECTION FOUR - INTELLIGENCE

I       4.1      ~bsc of the foregoing comment relates to i~sue~
         t~,ac nave oeen specifically raised by Governmenc and
        outside agencies.     Prior to the recent troubles wl,ich
l       ~ave focused atteu=ion, ti~e ACPO Sub-Committee on [t,:e
        initiative of the Chairman had ~ougnt co re-examine the
        Police Intelligence ne~worL~ for dealing witil football

I       nOD iigani:~m. A strut cure ba;~ed on !ocal liaison
        o£ficers is already in being and has proved of great
        vaiue ovec ~he year~ bu~ the Sub Committee fei~ that

l
        ti~e information being fed to theln needed to be improved
        a~d ~ile system of intelligence gatheri~ig ,rode more
        comprei~ensive.


I       4.1     Since that ti~me all Police Forces have bee;,
        consulted and the frai~work for a new iatelligence
        system based on the romp reuensive doc u,~e~1 ca tion of

I
        crowd bei,aviour at each, match has been drawu up. It is
        antlcipated Coat the new inteLLzgence system will be
        operating from the co~mmencement or ~he comin~ season.


I       SECTION FIVE - POLICE POWERS

        5. i     Tacticaiiy the Police have a number of options


I       open co them when dealing wigh disorderly behaviour at
        football matches. "One option i~ to ejec~ individuals
        wi,o~e conduct may have fallen short o~ taac which
        constitutes a criminal offence buc is nonet,~eiess in
I       breach of ~round rules and regulations.

         5.2 Generally speaking nowever where Cnere is evidence

I       oL a subs can~Ive offence, offenders are charged.
        Offences of ’a~saulc’ ( ’woundings", ’ accea L bodily
        harm’, ’Police Assaul=’ ), ’ posses~lon of offensive
        weapons’ and ’criminal damage’ are wel~. established in
I        =he criminal law anJ subject to ~ile quaLi=y o~ evidence
        Police power~ to deal wi=h =hese circumstances are noc
        in question. There ace however some difficuL~ies o[

I       enforcement .in respect of Public Order offences and
        recent decisions of ~ne Courts have made SeCtion 5 of
        cae Pub.Lie Order Ac~ 1936 more difficui~ ~o prove.     L=
        £s recognised ~:har I:he old common law ol~fence~ are
I       unwieldy although the preven¢lve pot~rs ~vailable
        tim Police for breaches of cl~e peace are vaiuabIe in
        so~e cLrcumstances. However, in tt,e li~n¢ o{ ttm ~ni~e
                                                                to



I       Paper - ’"£ne Review o~ Public Order 5aw" - ~l,ere is no
        8reat merle ta arguing curren¢ ie~al ince~preCaZion of
        public, ordec offences.     By a,td large I:he ACPO gives
        ~uppor~ ~o ~he new proposals for of[ences of ~io=~
I       VioLen~ Disorder and Affray.      Some of these offences
        have a clear relevance to =he proolem of hooliganism.


I
I
I
I   ~.3      fhe powers conferred on the Police in the new
    Spo=tln~ Events (Conrroi of Aicot~o~ etc. ) Bi L~. ,:a,:e

I   been brLeCly referred to. They allow for the searca of
    puoiic ~rans~or~ used by fans in tran~ic whece there
    are grounds ro suspect =here may oe oifences; powe~’~ co

!   ~earc., for alcohol and ’controlled con~ainer~’ such a~
    bottie.~, cans etc.. and ~o deal wi~i~ people who are
    drunk at sporting event~.


I   5.4       It is ii~eLy r~at the turn~[Le~ wLil be ti~e
    testing ground foe ti~e effectiveness o~ a good par~ of
    tni~ legi:~!ation in ti,e coming sea:~on. The Policing of

I   turn.~tiLe~ is alway~ impo¢~ant and the power:~ and
    offence~ under the new Bill will aziow fo~ effective
    policlng.      [f there i~ a constraint it i.~ of course
    that these provisions will require tin)re police officer~

I   to make titem e~ective.        The probtem o[ ~e~ou~ce and
    [inance is dealt wi~i~ elsewhere (Fa~’agra|~h 7. i).


I   5.5. Customarily ~upporters ha~,e been :~earcned ~y
    police fo~ offensive weapons or m±,~-~iles a,,~ they have
    rnougllt necessary Delore they ente~ t;~e g~ound,       in
    almo~ all ca~es thi~, has been wigh con~en= and has

I   been largely unchalienged.        }iowever t;le ~oiice and
    ~ riminal Evidence Act 19~4 ha~ laid down p~ec i:~e
    guidelines regarding police ~earche~ which ia e~:~ence

I   require an of ricer to nave rea.;onable grounds fo~
    su~pectin~ tl~ac he will find 3toien o," prohibited
    articie~ before he carries out a searci~ and in all
    case~ a written record of ti~e seat’ch must be ,~ade and
I   handed =o the individual concerned.

    5.6          It is the ,,Jew of =he ACPO that routi~e.

l   preventive searches of football supporter.~ are not
    adequately ca~ered for in tile eACE Ac~ no~wL~l~tandk:~g
    the proviso in the Ac~’s Code~ of Practice wnLcn
    ~eemin~ly exempts from lt~ provisions .~earci~e~ at
l   Sport~ Grounds wight con~ent or as a condition of entry.
    The &gPO take the view char an ’authorisation’ to
    ~earch o~ r.hi,~ ~asis canno~ be rero~mended because it

I   enjoins a polica po~ ~oo closely co tire foo~baik
    c Lubs and could therefore place in jeopardy
    con.~table’ ~ position in .ia~ slmuid his acCion
                                                              a
                                                             be
    cnal Lende d.

    5.7       As to the enforcement, of ’t~ublic O~tder L~u’ at
    m~jor ~porcin~ evenc~ elm Police Command a~: r.~ sce;~
    ha~ always to be awa=~ o~ practical con~,~de~a~iuns.
    Every arres~ take~ o[~ or mona officers from [he ~£r~
    and arrests made ac the wron~ ~i~ may w~rsun r.he
    :~ituat ion.
      i~o~luLue ~eo~ i~ is the ~trong view of ~n~ ACPO ~a~
      effective interve~tion i~, =he ~ace oi oeili~e’:ent and
      abusive behaviour ra~her than me~e con=ain~en= .~houl4
     ,Oe policy in =he coming ~ea=on.
     5.8.    As no~-ed earlier it~ the report (paragra[,a 1.6)
     ~he hooli:~a~ depend~ upon bein~ anonymou~ in a ~arge
     crowd.


     SECTIO~ SIX - SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

     Safety Certificates

     6.1 Since ~he Safe=y of Sporzs Grounds Act 1975 came
I    into force in SeptemOer i975 a system of ~ate=y ~,as
     been es~aoii.-~i,ed whici~ provides ~ha= desisnated soot,s
     stadia must comply wi=i, a~i the terms and co,~d[~on~ of

l    a cer=if£ca~e i~sued by t[,e Local aut,~ori~y.     To da~e
     ~i~e Act has applied =o all ~irsr and Second Oi¢ision
     Football League grounds and will ~oon be extended =o

II   include Third and Fou==i~ Divi~ion grou~ds in the coming
     foo =bail sea,on.      The Gore rn~e n= has said t,~a~ it
     intends also =o extend its provisions =o Ru~uy ueague
     C!ub ground,~ someti~ in the near future.

II   0.! ~1, is.-;uin~ Local auti~ority i q required to cou:=ui=
     with ~he Chief Conscabie of ~he area in which ~e

i    ground i~ located ~egarding ~he term~ and cundL~.io,,.~ ro
     be included before any such certificate is i.~sued.
     AI ~i~ough ~oere is no limit or rest ric=zon o~ =he
     conditions whir** a lucal authority may impoa~e on a

I    safe~y certificate, ti,e Act require~ ~i,at ce~’~-ificates
     con£ain condition~ about numOers of spectator~, number
     and sizes ot en=rance~ and exits, ~irc e~cape~

II   ~aintenance and number~ and strength o~ crus~, barriers.

     6.3 Whils~ tne impu= into safety cer=ificate~ i= a
     ~a==er for local au~horigies after consultation wiuh
I    Chief Cons~able~ a~d o~her interested par~ies, the aC~O
     ~a~ made recommendations =o ~,h~ef ccons=ables t~at meet
     many of =1~ needs of police and should be catered rot

I    An safety cer~i~icate.~.

     b.4    The following recommendations are pu0iisued i~
     A~’s note~ o~ ~uidan~e for aenio~ police o~f~cers:-

i         (i)   It is codsidered essential cha~ a sepal’ate
                police office, cl=arly signposted, should

II              be available at the ~rouud. The o~£ice
                should p~ov~de adeq~a=e accommodation for
                enquirie~ and rep~rtiBg, and ~i~ pro~e~
                of prisoners. There should ~ a secure

II              de~encioo room for ~he o~hort term
                accoa~oda~lon o~ prisoner~, The office
                ~aouid be si~ed so ttmt ~here is adequate

!1              vehicular" acces~ for ~he unobtruaiva ~emoVal
                o~ poisoners.
I           i~ wouia be de.~iraOle if eic~er
            a post office tele|),ione film o~ a direct iine
            =o =~e nearest police station were available.

I   (ii)    [,~ i.~ essential that a con=roi room is
            provided to oversee police operations i~ ~lle
            grou[~d. Provision oho~Lid be J~de for a oaae
I           station to control the g.H.F, police radio.
            It should De possible ~o ~ave a direcg acces~
            co cite ground public addce~s s~tem a[id a

l   (iii)
            tele~hoL1e llne =o ~.i~e Loca! police ~ta=ion.

            Before ~he s~adium is used on any occasion for
            a apecific activity ~he certificate iloLder
I           consul= with the Local ~oi~ce co[icerni.~ig
            ~he attendance o~ sufficient number of
            ~oLice officers for the purpose of

l           maintaining lawfu~ a,,d orderly behaviour
            among perso~s attendlng ti~e ~adium.



I   <iv)    The holder ~hail agree with one Chief
            Constable 14 days before each o¢ca,aion when
            the specified activity ~akes ~la¢~ on ~he

I           method of admission (ai[- ticket) and the
            me=hods ~o be used foe tae ’~egregacio~ of
            ho~me and away supporters.

I
I   <vi)    r;,e holder in co--ope~ation
            with ~’olice i.~ =o take rea:;onaOie s~eps co
            ensure no person enteL’~ or re,~ains in =,e

I   <vii)
            stadium wi=i, auy gias~, bottle ~,~" can.

            No accumulation of rubOisn, bricks, svones or
            ol:her ma~erial~ which in C~le opinion of the

I           Chief Officer of £oli¢e are capable of use as
            mis,~iles shall be permitted to reu~ain in any
            p~t. of the ,~tadium co whi¢.q specta~or:~ imve



    (v~il) Por[ai01e te[evi:.~ion cameras and equipment
I           slmli be placed in such a position as may
            be agreed between th~ hoider a~d c~e C.i~l~
            Con~ ~a ble.


    (ix)    No veh£cies ocher chan e~r&en=~ (police,
            ~ire, amm~Lance) si~ai~ ~ ~a:ked i~, any
I           pa~= of ~he e~.adium exce~ aS showm on .~y
            plan o~ as agr~e~ wiKt~ £i,~ Chief Coo~abie
            or ~i~e senior police o~Ice£.
                                                            -



I

I
l               the C;lief Constable or hi:~
                representative faust be informed as ’~oon as
I    (xi)
                possible of any re-arranged football fixture.

                When, owing to the condition of tile ground, a

I               cancellation.of I:-’,te matcit i:~; likely, a police
                representative should be present when ti%e
                ground is in~pecged.

I    Stewards

I    6.5 Whilst the police have no direct control over r.he
     employmen~ of stewards at football ~rounds, ~hey can
     exert indirect control by means of conditions inserted
      in safety certificate3 issued under ~he Safety of
I    Sports Grounds Act, 1975. It i:~ mo:~t important tnar
     stewards are sufficien~ in ztumber, suitably deployed,
     weii trained and capable mentally and physically of

I    carrying our *’heir routine and emergency fu,,ctions.
     Again ~nere is suostantial AJPO guidance as follows :-


I           The number of ~tewards employed by tan management
            of =he ground should be determined in consulr.ariolt
            with the police and ~hould be based oa the
            requirement dictated by the structural properties

I           of the ground in relation to an average crowd tot
            a particular fi~ure.


I_          One method of indirect control is provided by Cl,e
            Sa~e~y of Spor~s Grouuds Ac~ 1975 ac l:nose grounds
            whlc~ are required to be certified.      The Local
            Authority, before issuing a Safe~y Certificate, is
!           required £o consul~ tim Citief Officer of Poli~e
            regardinM ~he ~erms and conditions ~o be it~cluded
            in ~he ~er~ifica~e.

I           Persons employed as sceward=t at foo~aail grounds
            should be clearly idet, ti£iable by armbands, coat
            or ocher dls~inguishi~g fen[urn. T,he~ should, a~
I                         be under t~ie direc~ concroi of
            supervisora ~m~e Identities sltould De made known
            to ~he police officers on du~y at ~he ground.
i           S~ew~cds should be d~s~:r tbu ~ed I:It rougimut: ~he
            ~round In accordance wi.~n a d~ca£Led pr~-arranged:
            scimduLe, agreed between cite police and ~na~e~ent
I           o~ the ground.

            Their duties may be divided into              four amLn

I           ca cegories :-



I
I            contr~,lling o~" directin~ r:embers of ti~e public
             who are enterin~ o~ ~eaJin~ ~he football ~round.

             patrolling ti,e ground to deal wi~h aoy emergencies
l            e.g. rai~ing alarms, ex=ingulsning fires etc..

      (c)    manning entrat,ces, exits and other s=ragegic

I            points, particularly exit doors, gate~ and roller
             shutters which are not continuousiy open whilst
             the sround is in use;

i    (d)     undertahing specific duties relating =o emergency
             and evacuation procedures.


II   In particular they my have to u~,dertake ti,e following
     du~ ies : -


!    (a)     man any final exit door or gate ~a~ich As lucked
             during the game and ensure that at least oue
             steward manning any gate has the key to the gate
             continuously on his person durin& that cime.

!    Cb)    o~en these doors or gates to permit evacuation in
            an emergency, or. in order to clear t~e g~ou~*d at

i           full time, at a time pre-arranged De~ween the
            police and the management of the ground.

     it)    ensure that all means of entry and exit are Kept
II   (d)
            free from obstacles;
            ensure t~,at mobile sales s~aff do not position

I           equipment so as to obstruct exit rou~es.
     Stewa:ds play a vi~al part in Cite maintenance of public
     safety standards at football ground and accordingly
II   must be physically and men=ally fit to assume ~his
     responsibili£y. They should receive training i,I firs~
     aid and fire fi~hcln~ and s.ouid al~ be rehearsed in

!    e~rgeney procedures.


     The importance of =he pt’ovlslon of for~mi emerge~cy
i    procedures at each ground ¢aano~ be over emphasized.
     Join~ consui~ation in ~his respec~ shoul~ ~ake place
     between pollce, the managemen~ .... ~he &round, ~ire,
i    ambulance and o~her services.      I~ is essentia! ~|m~
     s~ewards and ~heir supervisors are fuilf c o~nlsan~ of
     ~he part ti,al: I:hey |tare [o play In ~he plan4 ~lch a~e

g                      managemeng of ~he          atmuLd ensure
     ~ha~ written Ins~ruc~ion~ concerning ~he ace:ion ~o be
     take,~ in ~he even~ of an e~ergem:y are ~de readily
     available ~o all staff and s~ewa~d~ and. in particular,

!    tha~ all the s~aff and stewards should receive
                i~struc~ion and ~alning appropria£e to ~1~eir
     responsibilities in tn|z event of an e~r~e~Cy.

II
I   £xet’cises £o¢ the Jca~r and .~tewazd:~ snouid oe carried
    out t’eguiarly to ensure ~he z~moo:’.l (}{)era~ion oZ c,{e
    procedure for dealin~ wlt~ an e~r6eacy. A record
    ~,~ou~d ~a kept co:~taiain:~ detall~ of the traialn~ and
I   i~.~ruc~ion gicen and the exe¢=z’~e~ ,eld~ and si~ouid
    i~ciude cite following matters :-


I              date and time of t~e in,~ruction of :~e
               exerc i~e.

         (b)    duration
I        (c)    name of the person giving ti~e instcuc~ion:~


I        (d)    names of the persons receiving ~,~e
                ins t cuc ~ ions

         (e)    nature of instruction or e~erci:;e
I   After initial practice in,~truction all ~aembers o~ ~caff
    and stewa~J~ si~ould receive verbal ins=ruction, ~jiven

I   .oy a c~mpe~en~ person, at least once i~ every period o~
    t;~’ee mouti~s at regular ~ntervai~.         Consideration
    shouid be given to providing briefing cacd:~ tu ste~ard~

!   reievant to particular points

    5ueward~ whu oarro.I t~e gcou{~d i~ or’dec to deal wic~
    emergenc~e.~ may be classlfed as ’Emergency Stewards’.

!   [L aa emergency arise~ in any section ot tae ground it
    ~’qouid be tae responsibility of tim Emergency Stewa,’d

l   co lamed iateiy notify ~ne police g ~’ound con~roi
    operator and ti~e section supervisor where appropriate.
    if the emergency i~ a fire or suspicion of a lice ti~e
    En~ergency Steward s,ould ai~o operate the nearest Fire

I   ,\latin Control Point and tackle the fire u:~ic~ the
    nearest avaLiable correct fire extinguls~er.      Ot~er
    steward~ in the ~ame section Should render all possible

I   assistance.

    [f =aere is a possibility of tlte need to evacuate a~y
    ¯ ~ection(~) of the ground a .~uitable me~age ~hou~d be

I   b~ad=a~t ovec ti~e public address sy,~tem, ~ubject to
    the discretion o~ ti~e senior police office~ present.
    On hearia~ this broadcast t,~e Emergency ~tewards and

I   t~eir supervisors   who are oa duty In ~he section(s)
    concer~md should proceed to ti~e Eaergeacy A~sembly
    Poin~ (which witi ~ave been designated i~ the wrir~ten
                        await dlrecti~as.            Othe~ ~tewards
i   instruction) aad
    should remain at    ti~e~c posL~.Loa~.        [~ t~.~e emergency
    passes wi~aout timre being a ~ee~ ~.o evacuate, a
    suitable message will ~e broadcast and all .~teward~

!   si~ould resume 8offal duties.




!
I
I
I
!    l~ ~ Ls necessary to evacuate any sectionls) of the
    3rounds, an appropriate instruction shouid be given to
     c~e E~ergency S~eward or hi,~ supervi:~or by the ~enior
I   police officer and to s~ewards employed on exit~ by a
    suitable me rand or metaods.            On receiving t~li~
    instruction ti~e exi~ ~tewards should opeu chei¢ exit

i   gates and the supervi.~o r si,ould notify the poiice
    ground control room i~mediately =i~i~ instrucr.,ion has
    been complied with.        Emergency Steward~ and stewards
    employed on general dutle~ should assist the puOlic in

!   leaving the ground in an ocderly manner and cI~eck all
    toilet:~ and puolic places =o ensure that they have been
    evacuated.        When the evacuation of the section(s) is

I   coml~leted all stewards should report co rne designated
    Assembly Point.        in the event ok total evacua=[on of
    t:ie ground a general Assembly Point for ~tewards
    should De designated.
I   It i.s essential that all stewards nave a complete lis~
    of all Assembly Poi~Ks.

I   5tewards are vital components of the public safety
    system ac football grounds.         [hey should me weii
    trained in emergency procedures wnicu should be clearly
!   defined.       Stewards should be adequate in num0e r.
    p~tysicaliy and mentally capable of performin~ ti~eir
    duties, e~fec tiveiy deployed, elf [ciently     ~ul)ervised
!   and    readily    identifiable.         Police    ha ce
    responsibility to advise and encourage toe mana~Iement
    of football gcounds in the efficient and effective use
                                                              a


    of stewards. Al£i~ough their employment is nor., directly
    con=rolled Dy police, indirect control is facilitated,
    in many cases, by means of condi=ion.~ inserted in
    Safety Certificates.
i
    6.6 Whilst ACPO guidance is comprehensive peri~aps one
i   issue needs to be addressed. There is a~ present no
    general system of Inspection of stewarding and it £s
    considered thai a condition should be written into
    Sa£etM Certi[ ica£es requiring Police inspectiun.
!
I                    pollcin$ football i.~ perhaps one of ~he
    m~st im~r~ant issues [or ti~e ACBO. 1~ cau be argued
    rim= z:he sport itself s.ould foo~ the bill bu~ this is
    simply nor., & practical answer. A good deal of ~he
I   ~olicing of foo~ali rtakaa place away £=on ~he ground
    and there is no basks [or ~kin@ l,a~es.             The
    financial status of m~St football Club~ t;~m~elves is
    such anyway that any major i~rease in ~l£~ing costs
!   would make them i~;soLvent.     In a~rk reality if t~;e
    Poiice we re to lnsl.;t upon far greater levels of
    policing aC games(or indeed c~ar~e tae cl~*b~ for a!L
!   the officers tha~ now attend) the whole s~ru~ture of
    the professional sport ~uld have to clangs.


I
I
I
    7.2 £a fact r,te ~oiice generally chacge c,te Club for
    ¯ "hose oL£icers de~ignaced ~o ground dutie~ re," ~.ne full
    mai:ci,.      1~. i,~ usual prac clce for the officers on
    ou~.~ide dutie3 Co ~e~urn ~o r,te ~round during ~;te. game
    where they forta a ,,~ubs~ana ;al reserve - £hese officers
    are no~ generaliy charged for.

    7.3 Recena enquiry by ~:~e ACPO Sub Commi¢~ee iadicates
    ti~a = 36 o £ tl,e 92 Canon League Ciubs we ~’e then
    experiencing di~ Lcul.’y in payi’~g police bills.    22
    Clubs at cite time of enquiry were mo~’e c,~a~% ti~ree
    monal,s in arrears and 14 clubs more taan 6 monti~s.


I   7.4 The ’~e~a~.
                ¯ ’ oOligation to malnraln a proper level o=
    policing is c lear and if foot bal I c[ubs sough= £o
    cun=ioue wi~h fixtures withou~ policing the power under
    Section i0 el Safety ar Sports Grounds Act could be
I   invoked co prevent t:,e game taking place.

    7.5 Whilst Oot.h ti~e Police and Clubs are makin~ every

I   ef[or~ ~o deal wi~h their financial di[’ficul~ie~ the
    problem remains.

    7.6     ~’er[,aos t~Ie greater financiai problem for the
I   Service is the shee~" cost o~ policing footOali ~hic;~
    cannot be offset agains$ football c~uL bs. As sca~ed
    ear£ier ia this re,~or~ ([,acagrap|~ 1.2) the bucde~, fails

!   unevenly     Appendix A sinews di~triouc~.on ot~ clubs as
    against nest police forces.      [~" :~nouid also be sa.id
    that if the Police are co take new initiatives and seek

!   for powerLUi enfoccement of new Legislation tni~ will
    in its turn translate in, o policing costs.

    There are p~’esen=ly two possibiii=ies :

1   either policing football Ls specially provided for in
    Police budgets particularly by way of an increased
    provision for overtime ; or foe=ball i:~ policed oy
!   reducinK the level.~ of policing el.’~ewhere.

    7.7. IC Ls ~i,e view o~ the ACPO tna~ £his problem is

I   r~a~ mt£s[actorily resolved and cigar Forces having a
    =o~id~abie commitment co foocba ii need spe¢ial


I
    8. i The Association o~ COief Police Ofiicer~ ~hrou~n
!   its sys=em of Commic=ees is isvolved in ex=a~tni~
    critical issues of Po£iein~i ~OliC~ where ~l~ere ~s a
    need for common s~andards or ~dmre ~te problems cro~4

!   geographical
    responsibili=y i~
                        boundar~eu.        Whilst
                                     in ti~e hands o~ ~he local
    Chief Constable guida~e fomm.tia~ed by =he Association
    is generally a ....ca~eved oy consensus and ~or== the. oasls

!   of muci~ cu~aoo practice.
     ¯ ,~. Z Tae A:s.’~ociacion~ guidance ia respect oi: footbaLL
     ,1ooii~ani~m aa~ been ~’ev.Lewed over ~ile years, Lhe Last
     rime bein~ 19~L-62. [n view of ¢urret~c l~gi~iaLion and
     pre~enc c ircum,~ =ances a fur~he~ review i,-~ ~)e Lag
     u~de r taken wi~icn wiLL       build upon I:i~e exi.~cing
     i~ [u rma =ion.


    SECflON NiNE - CONCLUSIONS A~D RECO~D’,~;~DA’ZIOi’,S

    9.~ SecCion One      FootbaLl llooliganism

          (i)     HooLigani,~m i,~ violent group bei~aviuut"
                  usi:~g z~e cover of ~arge crowd:; ~o avoid
                  i~dividua i res2onsioiLizy. Poiice
                  ini=iative to coun=er =ne )~ooL~,~an are
                  aimed a~ ~mi~ing t~e i,~dividual accountable
                  (intelLigence and CCrV) a,~d ac co,~croiLit~g
                  group misbehaviour (segregation, 2lannir~g.
                  ground co~l: roi~).

          (t~.)    ’Safety and ~ergency p~ocedure,~’ and
                  c~’owd cuncroi’ at’e compLe~engacy and =ue
                  rigid= baiat~ce between concaiamenc [eucLug
                  and emerg~zacy exic facilities has =o 0e
                  found.




!   9.2 Sac=ion Zwo - Curren= Prac=ice in Policing
                      FootbalL.

!        Ci)      CurL’en~ advice by =i~e ACPO ~o Chief
                  Officer~ i~ respect of foo~oaLi L,~

I                 comprehensive, weLL ~ried an,~ .~ound.
                  l~ is pre:~enrly beiug reviewed i~ ~.i~e
                  ligh= of new iegisla=ion and new
                  ini= ~a=ives.

!        (i~)     Pubiica=ion of guidance i~ in =ae proce~
                  o~ being prepared for" wide~- circuLa=ion

l                 ~i~-l~in ~ile Service.

    9.3 Section Three - Recen~ Developmetl~s


I        (i)      Drunkenne:~:~ i:~ a ~eriai fac~o~ in
                  hooliganism and I:ha problem Largely reia~es
                  co consumption by ’away support’ whil~

I                 en rott~e ail~ not a.[cohui COrI~UUI~d a~ E~e
                  ground.

         (il)     The new ’BilI’ i~ gene a~iy supported by
                  Cite AC~O and pt’ovide~ pours =o deal with
                  many aspects of ti~e p~oblem.
                 T~e ACPO al’e however concer~le,~ at :~o~e
                 issues mud observe that the =,peed o[
                 eqactmeut has no~ allowed for detailed

I                consultation.
                 (PartlcutarLy ti~e need to include @rivate
                 i~ire mini buses in ~he re.~trictions; aud

!        (iv)
                 £o widen t~e exemption to include private
                 viewing boxes. )

                 Membershi~ card schemes are not seen as

I                an answer to hooliganism because of rl,e
                 practical and lei;a~ difficulties of ~aking
                 a scl,eme effective. There may be some
                 oenefi~- i,owever ~n t~:e development of
i                £amily enclosures within grounds.

                 ’All- ticke~ f~.,,:
                                   .....
                                     t u ~: e ~ are otllJ :du g~abLe

!                for ’capacity ~ames’ andt’equ~re" cto.~e’
                 ~uperv£sion o~ ticket sales.

                 "Early kick- offs" probably attract less
!
         (vi)
                 pL’obleta.~ bu~. mu,~t not be arranged wi,"i~out
                 consideriag the possibility of the rowdy
                 elemen£ attending ot~er fixtures

!        (vii)
                 afte rwa.~ds.

                 The ACPO recogai.~e t~at ti~e ilome CLub can


!
                 do a good deal by providiag a~eni,~ie:~ to
                 promote a {rieudiy a:mosphere and the
                 Police are <een to co-opera=e where
                 appropriate.

|        (viii) The ACPO strongly     supports the develol)~,~nt

I                of CCTV fo= evidence gathering and
                 p roy iding management informa t ion.
                 Evaluation o£ early ~cnemes i~as led to
                 modifLcations and ~he AC, PO is in
j                ~onsul~atlon with ti,e ~iome Office ’SRDB’
                 and tile Football Trust to develop a
                 specltication and eKtead usage.

I   9.4 Section Four - Intelligence


I        (i)     Intelligence gat~,erlng aa~ been reviewed
                 and refined and a far ~oce compre~,ensive
                 and systemattc scLmme ha:~ b~en de:~igned

I                and will be operative n~xt: season.
    9.5 Section Eive -- Poii~e Power~


!                It i:~ generaliy Poiice practice ~o
                 prefer ehar~ea where there, is evidem:e o£
                 a subs~at~t/~ offence al~hou~h ’e~ectlon’

!                ~y be appropriate £~ some instances such
                 as breach o~ ground rules ....


I
!
                 8~opo=al~ for changes in the Public OrdeL"
                 uaw may me of advantage ~o¢ poilcing
                 hooliganism. The Po~er under ~he Sportkng
                 ~ve,ats (Control of Alcohol) Bill wiLL
                 allow foL" ~o=e effective ~iicin~;
                 t~ar=icularly a= =urns~iLe.~ bur =here will
                 be re~.ource implica=ions.

         (i{i)   k’olice powers uf search remai~l a difilcuLty
                 and =h~ ACPO is not convinced ~ha= the
                 terms of =~e guidance =o one Codes nude[
                 the Police and Criminal Evidence Act [904
                 resolve this issue. Police powers Sascd
                 on a condi=ion of ena~y are no= con.~ideced
                 a~; a~propria~e.

         (iv)    The ACPO look for ~up~or~ ia C’ae posi=ive
                 policing of hooliganism in £~e coming
                 sea~on and emphasise ti~e need (:o curb the
                 rowdy and intimida’.ing oehaviour fcom
                 whici~ =i~e violence springs. [t is
                 an=icil~aCed =ha= developmen=~ in CCTV and
                 InteLligence will make a signiLicant
                 contribution.

    9.6 Section Six - Safety of Spor~s Grounds Ace 1975.

         (i)     ACeO 4uidance on Sa£e~y Certifica=e~
                 and S=ewards is comprehensive and
                 up ~o dace. The Ac~ provides for
                 Local coadi=ions ia Cer=ificates as
                 neces:;aey, but: ti,e ACPO =a~¢e =~,e
                 view =ha= ~outine police i~spec,’ion of
                 stewarding should be a condition.

    9.7 Sec=ion Seven - The Cost of Policing.

         (i)     the cos= of.po~ck
                                ’ " ’ gn n~.cn
                                         W’ "  i,~ chargeable co
                 Foocbali Clubs i~ only a pare of ~he =ocai
                 cos~. A number of Football Clubs are
                 finding area= difficulty An paying =he ¯
                 Police al=hough i= is no:ed riga= ~|~ese
                 ~:harges cnano~ be avoided an~ I:~,e PoLice
                 would have =he power =o seek =he closure o£
                 a ground if i~ was no= ade½uacely ~oilced.

         (ii)    The burden of policing foo=oall ~alLa
                 heavily on certain tortes, par=icula£1y
                 ~i~ose i~, large ¢onnurOa~ions ~ere o~her
                 ~res~ures are al~o great. In ~imes of
                 budgetary consCtaln~ special provisLon-is
                 n~cessa L’y.

    9.8 Section Eight - ACFO Guidarme tO Chie~ Police
                      0 f f lee rs

I                AUtO guidance is comprei~ensive and subje¢~
                 of curre,,~ review.


!
!
                                                                                            :ii~ !~




!                                                                           APPENDIX ’ A’
                                          1985/1986
!                        CANON LEAGUE FOOTBALL CLUBS AS PER FORCE

I                                NO.I (NORTH WEST) REGION

     GREATER MANCHESTER POLICE        DIV.            MERSEYSIDE                 DIV.
    i.   Manchester City              1           i.     Everton                  1
    2.   Manchester United            1           2.     Liverpool                1
!   3.
    4.
    5.
         01dham
         Bolton
         Bury
                                      2
                                      3
                                      3
                                                  3.

                                                  CUMBHIA
                                                         Tranmere Rovers          4

    6.   Wigan
I   7.
    8.
         Rochdale
         Stockport
                                      3
                                      4
                                      4
                                                  i. Carlisle United

                                                  CHESHIRE
i    LANCASHIRE                                   i.
                                                  2.
                                                         Chester
                                                         Crewe Alexander
                                                                                  4
                                                                                  4
    i.   Blackburn                    2
    2.   Blackpool                    3
!   3.
    4.
         Burnley
         Preston
                                      4
                                      4


I   SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                 NO.2 (NORTH EAST) REGION

                                                  HUMBERSIDE
I   i.
    2.
    3.
         Sheffield Wednesday
         Barnsley
         Sheffield United
                                      1
                                      2
                                      2
                                                  i.
                                                  2.
                                                         Grimsby Town
                                                         Hull City
                                                                                 2
                                                                                 2
                                                  3.     Scunthorpe              4

!   4.
    5.
         Doncaster Rovers
         Rotherham
                                      3
                                      3           NORTHUMBRIA
    WEST YORKSHIRE                                i.     Newcastle United        1
!   i.
    2.
         Bradford City
         Huddersfield
                                      2
                                      2
                                                  2.     Sunderland              2

    3.   Leeds                        2
I   4.   Halifax                      4           i. Darlington

                                                  NORTH YOPJ~SHIRE
    CLK~]U~mD
i   i.
    2.
         Middlesbrou~h
         Hartlepool United
                                      2           i. York City
                                      4

i                                NO.3 (MIDLANDS) REGION
    WEST MIDLANDS                                STAIITORI~IERE
I   i. Aston Villa
    2. Birmingham
                                     1
                                     1
                                                 i. Stoke City
                                                 2. Port Vale
                                                                                 2
                                                                                 4
    3. Coventry City                 1

!   4. W.B.A.
    5. Walsall
    6. Wolverhampton
                                     1
                                     3
                                     3
                                                 WEST M~RCIA
                                                 1.     Shrewsbury Town          2
                                                 2.     Hereford United          4
    LEI CESTEI~Y!~
    i. Leicester City

I   NORTHAMPTONSHIRE
    i. Northampton Town

i
                           DK).4 (EASTERN) REGION
 NOTTINGHAMSHIRE               DIV.         NORFOLK               DIV.
i. Nottingham Forest            1           i. Norwich City       2
2. Nottingham County            3
3. Mansfield Town               4           SUFFOLK

 DERBYSHIRE                                 i. Ipswich Town       1

i.      Chesterfield            3           LINCOLNSHIRE
2.      Derby County            3
                                            1. Lincoln City       3
 CAMBRIDGESHIRE
I.   Cambridge United           4
2.   Peterborough               4

                         NO. 5 (SOUTH EAST) REGION
ESSEX                                      THAMES VALLEY
i.   Colchester United          4          i.     Oxford United   1
2.   Southend United            4          2.     Reading         3
HAMPSHIRE                                  KENT
1.   Southampton                1          1. Gillingham          3
2.   Portsmouth                 2
3.   Aldershot                  4          BEDFORDSHIRE

SUSSEX                                     i. Luton Town

1. Brighton                                SURREY
HERTFORDSHIRE                              Nil
1. Watford


                         NO. 6 (SOUTH WEST ) REGION
DEVON &CORNWALL                            MILTSHIRE
i.   Plymouth Argyle           3           1. Swindon Town        4
2.   Exeter                    4
3.   Torquay United            4           DORSET
AVON &S~mRSET                              1. Bournemouth         3
1.   Bristol City              3
2.   Bristol Rovers            3


                           NO. 7 (WALES) REGION
SOUTH WALES                               NORTH WALES
i.   Cardiff City              3           1. Wr exham            4
2.   Swansea City              3
                                          DYFKD-POWYS
GWENT
                                          Nil
i. Newport County
I   ]ETROPOLITAN
                              N0.8 (J~TROPOLITAN) REGION
                                    DIV.                   DIV.

I    1. Arsenal
     2. Chelsea
     3. Queens Park RanEers
                                    I
                                    I
                                     1



I    4. Tottenham
     5. West Ham
     6. Charlton Athletic
                                    I
                                    I
                                    2
     7. Crystal Palace
I                                   2
     8. Fulham                      2
     9. Millwall                    2
    lO. Wimbledon                   2
I   II. Brentford
    12. Orient
                                    3
                                    4


!
i




i

I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I      ASSOCIATION OF CHIEF POLICE OFFICERS
I   OF ENGLAND, WALES AND NORTHERN IRELAND

I
I
            COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY
I          INTO CROWD SAFETY AND
I             CONTROL AT SPORTS
I                 GROUNDS.

I
I
             A.C.P.O EVIDENCE.
I
I
I
                Second Report
I               September 1985
I
I
I
I
                                       FORWARD
I
I            Further to the written submission to the Committee of Inquiry

I   into Crowd Safety and Control at Sports Grounds of July 1985, the

    Association of Chief Police Officers General Purposes Sub-Committee on
I   Hooliganism at Sportings Events were asked to respond to the


I   recommendations contained in the Committee of Inquiry’s Interim Report and

    to consider some additional matters raisedduring the inquiry.

I            This second response attends to those issues.

!
I
I
I
I
I
I
i
I
I
I
I
          COHMITTEE OF INQUIRY INTO CROWD SAFETY AND CONTROL AT SPORTS GROUNDS
                                     INTERIM REPORT

                 POINTS TO BE RAISED IN SECOND REPORT BY THE A.C.P.O.

I                                                                        PAGES.
     a)         Any comments on the Interim report, with particular       1 - 11
                reference to the Provisional Recommendations.
     b)         The relative responsibilities of police and the            11
                management of a football club within the ground
                particularly with regard to crowd control and
                evacuation in the event of an emergency.

    c)          Police powers:
I                                of search
                                 for breach of the peace
                                                                         11 - 13



I                                Public Order Act, 19365
                                 throwing missiles

I                                chanting of obscene or racialist
                                 abuse

I                                running on the pitch

                                 to ban a particular match

I              (you may wish to compare police powers in England
               and Wales with those in Scotland, where the Scottish
               offence of breach of the peace seems to be used to
I              deal with almost any form of conduct regarded as
               undesirable).
    d)         The advantages and disadvantages of placing police       13 - 14
               officers among spectators on the terraces as a means
               of crowd control.

    e)         The provision of any available statistics about the        14
               number of incidents of violence at football matches.

i   f)         The potential difficulties for the police of the
               introduction of membership cards.
                                                                        14 - 15

    g)         The use of CCTV, and any difficulties with                 16
               "follow-up" enquiries.
    h)         Alcohol, with particular reference to consumption        16 - 17
               in Directors’ accommodation or "executive boxes".

    f)         Activities of the National Front and other extreme       17 - 18
               right wing or extreme left wing organisations at
               football grounds, and the suggestion that football
               matches are used as a vehicle for recruitment and
               for organised violence.
I                                                            PAGES


I   j)   Any observations on how police measures might
         prevent or minimise a riot, such as that which
         occurred at Birmingham City Football Ground on
                                                             18 - 19



I   k}
         11th May, 1985.

         To what extent the problems relevant to football    19 - 20
         are applicable to other sports.
I   l}   The adequacy or otherwise of the police
         participation in Local Authority teams for the
                                                              20


I        purposes of inspection and certification under
         the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975.

    m)   Any suggested amendments to the Home Office Guide   20 - 21
I        to Safety at Sports Grounds (the Green Guide).


I
I
l
I
I
I
I
I
l
I
I
I
I
l    a)     Any comments on the Interim report, with particular reference to the
            Provisional Recommendations

I    RECOMMENDATION 1.          Evacuation procedures should be a matter of police
                                training and form part of the briefing by Police
I                               officers before every match.



I                               This has been agreed and now forms part of the
                                Policy of the ACPO.
     RECOI~IENDATION 2.         The local authority team responsible for issuing
I                               safety certificates in respect of designated
                                grounds should as heretofore include police
                                officers.

I                               Supported by the ACPO.

I   RECOI~4ENDATION 3.         Early attention should be given to the Home Office
                               Directorate of Telecommunications to consider the
                               practicality of producing a more suitable personal

I                              radio for the police.


                               For some time the ACPO Technical and Research
I                              Committee has been exploring the possibility of
                               improving radio communications in public disorder
                               situations where ambient noise is a problem. The
I                              reports so far received are less than encouraging
                               and have prompted the explanation of alternative
                               measures to improve the standard of communication
                               at sporting events, including an improvement in the
I                              number and quality of direct, land-line links
                               within grounds.

I                              In     the    meantime    the     Directorate   of
                               Telecommunications remain fully aware of the needs
                               of the Police and is continuing to monitor the

I   RECOMMENDATION 4.
                               development of experimental projects.
                               The Green Guide should be amended to include in
                               paragraph 11 a provision that wherever practicable
I                              roads within a quarter mile of sports grounds
                               should be left entirely free of parked vehicles.


I                             As most football league grounds are located in
                              densely populated urban areas with little provision
                              for off street parking this recommendation would
I                             prove extremely difficult for the police to
                              enforce. Obviously emergency access routes need to
                              be maintained at all times but to enforce a

l                             complete ban on parking would present a
                              considerable drain on police resources.


I
I
I
I                        Paragraph 11.3 of the Green Guide reads: wherever
                         possible access roads should provide for the

I                        parking of emergency vehicles so that exit routes
                         used by crowds are not seriously obstructed.
                         NOTE: Popplewell Report para 3.35 acknowledges that
I                        parked vehicles did not hinder emergency vehicles
                         at the Bradford disaster and accepts that the
                         implementation of such measures in London and other

I                        major cities may prove impossible because of the
                         location of the ground.
    RECONNENDATION 5.   Consideration should be given to making it a
I                       criminal offence in England and Wales to have a
                        smoke bomb or similar device at sports grounds.


I                       It is important to cover in the criminal law all
                        devices which "may do no actual damage but the
                        panic which they are likely to engender among
l                       spectators is very great" and to also cover all
                        crowds in which panic can cause death and serious
                        injury. Such an offence should therefore include:-

I                       (a)   possession at, in or while attempting to gain
                              entry to;

I                       (b) any sporting event, public entertainment,
                            public meeting or procession or public
                            gathering;
I                       (c)   or at such a place, activates or attempts to
                              activate;

I                       (d) any smoke bomb, pyrotechnic device (e.g.
                            thunder-flash, or explosive firework), flare
                            or any similar article;
I                       (e) without lawful authority or reasonable excuse.


I                       The qualifying phrase (e) excludes people in such a
                        place who have legitimate reasons for possessing
                        such articles (e.g. where fireworks are part of the
                        entertainment). The wider definition of prohibited
l                       articles seeks to include all those which can cause
                        panic through fear of a fire or explosion. The
                        provision covering "activating or attempting to

I                       activate" covers such cases as those where a person
                        lights a device held by someone else or is seen to
                        light a device but "possession" cannot be proved.

I                       Such an offence would require a specific power to
                        search, seize and arrest; seizure may be a useful
                        alternative to arrest in minor cases where a

I                       juvenile or other person commits the offence
                        through inadvertence rather than culpability.


i
I                                -2-
I
i   RECOMMENDATION 6.    Those managing sports grounds not covered by safety
                         certificates should give serious consideration,
I                        with the assistance of fire authorities to the
                         presence in a ground of suitable fire-fighting
                         equipment.

I                        This item is directed at Sports Grounds Management
                         and the Fire Service.
I   RECOMMENDATION 7.    Stewards at all sports grounds should be trained in
                         fire fighting.

I                       This recommendation is supported by the ACPO,
                        however, it raises an important question concerning
I                       whose responsibility it ought to be to train and
                        inspect stewards (See comments on page 11)

I   RECOMMENDATION 8.   In designated grounds it should be a term of the
                        safety certificates that an adequate first aid room
                        should be provided.

l                       This is a matter which receives the full support of
                        the ACPO.
i   RECOMMENDATION 9.   There should be urgent consultation between the
                        Health and Safety Executive and the Fire

i                       Authorities and Local Authorities as to how best to
                        co-ordinate and communicate their inspection and
                        reports.

I                       The first point to be made i~ that a safety
                        certificate is issued by the Local Authority for an

I                       "indefinite period". Thereafter, the Green Guide
                        recommends that "a detailed inspection of the
                        ground, including all components and installations
                        should be carried out annually to ensure compliance
I                       with the guidelines in this Code." (para 4.1).

                        NOTE: The Green Guide is a voluntary code without

I                       e]-~l face.
                        Recommendations made by the annual inspection team
                        may be incorporated into existing safety
I                       certificates, "if it appears appropriate to the
                        Local Authority so to do." (para 4.1).


I                       It is important that those involved in the
                        certification process should also come together to
                        carry out annual inspections and that the findings
                        of each team member be communicated to the rest in
i                       the form of written reports.          Any general
                        observations affecting other team members
                        responsibilities must also be brought to their
l
                               -3-
I
I
I                         immediate attention for whatever action is deemed

I                         appropriate.
                          Police should comment upon matters such as crowd
                          capacity, stewarding standards and training,
I                         conduct of bars and refreshment areas, turnstile
                          procedures, egress and ingress and any other
                          matters affecting safety and crowd control.

I                         The ACPO recommendation
                          inspection be reinforced
                                                    is that the annual
                                                       by a system of
                          re-certification when the Local Authority would
i   RECOteIENDATION 10.
                          consider written reports.
                          Stewards in all grounds should not only be trained

I                         in fire precautions and fire fighting but should
                          also be trained in how best to help the police in
                          evacuation.

I                         Agreed. The general standards of stewards should
                          be a matter reported on annually by the Police (see
I   RECOfeIENDATION 11.
                          comment in previous recommendations).
                          Paragraph 6.14.6 of the Green Guide should be
                          amended to read "All exit gates should be manned at
i                         all times while the ground is used by the public
                          and be capable of being opened immediately from
                          inside by anyone in an emergency."
I                         Agreed. The present wording of para 6.14.6 reads
                          "All exit gates should be manned at all times while
I                         the ground is used by the public so that they can
                          be opened in~rediately in an emergency."

l   RECi~NDATION 12.      The Green Guide should be amended to contain a
                          specific provision in relation to stewards;

                          i)
I                               that they should be trained and instructed to
                                deal with any emergency relating to fire or
                                evacuation;

I                         ii)   that they should be given written
                                instructions about the action to be taken in
                                cases of emergency;

I                         iii) that they should receive practical
                               instruction and training appropriate to their
                               responsibility;
I                         iv)   that no-one should be employed as a steward
                                unless they have been so instructed and

I                         v)
                                trained; and
                                that they should be adequate in number,
                                physically and mentally capable of performing
I                               their    duties,    effectively    deployed,


I                               - zt -
I
I                                effect i vely      supervi sed   and   readily
                                 identi fi abl e.
I
                          Agreed. The standards and training of stewards
I   RECOMMENDATION 13.
                          should be specified within safety certificates.

                          Building of new permanent stands of combustiable

I                         materials should be prohibited as a general rule.

                          Agreed. This is a matter for the football clubs,
I   RECONNENDATION 14.
                          Local Authorities and the Fire Service.

                          Suitable and adequate exits should be provided in

I                         all. sports grounds.

                          Agreed. The ACPO takes the view that all exit
i                         gates should be stewarded and not left unattended
                          during sporting events. Consideration should be
                          given to installing standardised locking systems
I                         for all exit gates with keys being issued to
                          stewards and to police officers on duty. This is a
                          common practice at many grounds and works to the
                          satisfaction of all concerned.
I   RECOI~IENDATION 15.   No smoking should take place in combustible stands,
                          that this should be a condition of entry to the
I                         ground and that signs to this effect should be
                          prominently displayed.


I                         Agreed. The ACPO feel that the responsibility for
                          enforcing this rule should lie with the clubs and
                          their stewards.
!   RECOMMENDATION 16.    Fire Authorities should identify and visit all
                          sports stadia in their areas and should prohibit or

I                         restrict the use of any practices which, in their
                          view, constitute a risk to spectators because of
                          the inadequacy of the fire precautions.

I                         A matter solely for the Fire Service.


I   RECOMMENDATION 17.    In order to ensure a complete record of Sports
                          grounds a local registration system should be set
                          up.

I                         A matter for Local Authorities.


I   RECOMMENDATION 18.    Consideration should be given as how best to deal
                          with temporary stands and marquees.


I
I                                  -5-
I
I                        At designated grounds, notice of proposals to erect

I                        temporary stands should be given to the Local
                         Authority before work is carried out in accordance
                         with Section 8 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act,
                         so that necessary inspections can be carried out.
I                        Without some advanced notification a Local
                         Authority may have to resort to its emergency
                         powers under Section 10 of the Safety of Sports

I                        Grdunds Act, 1975.
                         In the case of non-designated sports grounds,
                         owners should be required to notify Local
I                        Authorities before erecting temporary stands and
                         marquees so that safety standards can be checked.
                         (Such a provision could relate the sports grounds

I                        registered by Local Authorities within the terms of
                         Recommendation 17 if it were implemented).
    RECONNENDATION 19.   The next edition of the Green Guide should make it
I                        clear that it applies to all sports grounds.


!                        This is a matter for the Department of the
                         Environment who publish the Guide.

    RECOI~ENDATION 20.   Urgent consideration should be given to introducing
I                        a membership system in England and Wales and in the
                         Premier Division in Scotland.

I                        This topic is addressed separately. (See page 14)
    RECOI~ENDATION 21.
I                        Closed Circuit Television should be introduced at
                         football league grounds in England and Wales and in
                         the Premier Division in Scotland.

I                        The installation of Closed Circuit Television has
                         been pursued by the ACPO and funds have been made

I                        available by the Football Trust to enable
                         installation of equipment at all English first and
                         second division clubs during the 1985-86 Season.
                         (No ACPO policy in Scotland. The subject has
I                        received a mixed response from both police and
                         clubs. Still under consideration).


I   RECOMMENDATION 22.   There should be a specific offence in England and
                         Wales of throwing a missile at Sports grounds.


I                        In its response to the White Paper Review of Public
                         Order Law (Cmnd 9510), the Association of Chief
                         Police Officers strongly recommended that there

I                        should be a criminal offence of missile throwing
                         rather than to leave this dangerous practice to be
                         dealt with as "violent behaviour." The example of
                         missiles being thrown at football matches was cited
I
I                                -6-
!                              as an example of the sort of problem we sought to
                               deal with under such a provision.
!                              There is a need for a general law to deal with:


i                                  "any person who throws or attempts to
                                   throw a missile of a kind capable of
                                   causing injury with intent to cause
                                   injury or whereby injury is likely to
!                                  be caused."

                               It should be noted that such an offence would

I                              require a power of arrest and should be applicable
                               in any public place as well as sporting arenas and
                               places of public entertainment, for missile
                               throwing has become a serious problem and public
I                              disapproval of this dangerous practice should be
                               expressed in specific legislation.


I   RECOMMENDATION 23:         Football Clubs should review their arrangements for
                               entry and the organisation of their turnstiles.


!                              Agreed.     The number, location and control of
                               turnstiles is an important consideration which, if
                               lacking can lead to a build-up of tension which can

!                              manifest itself in violence. General guidelines
                               are to be found in the Green Guide para 5.1
                               "Turnstiles should be of such numbers as to admit
                               at a rate whereby no unduly large crowds are
I                              waiting for admission and yet at no faster rate
                               than the arrangements for distributing spectators
                               within the ground permit."
I                              Consideration should be given to including a
                               section on turnstile quality, control and numbers

!   RECONNENDATION 24.
                               within the terms of safety certificates.
                               Consideration should be given to the design of a
                               standard efficient perimeter fence with proper
I                              exits.



I                              This receives the fullest support of the ACPO.

    PROVISIONAL RECOMMENDATIONS:

I   1)    I am minded to recommend that in England and Wales the Police should be
          given the unfettered right of search before entry to football grounds
          by Statute.

I         Searching was also dealt with in the ACPO response to the White Paper
          as a serious deficiency in the criminal law. There is a clear
          requirement for a workable power to search for offensive weapons and
I         other articles intended for causing injury or alarm in connection with
          any large gathering of people where the police suspect that violence
          may occur, such as gang-fights, football matches, seaside hooligans,

I         demonstrations, etc.



I                                      -7-
I   The new complaints procedure and a proper insistence on correct
    procedures emphasised by the Police and Criminal Evidence Act have made
    it imperative that the police be given proper covering legal authority
I   and do not have to rely on such nebulous concepts as "implied consent"
    or to risk exceeding their powers.

i   To enforce a provision relating to offensive weapons and other
    potentially dangerous articles requires %hat the police have the
    authority to determine whether an individual has any in his possession.

I   Some provision has been provided in the Police and Criminal Evidence
    Act for a police officer to search someone for a "prohibited" article,
    but not "unless he has reasonable grounds for suspecting that he will
    find stolen or prohibited articles." The Code of Practice makes it
!   clear that "Reasonable suspicion, in contrast to mere suspicion must be
    founded on fact."


I   While such a provision may be just adequate to deal with individuals or
    small groups, it is not applicable to large groups of people going to a
    demonstration, entering a football ground, or on their way to the site
    of a proposed gang fight. It has been the practice in the past for
!   police to check gangs of youths en route to events where serious public
    disorder is anticipated. That course of action is clearly outlawed by
    the Police and Criminal Evidence Act. The exception provided in the

!   Code of Practice for written notes does not affect this issue. The
    proviso in the Notes of Guidance (4A) that "Nothing in this code
    affects the routine searching of persons entering sports grounds or
    other premises ... as a condition of entry" is of very dubious
I   legality. It would be a foolish police officer who relied on implied
    consent to justify a search. Furthermore, such a provision, even if it
    was legal, does not apply to crowds en route to football grounds or to

!   National Front demonstrations, seaside gang fights or violent pickets.

    The ingredients of a power to search need to be carefully balanced to
    provide appropriate backing for police action with adequate safeguards
!   for the public. Such a provision could be:

          (a)
I               Where a police officer of the rank of Superintendent
                or above has reasonable cause to apprehend serious
                public disorder;

          (b)
I               he may authorise a constable or constables to search
                any person at, going to, attempting to go to or in the
                vicinity of;

I         (c)   any sporting event, public entertainment, public
                meeting or procession or public gathering where
                serious disorder may occur or is occurring;

I         (d)   for any smoke bomb, pyrotechnic device, flare or any
                similar article or any offensive weapon;

I         (e)   and seize any such article or weapon.

          (f)   Any authority given under this section shall be

I               confirmed in writing as soon as practicable.

    The aim is to authorise police officers to make selective searches
    where a senior police officer has reasonable cause to apprehend serious
I
I                                -8-
I        public disorder at or in connection with a specific occasion or

!   2)
         location and is prepared to make a written declaration to that effect.

         I am minded to recommend that Section 10 of the Fire Precautions Act,
         1971 should be amended with a view to giving the Fire Authority power
I        in cases other than those which are regarded as wholly exceptional.
         Matter for the Fire Service and Home Office.

    3)
I        Linked to the above I am minded to recommend that consideration should
         be given to introducing legislation giving powers for the Fire
         Authority to apply to the High Court for an injunction under Section 10
         of the Fire Precautions Act.
I        Matter for the Fire Service and the Home Office.

    4)
I        I am minded to recommend that Section 10 of the Safety at Sports
         Grounds Act should be amended in the manner to Section 10 of the Fire
         Precautions Act and an application to the High Court for an injunction
         should be an alternative remedy.
I        This recommendation is intended to provide Local Authorities with
         greater ease of access to the Courts than what is provided by Section
I        10 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act under the heading "Emergency
         Procedures."


I        Within this section a Local Authority may apply to a Magistrates Court
         to prohibit or restrict admission to a ground where it is felt there is
         an unacceptable risk.

I   5)
         Access to the High Court might well prove expedient in an emergency.
         I am minded to recommend that the Secretary of State should exercise
         his powers to designate all sports grounds, whatever their size, to
         include indoor as well as outdoor authorities.
         This is a matter for the Department of the Environment.
l   6)   I am minded to recommend immediate designation of any ground capable of
         holding over 5,000 spectators to cover all sports grounds not merely

i        football grounds.

         This is a matter for the Department of the Environment.

I   7)   I am minded to recommend that consideration should be given to
         providing the police with additional powers of arrest under the Public
         Order Act, 1936.

I        This recommendation refers specifically to the practical difficulties
         facing the police in the advent of CCTV and post-match investigations
         of Section 5 Offences highlighted by the cameras. Under the existing
I        Section 7 of the Public Order Act the Police are empowered to make
         arrests where conduct is threatening or insulting but not once the
         immediacy of the situation has passed. The Interim Report rightly

I        notes that police at grounds are unable on many occasions to
         immediately arrest the instigators of violence for a number of reasons
         and consequently these offenders remain free from conviction. A video
         recording may well serve to positively identify one or more culprits
I        some considerable time after the incidents. It is therefore necessary


I                                      -9-
          to extend powers of arrest so that these offenders may be subject to
          arrest when positively identified and charged with the most appropriate
          offence. The Association therefore strongly supports Provisional
          Recommendation 7 but equally strongly advocates that it should
          encompass all public order offences and not just Section 5 Public Order
          Act.

    8)    I am minded to recommend that consideration should be given to creating
          a specific offence of chanting obscene or racialist abuse at a sports
          ground.
         The ritual of chanting obscenities and racial abuse at football matches
         is seen as adversely affecting the environment and a factor in public
         disorder:
         The ACPO feel that whilst there will be difficulties of enforcement
         such conduct should be capable of prosecution. If this can be achieved
         within the review of Public Order Legislation as a general offence so
         much the better.
         It is submitted that there is a gap in the law which:

                    (a)prevents   the police from being able to
                         take action in many cases where
                         considerable stress is caused to many
                         people, particularly the elderly and
                         ethnic minorities;
                   (b) fails to provide the police with the
                        ability to prevent minor disorder
                        escalating into serious disorder, and
                   (c)   leaves many disorderly and potentially
                         dangerous acts outside statutory law.
         What is needed, is a summary offence which fits at the bottom of the
         range in terms of seriousness and punishment for public order offences.
          In terms of sporting events it needs to cover such acts in the stadium
         as: running onto the pitch to stop the game at football matches (where
         there is no evidence of a threat of unlawful violence to justify
         conviction for Section 5 of the Public Order Act), shouting racial and
         personal abuse at other spectators; linking arms with others and
         jumping down terraces, shouting words calculated to cause alarm (e.g.
         "fire" or "it’s a bomb"); and outside the stadium as: charging through
         shopping centres and along pavements scattering pedestrians in the
         process; shouting racial, obscene or provocative abuse; rushing
         entrances to the ground, railway platforms, shops and other premises;
         fighting or trying to fight with rival supporters or chasing them
         through the streets with intent to start a fight.
         Such variations in the types of disorderly behaviour preclude specific
         offences but call for a general provision to cover disorderly
         behaviour. A suggested form is:-

                  "Using threatening, abusive or disorderly
                  words or behaviour whereby alarm, harassment,
                  annoyance or distress is or is likely to be
                  caused to another person."



I                                     - 10 -
I         Concern has been expressed that such a provision would bring too much
          by way of high spirited behaviour into the ambit of the criminal law.

!         It is the view of the Association of Chief Police Officers that the
         safeguards provided by (a) the independent prosecution service (which
         will reject charges lacking adequate evidence); (b) the courts (which
         will require evidence of a significant wrong) should ensure that
I        society’s needs for a measure to cope with hooliganism will be balanced
         with the need for people to legitimately display high spirits.

I        Conduct of the type envisaged as falling within this provision is often
         the forerunner of more serious outbreaks of disorder. Adequate
         legislation is essential for the maintenance of order and tranquility
         on our streets, as an element of crime prevention, as a means of
!        preventing serious outbreaks of public disorder and to regulate
         behaviour at, on way to, or from, such gatherings as football matches.

I        A general power to deal with "disorderly behaviour" is much more
         effective, because it is so much more flexible, than a series of
         specific offences dealing with "chanting obscene or racialist abuse" or

!        "running on the pitch". Such behaviour is better regulated by
         identifying ringleaders and charging them with disorderly behaviour
         than creating a specific offence which may be committed by such large
         numbers of people that arrest and charge becomes impossible. Specific
I        offences which cannot be properly enforced may bring the law into
         disrepute.

    b)
!        the relative responsibilities of police and the management of a
         football club within the ground, particularly with regard to crowd
         control and evacuation in the event of an emergency.

I        It is the responsibility of a football club to provide and maintain the
         physical structure of the ground so that evacuation in an emergency can

I        be achieved. The Club is also required through its management and
         stewards to have a plan for evacuation and to be capable of carrying it
         out. 70 prevent public disorder considerable numbers of police
         officers are often in attendance at sports stadia and consistent with
!        the nature of their duties they will generally assume control in an
         emergency. It is recognised that the Police if present in numbers
         generally take on crowd control as a matter of routine and need to be
         aware of evacuation procedures.        This should not diminish the
         preparedness of the Club on whom the primary responsibility lies.
         The duties of the Police in an emergency originate in their obligation
I        to protect life and property.          That obligation may in some
         circumstances be onerous and far reaching but it is to be distinguished
         from liability based on contract or tort which will generally not be
I   c)
         relevant.
         Police Powers:     i)   Search

I                          ii)
                          iii)
                           iv)
                                 Breach of the Peace
                                 Public Order Act, 1936
                                 Throwing Missiles
                           v)    Chanting of obscene or racial abuse
!                          vi)
                          vii)
                                 Running on the pitch
                                 To ban a particular match.


I
i                                      - 11-
I   We have already addressed in this report the first five topics;

I   vi) Running on the pitch
    The ACPO view is that individuals who run onto the pitch do so either
I   because they are propelled by fear of violence on terracing or by a
    spirit of exhibitionism or violent intent. The use of discretion wil]
    invariably distinguish between the two kinds of individuals. Sometimes

I   an act of encroachment on the pitch can provoke a pitch invasion by
    rival fans intent either on attacking each other or preventing the
    match from continuing. In the event, such behaviour is dealt with
    either by ejection for breach of ground rules or by arrest for an
I   offence of breach of the peace. In Scotland such conduct falls within
    the definition of a common law breach of the peace which covers a very
    wide range of circumstances from a public nuisance to rioting, and
I   unlike England, where the Magistrates can only make a binding over
    order, in Scotland the penalties are limited only by the powers of the
    Court hearing the case.

I   It is anticipated, however, that with improved segregation and
    perimeter fencing, running on the pitch may not be quite the same
    problem as before. Nonetheless such behaviour ought not to be treated
I   lightly in view of the serious consequences which might flow from it.
    Therefore the ACPO feels that should there not be a general offence
    which encompasses such behaviour it should lend support to any

I   recommendation to make running on the pitch a separate offence.

    NOTE:    The Popplewell Report (para 6.65) makes the
             following point when addressing the question
I            of pitch encroachment, "In Scotland it may
             constitute the common law offence of breach of
             the peace."

I            The common law in Scotland has developed
             rather differently than in England and Wales.
             The common law public order offences in
I            Scotland are breach of the peace and mobbing
             and rioting. Breach of the peace covers a
             very wide range of circumstances from a minor

I            public nuisance offence to offences
             approaching rioting in seriousness.
            It is defined thus: "Breach of the peace is
I           constituted by one or more persons conducting
            themselves or themse]ves in a riotous or
            disorderly manner to the alarm, annoyance or

I           disturbance of the lieges."
            The penalties for both breach of the peace and
            rioting are limited only by the powers of the
I           courts.
            Strathclyde Police report that there have been
I           instances where individuals running onto the
            pitch have been convicted of a common law
            breach of the peace, but it is not used very

I           often as they prefer to rely upon statute law
            wherever possible.


i                               - 12 -
I                   In England and Wales, common law breach of the
                    peace caters for all manner of nuisances
                    committed in public and private places but
I                   there is no provision for "punishment" save
                    that an offender may be "bound over" to enter
                    into a recognizance with or without sureties.
I        (vii) to ban a particular match
         Under Section I0 (Emergency Procedures) of the Safety of Sports Grounds
I        Act, 1975, a Chief Officer of Police is empowered to recommend to his
         Local Authority if he feels that the risk to spectators is so great
         that until steps have been taken to reduce it to a reasonable level
I        their admission ought to be prohibited or restricted. A Local
         Authority may then apply to the Courts for an order prohibiting or
         restricting admission to the whole or any part of the ground until such

I        steps have been taken to reduce the risk to a reasonable level.
         Existing powers of control might be extended should the Government’s
         White Paper, "Review of Public Order Law" reach the Statute Book.
I        Section 5 deals with static demonstrations and paragraph 7 reads that
         in suitable cases the police will be enabled to impose conditions
         limiting the number of spectators attending a football match where they

I        apprehend serious public disorder.
         Existing legislation and legislative proposals seem to provide
         sufficient powers to ban matches if necessary in the interests of
I        public safety.

    d)   The advantages and disadvantages of placing police officers among

I        spectators on the terraces as a means of crowd control.


         i)    Advantages:
I              a)    High visibility of uniformed officers serves to
                     deter would-be troublemakers who enjoy the feelings
I                    of anonymity and immunity from the law which their
                     position in the crowd often affords.

               b)
I                    Closer proximity to troublemakers makes for easier
                     evidence-gathering and identification.
               c)    Able to effect the speedy removal of children and
I                    "vulnerable" in the event of disruption or other
                     emergency.

               d)
I                    Sometimes useful to deploy officers in plain clothes
                     as "spotters" to identify gang leaders and pass this
                     information to uniformed colleagues.

I        ii)   Disadvantages:
               a)    Can isolate individual officers within crowds and

I              b)
                     expose them to possible injury.

                     Limits redeployment of officers to other parts of the
                     grounds.
I
I                                      - 13-
I        In the final analysis, the relative merits of tactical deployment are
         determined on the day by senior police officers in the light of
I   e)
         intelligence and prevailing circumstances.
         The provision of any available statistics about the number of incidents

I        of violence at football matches.

         At present there are no national statistics available on incidents of
I        soccer violence although it is anticipated that the new intelligence
         system will be of assistance in providing a national picture in the
         future. However, as Chief Constable of Greater Manchester, I have

I        available arrest statistics for the eight football league grounds in my
         Force area which between them span the four divisions of the football
         league. (See Appendix ~A’).

I   f)   The potential difficulties for the police of the introduction of
         membership cards.

I        Popplewell Report (para 6.48) recommends that urgent consideration
         should be given to introducing a membership card system so as to
         exclude visiting fans. This is based on the assumption that "if
I        substantial violence at football matches arises by reason of the
         confrontation of rival fans, then one solution would be to ensure rival
         fans were not present at the same game." (para 6.36).
I        The ACPO takes the view that unless membership card schemes overcome a
         number of significant practical difficulties the effectiveness is

I        seriously undermined.

         The primary purpose of any membership scheme must be to exclude those
         who become identified as hooligans either at the enrolment stage or
I        because of their subsequent behaviour.         Those responsible for
         administering the scheme must be in a position therefore, to establish
         the "bona-fides" of applicants and members (otherwise there would be

I        nothing to prevent the wrong people obtaining several cards or cards
         using false particulars).
         The critical question therefore, is from which source would they obtain
I        the information necessary to administer such a vetting system? The
         police are an obvious choice, but they are prohibited by statute from
         disclosing confidential information held by them about suspects or

I        offenders, viz Data Protection Act, 1985 and the Rehabilitation of
         Offenders Act, 1974. Moreover, apart from the police it is difficult
         to say what other organisations would be available to the operators.

I        To restrict admittance to "home" supporters might deprive the clubs of
         an important source of revenue which could prompt several clubs to get
         round it by making provision for "casual supporters." Any membership

I        scheme which provides for casual non-members to be admitted in
         particular sections of the ground puts at risk any plans to segregate
         rival supporters.

I        Another important consideration is what kinds of behaviour will lead to
         the withdrawal of a membership card? Once this question has been
         resolved, which is no easy task, the organisers must decide upon the

I        territorial boundaries of what they have come to define as football



I                                     - 14-
I   hooliganism. Will it include vandalism on public transport, at railway
    stations, public houses and thoroughfares leading to football grounds?

I   All of which are targets for the football hooligan.

    The ACPO feel there is much to commend a number of alternative measures
    which seek to limit attendance at football grounds.
I            Several clubs have successfully introduced family
             enclosures which attract children in the company

I            of parents or guardians to specially identified
             sections of the grounds. The scheme at Watford
             Football Club is a noteworthy example.

I   ii)      Limited membership schemes have been introduced at
             several clubs whereby sections of the ground are
             reserved for club members only.
I   iii)     A recent suggestion made by the Home Office calls
             for the introduction of "football exclusion

I            orders" whereby football hooligans convicted by
             the courts might effectively be prohibited from
             entering a football ground for up to two years.
             On the face of it, this proposition has some
I            merit, and to an extent, overcomes the problem of
             information confidentiality associated with
             membership card schemes. The precedent is the

I            Licensed Premises (Exclusion of Certain Persons)
             Act, 1980, which applies to persons convicted of
             violent behaviour and effectively prohibits a
             person from entering specified licensed premises
I            for up to two years. Whilst difficult to enforce,
             this kind of court order does tend to have a
             deterrent effect.

i   iv)      Another practical measure is for clubs to make
             certain selective matches all ticket, (e.g. where
             capacity crowds are anticipated) with no sales on
I            the day of the match. Sales to away supporters
             could be restricted to members of official
             supporters clubs. This would necessitate adequate

I            controls over ticket sales. If a "black market"
             develops and tickets are readily available from
             touts, major problems can arise on the terraces.
             The police are faced with difficulties in this
I            area as there is no specific offence to deal with
             football touts. If they are arrested they are
             frequently charged with obstruction which is not
I            always appropriate. Some localities have by-laws
             which offer limited penalties and require local
             authorities to prosecute.

I            We therefore recommend that consideration be given
             to amending the provisions of Section 3 and
             Schedule 4 of the Local Government (Miscellaneous
I            Provisions) Act, 1984 to include areas around
             football grounds to which the public have access
             and to provide a power of arrest if found

I            committing the offence.



i                                - 15-
I   g)    The use of CCTV, and any difficulties with follow-up enquiries.


I        Experiments at grounds in Greater Manchester, West Yorkshire and West
         Midlands have shown that CCTV is of value.

         a)
I              in recording incidents of disorder, the role played by
               individuals in that disorder and identifying offenders.

         b}   in allowing police commanders to identify areas of
I             potential conflict and thereby to deploy manpower most
              effectively.


I        c)
         d)
              as a deterrent to would-be troublemakers.
              outside the ground, mobile CCTV (hoolivan) extends the
              area of evidence gathering coverage before and after each
I             match.
         The courts have found the evidence produced by video and photographers
I        to be of great value in securing the conviction of offenders who
         otherwise would avoid prosecution.


I        The Football Trust which is administered independently of the Football
         Grounds Improvements Trust - has made available funds to cover
         expenditure up to £25,000 per ground for all first and second division
         grounds providing the equipment is owned and serviced by police.
I        Equipment has already been installed at many grounds, with the
         remainder only awaiting completion of tendering procedures before work
         commences.

I        So far the police have not had a lot of experience with "follow-up"
         enquiries but the state of knowledge has indicated a need for new
         skills in operational and video-searching techniques.          The ACPO
I        however, are optimistic that CCTV will be a powerful deterrent and will
         remove the immunity of the violent individual in a large crowd.

    h)
I        Alcohol, with particular reference to consumption in Directors
         accommodation or "executive boxes."


I        The ACPO has lent its support to the Governments Sporting Events
         (Control of Alcohol) Act, 1985, emphasising throughout the proceedings
         that it favours alcohol control rather than outright bans at football

I        grounds. We take the view that the main problem is associated with
         excessive drinking whilst travelling to footba]l matches and that is
         where effort must be concentrated.

I        It is therefore, of some concern to the ACPO that the Act omitted any
         reference to private hire vans in its section on prohibition of alcohol
         on public service vehicles. (The ban) on football "specials" - both

I        train and coaches - may result in some supporters transferring to
         private hire vans as an alternative form of transport which is exempt
         from legal constraints. Available evidence suggests that kind of
         displacement occurred following British Rail’s successful policy of
I        banning alcohol on football "specials" and what is more, intelligence
         suggests that it is precisely those kind of individuals "hell-bent" on
         causing trouble at matches who tend to prefer this form of transport.
I
I                                     - 16-
I        There are, of course, recognisable difficulties with enforcement, but

I        it is also the view of the ACPO that these are not insurmountable and
         would be outweighed by the deterrent value were this loophole
         effectively plugged.

I        The particular question of consumption in "private viewing boxes" is
         covered by Section Two of the Act, which prohibits the possession of
         alcohol in any area of the ground from which the event may be directly

I        viewed. According to the explanatory memorandum accompanying the Act,
         such areas include the stands, terraces and the restaurant, sponsor’s
         boxes and other rooms which overlook the pitch.

I        The Act goes on to specify the terms and conditions applying to
         exemption orders granted by local Magistrates to licensees or club
         secretaries inside designated sports grounds, but re-emphasises that

I        such orders will not apply to any licensed premises or registered club
         premises from which the event may be directly viewed.

         In essence therefore, private viewing boxes may well prove to be the
I        only parts of football grounds which previously enjoyed drinking
         facilities now effectively barred by virtue of their direct viewing
         position. This seems an anomalous situation which could prove to be
I        another serious loss of revenue for many clubs who have invested
         heavily in this area. The net result could well be a cutting back on
         other expenditures which could have an effect upon the police.

I        It is the view of the ACPO that the anomaly regarding private viewing
         boxes - hitherto troublefree - and the omission of private hire vans
         and mini-buses from the P.S.V. alcohol ban deserve re-appraisal for
I        possible inclusion in future legislation.
         Apart from these reservations, this piece of legislation provides the

I        police with the means to take an effective stand against excessive
         drinking and ancillary behaviour where it is arguably of most
         importance and that is at the turnstiles.

I   i)   Activities of the National Front and other extreme right wing or
         extreme left wing organisations at football grounds, and the suggestion
         that football matches are used as a vehicle for recruitment and for

I        organised violence.

         Police intelligence on the activities of extremist political
I        organisations is, of course, of a highly confidential nature. However,
         there is some evidence available which suggests that the National Front
         members have been actively involved in incidents of disorder at certain

I        football grounds, particularly in London. Moreover, there has been
         suggestion not established by the police that the National Front have
         been involved in organising parties of so-called football supporters to
         travel abroad to matches played by the England team.
I        There are many individuals who are seen standing on the terracing at
         football matches draped in or waving Union flags but it would be wrong
I        to assume that these are in any way connected with such organisations
         as the National Front simply because of their overt display of the
         National emblem.

I
I                                     - 17 -
I        There are many football grounds where National Front teams can be seen
         selling their National Front newspapers to supporters as they queue at
I        the turnstiles but there is little evidence to suggest that such
         individuals transfer their overt advertising activities onto the
         terraces. Equally National Front publications have advertised football

I        club badges and there is some loose link which needs to be monitored.

         It is intended that the new intelligence system introduced at the start
         of this football season will provide a valuable exchange of information
I        between all forces which will focus attention not only on targeted
         individuals but on activities or organisations such as the National
         Front whose involvement at football matches is already being closely

i   J)
         monitored by police.

         Any observations on how police measures might prevent or minimise a
         riot, such as that which occurred at Birmingham City football ground on
I        11th May, 1985.



I        Against the backcloth of events like that at Birmingham which so
         characterised the end of the 1984/85 football season, policing
         arrangements have been reappraised and in specific areas strengthened
         by new legislation.
I        Intelligence

I        A comprehensive intelligence system has been devised by the ACPO
         Sub-Committee on Hooliganism at Sporting Events which draws upon
         existing structures involving football liaison officers and other
         outside agencies such as British Rail, public transport authorities and
I        the football clubs themselves. The net result has been a build-up of
         information about the movements of football supporters and the
         identification and targeting of those whose past behaviour singles them
I        out as leading troublemakers.
         Even though the season has just begun, already there are encouraging
         signs that the new intelligence system is well on the way to achieving
I        its intended objectives. At the Oldham v. Huddersfield game on 24th
         August, for example, officers on duty at turnstiles were briefed on the
         basis of intelligence from Huddersfield that three men, all identified,
I        were the leading members of a gang of hooligans who travel with
         supporters to away matches with the sole purpose of causing trouble.
         Before the match had started all three had been recognised and targeted

I        by police who eventually escorted them from the ground after the final
         whistle having effectively deterred them misbehaving.

         Legal Powers
I        Excessive drinking has already been identified as a key factor
         contributing to football hooliganism. The ACPO view is very much

I        directed towards the desirability of controls rather than outright bans
         at grounds. New powers contained in the Sporting Events (Control of
         Alcohol) Act, 1985, though rushed through with some haste, provide the
         police with the means to take an effective stand in controlling
I        excessive drinking by supporters whilst travelling to, and upon entry
         to, football grounds. It remains to be seen just what effects this
         piece of legislation might have in the long term but so far there are

I
I                                     - 18 -
I        clear signs that it has had a salutory effect judging by the sobriety
         and demeanour of football supporters.

I        There is no doubt that the turnstiles will be the testing ground for
         the effectiveness of a good part of this legislation and if there is a
         constraint, apart from that relating to routine searching, it is of
I        course that these provisions require more police officers to make it
         e ffecti ve.


I        New policing initiatives and a purposive enforcement of new legislation
         in its turn translates into policing costs and, in the case of
         "turnstile policing" in particular, these are costs which cannot be
         offset against football clubs. Moreover, the financial burden of
I        policing football matches falls heavily on certain police forces
         particularly those in the large conurbation where other pressures are
         also much greater. It is the view of the ACPO that this problem is not

I        satisfactorily resolved and that forces having a considerable
         commitment to football need special financial provisions to offset
         overtime expenditure.

I        The adequacy of existing powers in respect of search, arrests for
         breach of the peace, pitch encroachment and missile throwing have all
         been addressed separately in this report, suffice here to state that it

I        is hoped that the Government’s review of public order law will remove
         some of the anomalies which currently fetter police action as well as
         place on the statute book additional offences which can more easily be
         proved without engaging in protracted proceedings.
I        Ground Improvements

I        The extension of the provisions of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act to
         all football league grounds has revealed that there is much to be done
         by many of the smaller clubs to bring their facilities up to the
         standards demanded. Indeed many of the bigger clubs are finding
I        themselves having to carry out specified ground imrpovements following
         joint recommendations made by specially constituted police/fire!local
         authority inspection teams. The net result being more effective
I        segregation of rival supporters, more formidable perimeter fencing and
         above all a safer environment in which spectators can enjoy the game of
         football.

!        In addition, the added facility of CCTV at all first and second
         division football grounds has provided valuable assistance to the
         police in identifying and targeting would be trouble makers in crowds
I        and enabling police resources to be deployed in areas of greatest need.
         All of which adds up to much more effective police control of

I        spectators inside (and outside) football grounds and more effective
         deployment of police resources, based upon a comprehensive intelligence
         gathering system.

I   k)   To what extent the problems relevant to football are applicable to
         other sports.


I        Understandably attention has been focused on the problems of crowd
         disorder and safety at football grounds and yet we are mindful that the
         problems at cricket grounds, particularly when one day matches are
I
I                                     - 19
I        played, and rugby league grounds, are basically similar though they may
         vary in degree. Crowds attending rugby league matches for example, are
         often in number similar to those attending football league matches in

I        the lower divisions. It is all the more perplexing therefore to
         discover that the hooliganism phenomena only rarely manifests itself
         among spectators at rugby matches who, by and large, are drawn from
         similar catchment areas as those attending football league matches.
I        It is timely, however, that the police are alert to the possibility of
         "football hooliganism" being displaced into other sports as an
         unintended consequence of tighter police controls at football matches.
         It is the policy of the ACPO to closely monitor crowd behaviour at
         other sports in the event that hooliganism manifests itself in any
I        discernable pattern. Should that happen we shall be seeking an
         extension of powers currently specific to football league club grounds.

I   1)   The adequacy or otherwise of the police participation in Local
         Authority teams for the purposes of inspection and certification under
         the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975.

I        Hitherto, police involvement in Local Authority inspection teams has
         been limited to the certification stage only. It is the view of the
!        ACPO joint inspection teams, including the police, ought to visit
         designated sports grounds on an annual basis to inspect and report upon
         the adequacy of arrangements and equipment in accordance with the

i        provisions of the Act and the Green Guide. Re-certification and a free
         exchange of information between all parties involved will serve to
         maintain standards and ensure that all conditions imposed on safety
         certificates are complied with.
I        Unless a formalised system of annual re-certification is introduced it
         is felt that the current high standards being introduced will

I   .)
         inevitably start to decline as the impetus wanes.
         Any suggested amendments to the Home Office Guide to Safety at Sports
         Grounds (the Green Guide).
I
         Section 5.2 deals with the dangers of boundary fences of inadequate

I        strength and height. Attention has so far been focused upon the
         standards of pitch perimeter fences of metal construction but it is
         felt that specific guidelines should be made on the strength and
         structure of brick and concrete walls not only surrounding the playing
I        pitch but also those which surround the ground itself. Experience
         shows that many external walls are in need of repair or replacement and
         in their present state not only represent a potential danger but also
I        provide a source of ammunition to the hooligan element among
         supporters.

         Section 6.14.13 reads "All doors on an exit route should be secured in
I        the fully opened position before the end of play." Such a guideline
         puts at serious risk police arrangements for segregating rival fans and
         represents a potential flash point for crowd disorder. It is the view
I        of the ACPO that on the majority of football grounds the number of exit
         gates far exceeds the reasonable proportions which could be expected to
         be controlled by a police officer, and as a consequence it is necessary

I
I                                       20-
I   from an operational point of view to allow these gates to be locked and
    stewarded with a universal lock and key system controlled by fire and
    safety stewards. Whilst this aspect is contrary to the recommendation
I   in the Popplewell Interim report the ACPO take the view that it is
    necessary to order. We are interested in the development of failsafe
    locking devices as used at Ipswich Town which allow for control from a
I   central point but can be opened locally in the event of power failure.
    If these systems can be perfected technically they may provide an
    answer but it is recognised that they may be very expensive.

I   Section 6.14.7 deals with turnstile facilities. It reads, "Facilities
    should be provided to enable people to leave the ground at any time.
    For this purpose a number of reversible turnstiles or doors so operated
I   as to limit the openings to the passage of one person at a time might
    be considered."


I   The ACPO take the view that this section should be amended to exclude
    the words "reversible turnstiles," as by their very nature they
    intimate a mechanism capable of jamming either in the reversing process
    or by any physical pressure. The mechanisms other than hinges are
I   discouraged by the guide, and on average the opening width of most
    turnstiles is below the minimum exit width recommended in the guide.
    Turnstiles should be so constructed as to discourage any use as an exit

I   route.
    Section 8.3(b) deals with evacuation from stands at sports grounds and
    recommends that evacuation time for stands of wooden construction
I   should be 2.5 minutes. It is the view of the ACPO that this evacuation
    time be reduced from 2.5 minutes to 2 minutes.

I   Section 8.4 reads, "Seats and gangways should be so positioned as to
    provide ready access to exits. No person in any part of a stand should
    have to travel more than 30 metres to the nearest exit from the stand."

I   It is the ACPO recommendation that for wooden stands the maximum
    distance travelled to the nearest exit should be no more than 18
    metres.     This amendment will allow compliance with the reduced
I   evacuation time recommended at Section 8.3(b).
    Section 18.4 reads, "Clubs should carefully consider their arrangements

I   for the sale of alcohol. In any case all refreshments should be served
    in plastic containers."

    The ACPO recommends that this Section should be amended to take account
I   of the provisions of the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol) Act,
    1985, so far as it relates to controlled sale and possession inside
    football grounds.

I



                                 - 21 -
                                                                                    APPENDIX ’A’


                     of the     Drunk and   Serious  Police             Obstruct     Criminal Offensive~
     Offence         Peace      Disorderly Assaults Assault             Pol ice ¯    Damage Weapon


     Manchester United - 1st Division - Average Attendance 43~000

J 1983/84
   ~984/85
                       7
                      28
                                     7
                                     5        f    I
                                                                    1
                                                                    2


    Manchester Cit>, - 2nd Division - Avera@e Attendance 24~000
I
I   1984/85      I    31       t     1             - I+
                                                   1                1           I        2
                                                                                         2
                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                   5


    )Idham Athletic - 2nd Division       Average Attendance 4~500

    It983/8+ I
I L984/85
                     4o
                     25
                                     3
                                     1        r J f r
I   3olton Wanderers - 3rd Division - Average Attendance 5pO00


I   L983/84 1 26j-
    1984/85
                              112
                                         21                               -    J                       -

I
    Wigan - 3rd Division - Average Attendance 3~200
i
I
    1984/85          18              I             -
                                                                 m

                                                                 1      I I
    ~ur~, - 4th Division - Avera@e Attendance 3m500



l’ I [
    .98+/85          16                            -!                     m

                                                                          3    I                   1
                                                                                                   1

l tochdale - 4th Division - Average Attendance 1p500


I ~,983/84
   .984/85
                     49
                     15
                                     -
                                     -
                                                  -
                                                  -                       I
                                                                                        1
                                                                                        2
    =fence   r roachf f
                 of the
                 Peace
                             Drunk and Serious
                             Disorderly Assaults
                                                        Poltce Obstruct
                                                        Assault Police
                                                                               Crimtnal
                                                                                Damage
                                                                                           Possess
                                                                                          Offensive
                                                                                            Weapon




                                                                (                   1




I       NOTE:   These figures do not include arrests outside grounds where in fact the
                greatest problem has been.

I                So far in the 1985/86 football season each of the clubs in Greater
        Manchester has played either five or six home matches but already there are
        indications that incidents of violence have declined. At the same stage of t~e
I       !984/85 season there had been 44 arrests for violent behaviour and 176
        ejections for general nuisances whereas the comparative figures for this season
        show 14 arrests and 68 ejections. However, reported attendance figures at all
I       grounds show a slight fall on the previous year’s figures with the exception of
        Manchester City - who have just been promoted to the first division - who
        report an increase just below 1,000 per match.

I
