                                Sheffield Archives Ref:




               Fw /   t k   ,




      WEST MIDLAND POLICE




       Superintendent
    Roger.L. GREENWOOD




COMPLAINTS and DISCIPLINE
          FILE
                                                                                                                                                                                                          WP 665
                                                                                                                                                                                                          (S.O. B16)
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ( 1.86 )

                                                                                                                                                                        R«f. Mo.
      West Midlands                                                  COMPLAINT AGAINST POLICE                                                                                             1/89
      Police                                                                         _                                                                                  Date
                                                                                    Enquiry Summary
                                                                                                                                                                                         3 1.7.90
     NAME & ADDRESS                                                                                                                                                     • FO R M AL IN V E STIG A TIO N
           OF
     C O M P L A IN A N T S )                     SEE SCHEDULE                      'A'                                                                                 • IN F O R M A L IN V E STIG A TIO N




     N A TU R E OF
     C O M PLAINT
                                                 SEE SCHEDULE                       *B '




    B RIEF D E T A IL S                         On 15 April 1989, a disaster occurred at the F/A Cup Semi-Final
    OF EVENTS                                   between Liverpool and Notti ng h am Forrest held at Hillsborough
    LE A D IN G TO                              Football Stadium, Sheffield which resulted in death and injuries
    C O M P LA IN T                             to a large number of the Liverpool supporters.     The Complaints
                                                set out in this file emanate from events preceding,     during and
                                                and immediately following that disaster.




   OFFIC ERS
   SUBJECT TO
                                               Su pe r in t en d e nt Roger GREENWOOD
   C O M P LA IN T                             South Yo r kshire Police
   (Rank, Number
    and Name)



   IN V E S T IG A T IN G
                                               S H I E F C O N STABLE MR L SHARP                                                                   POLICE HQ
   O FFIC ER                                                                                                                                       C.TIMRRTfl

  B R IE F D E T A IL S                        T hese complaints have been supervised by Captain E .N Taylor of the
  OF                                           Police C omplaints Authority.            Following extensive enquiries
  IN V E S T IG A T IO N                       S u p e r i n te n de n t GREENWOOD was seen for interview but declined to
                                               answer questions put to him by the Investig a t in g Officer, preferring
                                               instead to supply a written response.

                                              Files in respect of the criminal c ulpability of Superintendent
                                              G RE E NWOOD (and o ther officers) in respect of these complaints are
                                              already with the D irector of Public Prosecutions and the Police
                                              Compla i nt s Authority.
                                                                        i




     IN V E S T IG A T IO N SUPERVISED BY                                             Section 89(1) PACE Act 1984                                         YES#J@f                                       ,              /   9
     POLICE C O M PLAINTS A U T H O R IT Y :-                                         Section 89(2) PACE Act 1984                                        $ g S /N O *                                            /
------------------------------------------------ ---------------------------------------------------------- — --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------/
                                                                                                                                                                  WP 665 I R I H I )

                                             FOR COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE USE O N L Y

                                                                                                                                     Yes        No           Date
     REFERRED TO:-                Under provision of:-

                                  Section 8 7 ( 1 1(a)(1) PACE Act 1984                   M ANDATORY REFERRAL

    POLICfc                                                                               MANDATORY REFERRAL
                                  Section 3 7 ( 1 ! (a H I! I PACE Ac; 1984
    COMPLAINTS
                                  Section 87(1 ilb i PACE Act 1984                    D IS C R E T IO N A R Y R E F E R R A L
    a u t h o r it y

                                  Section 8 7 (2 '    PACE Act 1984                         A T R E Q U E S T OF PCA


                                  Appropriate certificate issued by P.C.A.
                                                                                          Informing P.C.A at conclusion
                                  Section 9 0 /91 *   PACE Act 1984                       of enquiry

                                  Reg. II The Police (Complaints) (General) Regulations 1985
                                  (Complaints which are withdrawn)
                                  Reg. 3 The Police (Anonymous, Repetitous etc. Complaints) Regulations
                                  19 8 5 (Complaints which are anonymous, repetitous or incapable of                                                      Confirmed


    D IRECTOR                     Section   90(4) PACE Act 1984
    OF PUBLIC
    PROSECUTIONS                  Proceedings recommended                                 YES/NO *

                                  Complainant(s) informed                                 YES/NO *

    ACTIO N TAK EN                Officer(s) informed:                                    YES/NO *

                                  Officer(s) advised                                      YES/NO *
1
                                  Officer(s) disciplined:                                 YES/NO *
1
    A ny other comments (i.e. C o m p lainan ts dissatisf ied, c iv il proceedings, com pensa tion p a id , ctc.)




\



    Assistant Chief Constable                                        Date:                          1.       Chief Constable to see.

                                                                                                    2. Chief Superintendent                          Division.
                                                                                                    File result in Div. Complaints Book unless any complaints to make

                                                                                                    3.       File



                                                                             STATISTICS SECTION

                                BREAKDOW N OF COMPLAINTS                                                                        C ATE G O R Y OF C OMPLAJN T

                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                         |
                                    4         5        6         7           8       9         10        |   11      12         13         14   15   16          17         18           19
      1         2          3
                                                                     CATEG O RY              OF      C O M P L A IN T



                                    23        24       25        26          27      28        29            30      31         32         33   34   35         36          37           38
      20        21         22
                                                           CATEG O RY              OF      C O M P L A IN T                                                                    DJ».P.


                                    42        43       44        45          46      47        48            49      50         51         52   53   54         55          56           57
      39        40         41
                    D.F'.P.                                                       POLICE         COMPLAINTS                      AUTHORIT Y


                                   61         62       63        64          65      66        67            68     69          70         71   72   73         74          75           76
     58        59         60
                 P.C .A.                                              SUBSTANTIATED                                                    DISC IPLINA RY PR<OCEEDINGS


                                              81       82        83          84      85        86            87     88          89         90   91   92         93          94
     77         78         79      80

                                                                                                                                                     • DelFte as a p p l i c a b l e ^
                                  SCHEDULE *A*

                                  COMPLAINANTS



1.   MR TREVOR HICKS                             MASTER FILE
                                                 PART IV PAGES
                                                 2331
                                                 2331-2356
                                                 ALSO REFERS


     COMPLAINT NUMBERS 1, 2 & 6



     MR LESLIE JONES                             MASTER FILE
                                                 PART IV PAGES
                                                 2373
                                                 2368-2377
     MERSEYSIDE                                  ALSO REFERS


     COMPLAINT NUMBERS 3, 4, 5 & 7




                                                                 4
                              SCHEDULE *B*




      NATURE OF COMPLAINTS


(1)   He failed to prevent a dangerous build up of supporters
      outside the gates.


(2)   He failed tocontrol the movement       of supporters subsequent
      to the opening of    Gate C.


(3)   He failed to     send officers to the rear of pens 3 and 4 to
      relieve pressure when he was in control of the area.       This
      was when he knew Gate C was being opened to allow
      supporters in.


(4)   He failed to carry out his assigned duty by placing
      himself in a position by the players tunnel.       Using his
      radio and his eyes he should have been aware of the
      dangerous situation and controlled his officers
      accordingly.


(5)   He failed to   give instructions to his officers to monitor
      the pens, for overcrowding in relation to crowd safety at
      his briefings.


(6)   He failed to respond to the developing tragedy and was
      slow to effect a rescue operation.


(7)   He was totally ineffective in mounting a rescue.      That is
      he made no attempt to organise the police officers in a
      way which would have helped bring about a successful
      rescue operation.




                                                                        5
                FOREWORD



 This report is submitted in the normal and accepted

 complaint format.       However, some explanation is

 required to assist the reader in identifying where to

 find certain statements and documents.



 In the margin of the report it will be seen that

 Document numbers, Statement pages, Appendices and on

 occasions Lord Justice Taylor’s interim and final

report are referred to as well as to extracts from the

 transcripts of his Public Inquiry.



Where a document number or statement is prefixed with a

part number this can be found within the seven volumes

(parts) of evidence submitted to the Director of Public

Prosecutions.



eg:        PART IV            or          PART IV

           Document No 6                  Statement

           Pages 44-52                    Pages 2331-2356



If a document number or statement is not prefixed with

a part number that particular item can be found within

this file.



Where reference is made to a video then each VHS tape

has been given a separate, Part III, document number.

Not only that but within the same Part III is a written

description/schedule of what the video contains.        For

example;
•
                        Part III (Documents)

                       Document No 115

                        (Video)

                       Pages 757



    identifies the VHS tape number as 115 and the schedule

    page in the documents where the description can be

    found.



    A similar system is used to identify photographs which

    also feature in Part III.     For example;



                       Part III (Documents)

                       Document No 150

                       Photo No 14



    This easily identifies that this photograph can be

    found in the Album marked Document Number 150 and

    within each album the photographs are numbered

    consecutively.



    A reference to one of Lord Justice Taylor’s reports

    will be shown as follows;



                      LJT (interim) or (final)

                      Page

                      Paragraph




                                                             7
A reference to a transcript from the Public Inquiry

will be shown as follows;



                   e.g.

                   Transcript 26.5.89

                   Day 9

                   Pages 74-75




L SHARP QPM, LLB

CHIEF CONSTABLE

CUMBRIA CONSTABULARY




                                                      8
                  CIRCUMSTANCES SURROUNDING COMPLAINTS



                  R1    On 15 April 1989 a Football Association Cup Semi

                  Final match was played between Liverpool and Nottingham

                  Forest Football Clubs at the neutral Sheffield

                  Wednesday ground at Hillsborough.   It is well

                  documented that shortly after ’kick-off’ the match was

                  abandoned due to crushing in pens 3 and 4 of the

                  Leppings Lane/West Stand terraces, which resulted in

                  the death of 95 Liverpool Supporters and injuries to

                  many others.



                  R2    As a result of the tragedy Mr G J DEAR, QPM,

                  Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police was

                  appointed to investigate the disaster and to collate

                  evidence for H M Coroner and for a Judicial Inquiry

                  which was carried out by Lord Justice TAYLOR.     On 27

                  September 1989 following submission of the TAYLOR

                  Interim Report into the disaster to the Director of

                  Public Prosecutions Mr DEAR agreed to accept additional

                  responsibility for the criminal and disciplinary

                  aspects of the investigation.   On 1 April 1990, with

                  the retirement of Mr DEAR, these responsibilities were

                  transferred to Mr L SHARP, QPM, Chief Constable of

                  Cumbria.



Part IV           R3    Trevor HICKS the father of Sara Louise HICKS

Statement Pages   (19 years - deceased), Victoria Jane HICKS (15

2331-2356         years - deceased) and attended the match with his wife



                                                                            9
                  Jennifer HICKS and the two daughters.    Whilst he went

                  to stand in pens 1/2 and his wife went to a seat in the

                  North Stand, both girls went into pen 3.     Mr HICKS

                  makes a series of complaints which also relate to the

                  lack of planning and control/management of Liverpool

                  supporters both prior to and during the match as well

                  as to organisation of the rescue operation after it was

                  abandoned against Superintendent GREENWOOD and other

                  officers.



Part IV           R4    Richard JONES (25 years - deceased) was the son

Statement Pages   of the complainant Mr Leslie JONES and attended the

2368-2377         match with his sister Stephanie JONES and his

                  girlfriend Tracey COX.   Arising from his son’s death,

                  JONES Senior makes a number of complaints relating to

                  the lack of planning and control/management of

                  Liverpool supporters at the match against

                  Superintendent Roger GREENWOOD and other officers.



                  DETAILS OF COMPLAINTS



                  R5    Dealing with the complaints made by Mr HICKS

                  involving Superintendent GREENWOOD, on 7 June

Document          1989 Mr HICKS sent a letter to the Home Secretary

Pages 1-2         Douglas HURD primarily complaining about another senior

                  officer of the South Yorkshire Police.

                  The complaint was initially allocated to Mr Kenneth

                  Philip Douglas COOPER, Assistant Chief Constable

                  Northamptonshire Constabulary for investigation



                                                                            10
Document 2    by letter dated 25 July 1989, with the Police

Page 3       Complaints Authority being formally requested

Document 3   to supervise the investigation in a further letter the

Page 4        same day.



             R6    On 4 August 1989 Mr SKITT, Deputy Chief

             Constable, Northamptonshire Constabulary agreed to the

             appointment of Mr COOPER as the Senior Investigating

             Officer on behalf of his Chief Constable.   This

Document 4   appointment was later ratified in a letter dated 4

Page 5       August from Captain TAYLOR of the Police Complaints

             Authority in which he confirms his supervision on

             behalf of the Authority to Mr HICKS.



             R7    Following his appointment, Mr COOPER saw Mr HICKS

             on 24 August and he made a formal statement of

             complaint outlining a series of new complaints against

             a number of officers including Superintendent

             GREENWOOD.



             R8    Subsequent to this interview Mr COOPER received

Document 5   a letter dated 5 September 1989 from Captain TAYLOR

Page 6       informing him that, the enquiry would be dealt with by

             another force. On 27 September following protracted

             negotiations, responsibility for all criminal and

             disciplinary aspects of the investigation into the

             Hillsborough disaster, were passed to Mr DEAR for

             enquiries by West Midlands Police.




                                                                       11
Document 6      R9     On 19 October 1989 Mr JONES sent a letter to the

Pages 7-8       South Yorkshire Police Authority enclosing a schedule

                of specific complaints against individually named

                officers including Superintendent GREENWOOD.     This was

                forwarded by Assistant Chief Constable Mr ANDERSON,

                South Yorkshire Police, on 23 October,

Document 7      together with a separate letter to Mr JONES, Assistant

Page 9          Chief Constable, West Midlands Police requesting Mr

                DEAR to undertake the investigation and indicating that

                Captain TAYLOR would supervise on behalf of the

                Police Complaints Authority.   This was confirmed by

Documents 8-9   letters from Captain TAYLOR on 25 October and on 27

Pages 10-11     October Assistant Chief Constable Mr JONES accepted

                the investigation on behalf of Mr DEAR.



                RIO   As a result of receipt of the letter/schedule

                from Mr JONES, he was seen by Detective Chief

                Superintendent Michael Jon FOSTER on 2 November 1989,

                in company with his solicitor and he then made a formal

                statement outlining his complaints.



                Rll   As will be appreciated these complaints raise

                allegations of both criminal and disciplinary

                offences.   The file on the criminal aspect of the

                investigation is already with the Director of Public

                Prosecutions and the Police Complaints authority.

                This report deals solely with the disciplinary

                aspects.
                       DETAILS OF INVESTIGATION



                       R12   The complaints made against Superintendent

                       GREENWOOD can be dealt with in four categories and

                       relate to his duty and actions as follows;



                       (a)   Outside Leppings Lane and the control of the

                             crowd.



                       (b)   The control of supporters subsequent to the

                             opening of Gate C.



                       (c)   His control inside the ground of his officers and

                             alleged failure to instruct his officers to

                             monitor the pens for overcrowding.



                       (d)   His response to the disaster and the actions he

                             took at the time.



Part IV                R13   Mr HICKS and Mr JONES make specific allegations

Statement Pages        against Superintendent GREENWOOD and it is necessary to

2331-2356              permutate some of these complaints in a chronological

2368-2377              way as opposed to dealing solely with one complainant

                       at a time.



                       (a)   Outside Leppings Lane and the control of the

                             crowd.



                  1.   Failed to prevent a dangerous build up of supporters

                       outside the gates.
Part IV           R14   This complaint is made solely by Mr HICKS and is

Statement Pages   also made against Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD,

2331-2356         Superintendent MARSHALL and Superintendent MURRAY.



                  R15   In relation to Superintendent GREENWOOD the

                  allegation suggests a possible discipline offence of:-



                  Neglect of duty.



                  Without good and sufficient cause neglected or omitted

                  to attend to or carry out with due promptitude and

                  diligence anything which it is his duty as a member of

                  a police force to attend to or carry out, viz he failed

                  to prevent a dangerous build up of supporters outside

                  the gates.



                  Contrary to The Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985.

                  Schedule 1. Regulation 4(1) paragraph 4(a).



                  R16   In consideration of this offence it is correct to

Part V            say that in the Match Operation Order the turnstile

Document 194      area is effectively under the control of Superintendent

Pages 1128-1210   GREENWOOD.



                  R17   However by consent this responsibility was taken

                  over and accepted by Superintendent MARSHALL who was

                  outside the ground.   Logically this was a quite proper

                  and sensible division that had worked in reverse the

                  previous year.



                                                                         14
•
                      R18   Confusion is evident from the match operational

                      order on this point but it should be remembered that

                      under phase two the turnstile police officers revert

                      inside to the command of Superintendent GREENWOOD.     The

                      important point is that each of the Superintendents

                      knew their responsibilities.



                      R19   To that extent therefore although ’on paper’

                      Superintendent GREENWOOD had a responsibility directly

                      related to this complaint in fact the responsibility

                      was Superintendent MARSHALL’S.



    Part VII          R20   This point was pursued in interview with

    Appendix C        Superintendent MARSHALL but Superintendent GREENWOOD

    Pages 543-715     declined to answer questions although he did hand over

    Pages 1357-1389   a written response to the allegations made against him.



                      R21   There is no way in which Superintendent GREENWOOD

                      on 15 April 1989 had any involvement in the crowd build

                      up outside Leppings Lane.



                      R22   This complaint forms part of the evidence

                      submitted to the Director of Public Prosecutions who is

                      considering criminal offences against Superintendent

                      GREENWOOD of Manslaughter and Culpable Malfeasance.



                      R23   The evidence required to consider Manslaughter

                      requires a high degree of gross negligence or

                      recklessness and there is no comparable discipline

                      offence to consider.


                                                                               15
     R24    However, the offence of Culpable Malfeasance is

     an alternative offence to Manslaughter, and although it

     is based upon the same evidence, it requires a lesser

     degree of negligence or recklessness and embraces

     neglect of a duty.



     R25   Should the Director of Public Prosecutions decide

     there is insufficient evidence to prove offences of

     Manslaughter or Culpable Malfeasance no further action

     can be taken in respect of this disciplinary offence of

     Neglect of Duty.



     (b)   The control of supporters subsequent to the

           opening of Gate C .



     R26   Mr HICKS makes the following complaint against

     Superintendent GREENWOOD;



2.   Failed to control the movement of supporters subsequent

     to the opening of Gate C.



     R27   Mr JONES on the same theme makes a similar

     complaint;



3.   Failed to send officers to the rear of pens 3 and 4 to

     relieve pressure when he was in control of the area.

     This was when he knew Gate C was being opened to allow

     supporters in.




                                                            16
                        R28   The complaint by Mr HICKS has also been made

                        against Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD,

                        Superintendent MURRAY and Superintendent MARSHALL.



                        R29   In relation to Superintendent GREENWOOD the

                        substance of these two allegations suggests a possible

                        disciplinary offence of;



                        Neglect of Duty.



                        Without good and sufficient cause neglected or omitted

                        to attend to or carry out with due promptitude and

                        diligence anything which it is his duty as a member of

                        a police force to attend to or carry out, viz he failed

                        to control the movement of supporters subsequent to the

                        opening of Gate C or send officers to the rear of pens

                        3 and 4 to relieve the pressure when he knew Gate C was

                        being opened.



                        Contrary to The Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985.

                        Schedule 1. Regulation 4(1) paragraph 4(a).



                        R30   Although there are many matters that could be

                        considered relevant to this complaint the most

                        important one and the one on which everything rests is

                        the knowledge Superintendent GREENWOOD had that Gate C

                        or the gates were to be opened.




Lord Justice Taylor’s   R31   He was quite categoric at the Public Inquiry that
Public Inquiry
1 June 1989             he had no knowledge of the request or decision to open
Pages 20-101
Part VII          the gates.    In his written response to the allegations

Appendix C        he reaffirms this.    If he had no knowledge then quite

Page 1379         simply there was nothing he could do.     It cannot be

                  proved he had knowledge of the gates opening or the

                  requests made beforehand by Superintendent MARSHALL.



Part V            R32     The problem of radio transmission well covers

Statement Pages   this.    For example a number of police officers do in

2502-2514         their statements hear the requests for the gates to be

2947-2955         opened made by Superintendent MARSHALL.     Some heard

2964-2970         what no doubt was the final request and refer to it in

3043-3048         their statement.

3059-3065

3269-3274         R33     However, there are a number of police officers

3368-3371         who can be equated with Superintendent GREENWOOD and

                  they in their accounts refer to the unintelligible

                  nature of the police radio transmissions.



                  R34     This matter would have been pursued in interview

                  particularly as he had a personal radio.    However it

                  must be remembered he had responsibility and problems

                  of his own inside the ground and at the crucial time

                  there had been radio problems.   Add crowd noise to this

                  and his explanation is entirely acceptable.



                  R35     Whether he should have been told of the decision

                  is another matter and an issue for consideration in

                  relation to Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD.




                                                                             18
R36   As it is, there is no evidence to suggest

Superintendent GREENWOOD had the knowledge to act in

the way Mr HICKS and Mr JONES especially believe he

should have.



R37   These complaints form part of the evidence

submitted to the Director of Public Prosecutions who is

considering criminal offences against Superintendent

GREENWOOD of Manslaughter and Culpable Malfeasance.



R38   The evidence required to consider Manslaughter

requires a high degree of gross negligence or

recklessness and there is no comparable discipline

offence to consider.



R39   However, the offence of Culpable Malfeasance is

an alternative offence to Manslaughter, and although it

is based upon the same evidence, it requires a lesser

degree of negligence or recklessness and embraces

neglect of a duty.



R40   Should the Director of Public Prosecutions decide

there is insufficient evidence to prove offences of

Manslaughter or Culpable Malfeasance no further action

can be taken in respect of this disciplinary offence of

Neglect of Duty.



(c)   Control inside the ground of his officers and his

      alleged failure to instruct his officers to

      monitor the pens for overcrowding.
R41   Mr JONES makes two complaints in this category

which need to be addressed separately.



He failed to carry out his assigned duty by placing

himself in a position by the players tunnel.    Using his

radio and his eyes he should have been aware of the

dangerous situation and controlled his officers

accordingly.



This suggests a disciplinary offence of;



Neglect of Duty.



Without good and sufficient cause neglected or omitted

to attend to or carry out with due promptitude and

diligence anything which it is his duty as a member of

a police force to attend to or carry out, viz by

failing to carry out his assigned duty whereas by using

his radio and his eyes he should have been aware of the

dangerous situation and controlled his officers

accordingly.



Contrary to The Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985.

Schedule 1. Regulation 4(1) paragraph 4(a).



R42   In consideration of this complaint it is first

necessary to assess the view by Mr JONES that

Superintendent GREENWOOD failed to carry out his duty

by placing himself at the players tunnel.
 Part V                   R43      In his written recollection and in his written

 Statement Pages          response to the allegations Mr GREENWOOD makes it clear

2515-2526                 he was on duty in the ground early on.     He also says he

Part VII                  walked around the perimeter track shortly after 2.30

Appendix C                pm.     He was at the players tunnel at about 2.50 pm, the

Pages 1378-1379           crucial time, because of the abundance of media people

                          that wanted to photograph Brian CLOUGH the Nottingham

                          Forrest Manager who had been banned from the touchline.



                          R44     In any event Superintendent GREENWOOD had to

                          decide where he should be at any one particular time

                          and it is difficult to imagine how his position at the

                          tunnel is a failure on his part to do his assigned

                          duty.



                          R45     The second part of the same complaint suggests

                          that Superintendent GREENWOOD, by using or listening to

                         his radio and using his eyes, should have been aware

                          of the dangerous situation.



                         R46      This suggests that he should have foreseen the

                         build up in pens 3 and 4 and acted upon it.     The fact

Part III                 is that the photographs taken at 2.52 and 2.54 do not

Document 162             show a problem in those pens and that is the crucial

Schedule Pages 841-843   time when the gates at Leppings Lane were opened.

Photo 28-29

                         R47      A great many other people, senior police

Part II                  officers. Football Association officials, a television

Statement Pages          commentator. all had just as good a view but failed to




                                                                                       21
819-829      recognise a dangerous situation.   There is no direct

829A-J      evidence that suggests Superintendent GREENWOOD was in

860-869     a better position or better equipped to recognise the

1110-1118    situation and act accordingly.

Part V

2457-2469   R48   This complaint forms part of the evidence

2470-2488   submitted to the Director of Public Prosecutions who is

            considering criminal offences against Superintendent

            GREENWOOD of Manslaughter and Culpable Malfeasance.



            R49   The evidence required to consider Manslaughter

            requires a high degree of gross negligence or

            recklessness and there is no comparable discipline

            offence to consider.



            R50   However, the offence of Culpable Malfeasance is

            an alternative offence to Manslaughter, and although it

            is based upon the same evidence, it requires a lesser

            degree of negligence or recklessness and embraces

            neglect of a duty.



            R51   Should the Director of Public Prosecutions decide

            there is insufficient evidence to prove offences of

            Manslaughter or Culpable Malfeasance no further action

            can be taken in respect of this disciplinary offence of

            Neglect of Duty.



            R52   The next allegation by Mr JONES alone is;
He failed to give instructions to his officers to

monitor the pens, for overcrowding in relation to crowd

safety at his briefings.



R53    This suggests two possible discipline offences

of ;



(a)    Neglect of Duty.



Without good and sufficient cause neglected or omitted

to attend to or carry out with due promptitude and

diligence anything which it is his duty as a member of

a police force to attend to or carry out, viz he failed

to brief his officers adequately to monitor the pens

for overcrowding in relation to crowd safety at his

briefing.



Contrary to The Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985.

Schedule 1. Regulation 4(1) paragraph 4(a).



(b)    Disobedience to Order



Without good and sufficient cause disobeyed or

neglected to carry out a lawful written order, viz the

South Yorkshire Police Standing Instruction for

Policing Football Matches namely Appendix B and

Appendix C.



Contrary to the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985.

Schedule 1. Regulation 4(1) paragraph 3(a ).
Document 194      R54   The Operation Order makes no mention of the

Pages 1128-1210   responsibilities of serials or individuals in respect

                  of monitoring or distributing the crowd so as to

                  prevent or relieve overcrowding other than in respect

                  of "safety" which seems to relate to evacuation

                  procedures.



Document 192      R55   At Appendix B of the Standing Instructions is a

Pages 1016-1018   guide to General Briefing which is directed at the

                  officer in command and at paragraph 5 it states:-



                  R56   "A description of the ’event* about to take place

                  will be given along with the system of policing to be

                  adopted (escorting and segregation of rival fans etc),

                  the basic reasons for the officers presence and what is

                  expected of them, ie to facilitate the attendance of

                  spectators, to exercise crowd control...."



                  R57   This particular paragraph appears to be mandatory

                  and goes straight to the point of the accepted police

                  responsibility to facilitate the attendance of

                  spectators, and to exercise crowd control.   These

                  responsibilities are clearly intended to be separate

                  and distinct from "safety aspects

Part V            because at paragraph 16 the Standing Instruction

Document 192      states:-

Page 1017

                  "Explain emergency evacuation procedures."
                  R58   There is nothing in the Operation Order, nor in

                  the briefings which specifically addresses police

                  responsibilities in respect of crowd control.



Part V            R59   At Appendix C of the Standing Instruction

Document 192      guidelines are given in respect of Individual

Page 1019-1021    Briefing.



                  R60   Directions are given to "Officers on the playing

                  area track" and at paragraph (a) (iv):-



                  "Spectators will not be allowed to remain in

                  passageways adjacent to entrances and exits or to be

                  in terrace or stand gangways.    Persons seen to be so

                  remaining will be directed to move."



                  R61   This, an accepted police responsibility, seems to

                  be particularly relevant to Pens 3 and 4 of the

Part V            West Terraces and the associated entry tunnel, yet the

Document 194      Operation Order is silent in this respect.

Pages 1128-1210



                  R62   In respect of these two possible discipline

                  offences it is first necessary to consider the South

                  Yorkshire Police view on responsibility for the

                  monitoring of the pens.    That is contained in their

Part V            Standing Instructions.    It firmly puts the onus upon

Document 192      the Football Club and the Stewards.

Pages 998-1044
                         R63    However, the Club have a different interpretation

Part I                   as shown in the document they circulated and sent to

Document 1               the Police.

Pages 1-5

                        R64     This issue has been discussed in the main file

                        and needs no further explanation when the accepted

                        policy of South Yorkshire Police is that supporters

                        find their own level at matches such as a semi-final

                        where one team’s supporters take up the whole of one

                        part of the ground, in this case the West Terraces.




                        R65     With regard to Superintendent GREENWOOD himself,

                        he provides the important link to the crushing in 1981

                        because he was present at that incident as a Police

Lord Justice Taylor’s   Inspector.     His evidence at the Public Inquiry reflects
Public Inquiry
1 June 1989             this.    Hence he had knowledge of the potential for
Pages 20-101
Part II                 overcrowding and he features on the de-brief minutes
Document 50
Pages 320-324           when South Yorkshire Police reviewed the incident.


                        R66     But it is important now to remember that

                        following this incident, the Club by the introduction

                        of radial fences over the following years, effectively

                        dealt with the cause of that incident and to everyone*s

                        belief, from then on there was no problem on those

                        terraces with overcrowding.    The evidence since the

                        disaster suggests differently but that was not known in

                        the intervening years.
                  R67   As such therefore, taking into account the South

                  Yorkshire policy, alongside the action taken after

                  1981, it would have been reasonable for Superintendent

                  GREENWOOD not to include the problems of overcrowding

Part V            in any brief he gave to his officers.     His briefing

Document 200      notes reflect no mention of monitoring for

Pages 1277-1279   overcrowding.     However, in his written submission in

Part VII          response to the allegation he makes particular

Appendix C        reference to the fact that he did make reference to the

Page 1374         1981 overcrowding problems.     Because it has not been

                  possible to interview him it cannot be fully

                  ascertained for certain whether the context of 1981

                  concerned overcrowding or was related to crowd

                  segregation.



                  R68   In an effort to solve that, a number of the

                  Inspectors briefed by Superintendent GREENWOOD have

Part V            been re-interviewed and their statements are included

Statement Pages   in this file.     It does seem the 1981 issue was related

2963A-C           in terms of the segregation of a number of Liverpool

3042E-F           supporters in the Spion Kop end of the ground.




                  R69   It is evident that Superintendent GREENWOOD did

                  not include in his briefings the topic of overcrowding

                  and monitoring.    However, the awareness of the

                  perimeter track officers to the possibility of the
Part V
Statement Pages   a problem is very clear in the written recollections
3315-3323
3324-3328         and the interviews tinder caution of Police Constable
Part VII
Appendix C        SMITH and ILLINGWORTH .
Pages 345-440
             R70   Again Mr GREENWOOD gives a further explanation in

Part VII     his written submission to the complaint.      In this

Appendix C   written submission Superintendent GREENWOOD makes it

Page 1374    clear he believed the monitoring of the supporters was

             a job for the control box and therefore Chief

             Superintendent DUCKENFIELD and Superintendent MURRAY.

             He also says he had no knowledge of the documentation

             that indicated admission and packing was a p r i m a r y

             function of the stewards although it is not clear if he

             is at this time relating back to 1981 or the present.

             It has not been possible to pursue this because he has

             declined to answer questions.



             R71   The suggested Neglect of Duty complaint forms

             part of the evidence submitted to the Director of

             Public Prosecutions who is considering criminal

             offences against Superintendent GREENWOOD of

             Manslaughter and Culpable Malfeasance.



             R72   The evidence required to consider Manslaughter

             requires a high degree of gross negligence or

             recklessness and there is no comparable discipline

             offence to consider.



             R73   However, the offence of Culpable Malfeasance is

             an alternative offence to Manslaughter, and although it

             is based upon the same evidence, it requires a lesser

             degree of negligence or recklessness and embraces

             neglect of a duty.




                                                                        28
R74   Should the Director of Public Prosecutions decide

there is insufficient evidence to prove offences of

Manslaughter or Culpable Malfeasance no further action

can be taken in respect of this disciplinary offence of

Neglect of Duty.



R75   Although the circumstances of the Disobedience to

Orders suggested discipline offence has been submitted

as part of the evidence to the Director of Public

Prosecutions this offence could still give rise to a

discipline offence under the Police Discipline Code.



R76   However, based upon the circumstances and the

facts related it is felt the evidence to prove the

offence is insufficient and the complaint is

unsubstantiated.



(d)   His response to the disaster



R77   Both Mr HICKS and Mr JONES make complaints in

relation to this aspect of Superintendent GREENWOOD’S

duty on 15 April 1989.



R78   Mr HICKS makes the following complaint;



Failed to respond to the developing tragedy and was

slow to effect a rescue operation.
K79   He makes the same complaint against Chief

Superintendent DUCKENFIELD, Superintendent HURRAY and

Superintendent MARSHALL.



and Mr JONES complains



He was totally ineffective in mounting a rescue.     That

is, he made no attempt to organise the police officers

in a way which would have helped bring about a

successful rescue operation.



R80   These two allegations suggest a possible

discipline offence of;



Neglect of Duty.



Without good and sufficient cause neglected or omitted

to attend to or carry out with due promptitude and

diligence anything which it is his duty as a member of

a police force to attend to or carry out,   viz he

failed to respond and was totally ineffective in

mounting a rescue.   That is he made no attempt to

organise the police officers in a way which would have

helped bring about a successful rescue operation.



Contrary to The Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985.

Schedule 1. Regulation 4(1) paragraph 4 fa).
Part V             R81   In considering this allegation, account must be

Statement Pages    taken of what Superintendent GREENWOOD states he did.

2515-2526         His written recollection and his written submission

Part VII          provide an account of his movements and his positive

Appendix C        actions.

Pages 1357-1389

                  R82    It is unnecessary to list them but important to

                  relate some.     In the first instance it is evident that

                  once he recognised a problem at the Leppings Lane end

                  of the ground he went there.



                  R83    He assessed the situation and has stated he

                  immediately felt it was not a pitch invasion but a

                  crowd problem.



                  R84    On arrival he made an attempt to move the crowd

                  back, perhaps futile with them concentrating on a

                  Football Association Cup Semi-Final game, because he

                  saw distress in the front six rows of supporters.     He

                  tried to contact the control by radio, waved his arm

                  as a signal for the match to be stopped and when no

                  response came took the decision to run onto the pitch

                  to stop the match himself.



                  R85    Superintendent GREENWOOD then lists the actions

                  he took including the organisation of the Police Funnel

                  to remove the dead and injured from pen 3.




                                                                             31
R86   The very nature of the disaster with people

trapped in the pens made a rescue difficult.     To many

it must have seemed there was no organisation, with

police officers apparently standing around.     Yet there

were few exits to use in the perimeter fencing and only

a small number of officers could do anything

constructive at the narrow gates.



R87   Mr GREENWOOD quickly briefed the Assistant Chief

Constable Mr JACKSON, when he came onto the pitch, and

it is fair to say that from then on the overall

responsibility for dealing with the disaster rested

with Mr JACKSON and Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD.

Certainly Mr GREENWOOD had a degree of autonomy in

respect of those police officers under his command on

the pitch but it is also right to say that in such

incidents as this, individuals act on instinct and do

all they can unilaterally.   In this case, that applied

not only to police officers but to many supporters,

ground staff and others who acted promptly to deal with

a great many of the dead and injured.   It has not been

possible to pursue with Mr GREENWOOD exactly how he

controlled the situation prior to the arrival on the

scene of Chief Superintendent NESBIT, but he is clearly

shown on video and photographs in the thick of it

almost from the start.   Without specifically

identifying what else Superintendent GREENWOOD could

have done, it is difficult to show he was slow and

ineffective.   Indeed from his own explanation and from

the visual accounts, the evidence suggests otherwise.


                                                            32
                  R88   These complaints form part of the evidence

                  submitted to the Director of Public Prosecutions who is

                  considering criminal offences against Superintendent

                  GREENWOOD of Manslaughter and Culpable Malfeasance.



                  R89   The evidence required to consider Manslaughter

                  requires a high degree of gross negligence or

                  recklessness and there is no comparable discipline

                  offence to consider.



                  R90   However, the offence of Culpable Malfeasance is

                  an alternative offence to Manslaughter, and although it

                  is based upon the same evidence, it requires a lesser

                  degree of negligence or recklessness and embraces

                  neglect of a duty.



                  R91   Should the Director of Public Prosecutions decide

                  there is insufficient evidence to prove offences of

                  Manslaughter or Culpable Malfeasance no further action

                  can be taken in respect of this disciplinary offence of

                  Neglect of Duty.



Part VII          R92   Superintendent GREENWOOD was interviewed at

Appendix C        Furnival House, Sheffield on 29 June 1990.   He declined

Pages 1357-1389   to answer any questions but handed over a written

                  submission which he agreed could be used for both the

                  criminal and discipline investigation.




                                                                             33
                  R93   It is of course the right of Mr GREENWOOD to

                  refuse to answer questions but perhaps some background

                  is necessary on this issue in case any misunderstanding

                  is suggested later.



                  R94   The decision was made early in this investigation

                  to use both audio and video for interviewing.     However,

                  the decision on the video was left entirely to the

                  discretion of the person to be interviewed and if

                  necessary audio only would have been used.



                  R95   In accordance with normal practice the

                  Interviewing Officer retained the right to start an

                  audio interview and if necessary record on tape the

                  refusal.   If necessary, a contemporaneous note

                  interview would have been conducted.    Superintendent

                  GREENWOOD and his solicitor were fully aware of these

                  options.



Documents 10-11   R96   Letters explaining the original procedure and

Pages 12-13       dealing with the opportunity to view the interview room

                  and discuss the options are included for information.



Documents 12-13   R97   Regulations 7 Notices were served on

Pages 14-15       Superintendent GREENWOOD as follows;




                  Complaint HICKS   5 September 1989     Assistant
                                                         Chief Constable
                                                         Cooper
                                                         (Northamptonshire
                                                         Constabulary)



                                                                           34
Complaint JONES     7 November 1989     Detective Chief
                                        Superintendent
                                        FOSTER


ANTECEDENTS



R98    Superintendent Roger Lionel GREENWOOD is 45 years

of age,                                     He is a



                  owner/occupier of his home




R99    He joined the Yorkshire West Riding Constabulary

on 13 December 1963 after service as a Police Cadet and

served in Wakefield Division and Force Headquarters

until promotion to Sergeant in September 1970 when he

was posted to Rotherham Division.     He transferred to

the South Yorkshire Police on amalgamation in April

1974 and was promoted to Inspector in June 1974 and

posted to duties in Organisation and Planning

Department at Force Headquarters.



R100   He transferred to patrol duties in Rotherham

Division in December 1975 and in October 1977 he

commenced a Law Degree Course at Sheffield University

under the Bramshill Scholarship Scheme, achieving a

second class honours degree.   He returned to patrol

duties in July 1980 at Ecclesfield Sub Division and was

transferred to the Complaints and Discipline Department
in August 1981.    On 14 December 1983 he was promoted to

Chief Inspector in Sheffield North Division, becoming

Deputy Commander of FI (Hammerton Road) Sub Division in

November 1985.    He was promoted to the rank of

Superintendent on 19 Hay 1986 and took command of F2

(Woodseats) Sub Division, transferring to A1

(Doncaster) Sub Division on 10 July 1989.



R101   He has no matters of a disciplinary nature

recorded against him.




M J FOSTER
DETECTIVE CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT
CONCLUSION



R102   Superintendent GREENWOOD is the most experienced

senior officer in South Yorkshire Police in so far as

policing Hillsborough stadium is concerned.                          His
                                                                                                                     -



connection with major events there goes back to 1981.



RIO3   On 15 April 1989 he was the Ground Commander with

responsibility for police operations within the
                                                                      ..   , •

stadium.   Although there is sane
                                              ...

the Operation Order between those o

of Superintendent MARSHALL, it Is pertinent that in
                                                                                             .



1989 those two                                                                  other

from the 1988 semi-final.

respective roles in 1989

that the serials deployed at the Leppings J*ne
                                     ■- -      . ■■■'.-:-
                                           _ «    < ■ • ■ jp
turnstiles,
                                            ......,..                                    -. - ...■: ;
Superintendent GREENWOOD,                                                                                  ; ' : -
                                                         .....                                   ...        :   .


control of Superintendent MARSHALL.            Both officers
                                      .
understood and accepted the
                ■

that the overlap didnot contribute in                                 g          ^

events of the day.       Consequently Superintendent

GREENWOOD had no responsibility for                                              *Ho
                                          •     ■/   .    ■-                •    ;   .
the Leppings Lane turnstiles, unless otherwise
                                                                                                                    ; V

directed, which he was not.                                          ____
                                                          •      .    '                                .    .
accepts that.       Superintendent GREENWOOD’S




                                                                                         '       .
R104    Although his experience of policing at

Hillsborough included incidents of overcrowding and

crushing in the past, particularly 1981, he was also

aware of the remedial action taken at the ground to

deal with it.       In view of that, and the successful

policing of the 1988 semi-final, he shared the view of

the other senior officers of the force that the crowd

could be left to find their own level.            That is not

difficult to understand bearing in mind the South

Yorkshire Police view that crowd monitoring and

distribution was p r i m a r i l y   the responsibility of

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, whereas the primary

police function was the prevention of crime, disorder,

pitch invasions, and evacuation of the crowd at the

time of emergency.        No one in the Club or the South

Yorkshire Police appears to have noticed the difference

in perception as to the stewarding duties of crowd

control.     In common with other senior officers,

Superintendent GREENWOOD took the ground as he found

it.



R105   Although there is no pre-prepared note of

Superintendent GREENWOOD’S briefing, just a note made

after the event, there is his account of it and the

accounts of those who were present.           The South

Yorkshire Police Standing Instructions for Policing

Football Hatches covers general and individual

briefings.     The briefing system adopted at Hillsborough

is comprehensive and quite elaborate and although some




                                                                38
of the briefings given on the day, and before, were

better than others, the evidence suggests that

Superintendent GREENWOOD’S was as good as, if not

better than most, bearing in mind that he was the only

senior officer to refer specifically to the problems of

1981.     From the evidence available I am satisfied that

Superintendent GREENWOOD did sufficient in his

briefings to comply with the Standing Instructions.

Although Superintendent GREENWOOD has declined to

answer any questions about these, or any other matters,

it seems that, from his prepared statement handed over

at interview, should anything occur which was out of

the ordinary, the appropriate directions would be given

from the Police Control Box to officers on the ground,

either directly or through the various ground

Commanders.     On the day, the opening of Gate C was such

an event and there is no evidence to show that

Superintendent GREENWOOD either knew it was

contemplated or carried out.     Consequently, it is

difficult to see how he could have done anything about

it either by way of preparation for it, or by reaction

to it.     It is pointless to speculate as to what he

might have done if he had known or had been made aware

that it was happening.     The fact is that the evidence

indicates he was unaware that any exit gate was to be

opened, or was, indeed, opened.



R106     Up to the time that he positioned himself at the

players’ tunnel, he had no inkling of the crisis which
was approaching.     At that time he had responsibility

for the whole ground and for him, the identifiable

problems and potential problems were not at the

Leppings Lane end - they were at the Spion Kop where

Liverpool supporters had found themselves among

Nottingham Forest fans, and at the players’ tunnel

where the teams, officials and Brian CLOUGH, a man of

controversy, were about to emerge onto the pitch.      The

players’ tunnel is on the half way line, a good place

for the Ground Commander to be at that time.



R107   When the teams, officials and managers came out

of the players’ tunnel, Superintendent GREENWOOD had

his back to the pitch and he was concentrating on the

media personnel and Brian CLOUGH.     The moment he became

aware that there was something happening at the Western

Terraces, he went there and took prompt action by

attempting to get the crowd to move back to relieve

pressure at the front of the pens, albeit

unsuccessfully.     He also stopped the game himself

having unsuccessfully tried to attract the attention of

the Police Control Box so that the agreed system could

be used.   He also assisted and directed parts of the

rescue operation.    There is little doubt that his

personal radio was not functioning effectively and this

hampered him significantly.    There is evidence that he

directed and organised groups of police officers in the

rescue attempts.    He did not send any officers to the

rear of pens 3 or 4, but then neither did anybody



                                                           40
else.    Should he have done so at the time he started to

shout and signal to the crowd in pens 3 and 4 for them

to move back?



R108    There is not an easy answer to that.   With the

benefit of hindsight the answer must be "Yest"     He

describes how he approached the front of the pens just

after the kick-off and saw people at the front of the

crowd being crushed against the perimeter fence.        But

the perimeter gates were opened and people were

emerging from them and over the fence.    He knew there

were serials on the concourse at the rear of the West

Stand but he gave no directions to those or any other

officers to try to relieve the pressure in the pens

from the rear.    There is evidence that some officers

did go through the tunnel to the rear of pens 3 and 4

and started to remove people back through the tunnel,

but those officers were acting on the initiative of

their own supervisory officers.



R109    Of course, Superintendent GREENWOOD was unaware

at that time that Gate C had been opened and it may

well have been the case that his initial assessment was

that he could solve the problem from the front by

getting the crowd to move back.    That might have been a

futile belief but it is difficult to see how he can be

guilty of any neglect of duty.    Should the Director of

Public Prosecutions find that there is insufficient

evidence to prosecute the offences of Manslaughter or




                                                         41
                  Culpable Malfeasance, then the same must apply to the

                  disciplinary offence of Neglect of Duty.    There is

                  certainly insufficient evidence to prove any offence of

                  Disobedience to Orders.



                  R110   In that case, all of the complaints made by Mr

                  HICKS and Mr JONES are unsubstantiated.



Documents 14 15   Rill   In consultation with Mr WELLS. Chief Constable,

Pages 16-18       South Yorkshire Police, agreement has been reached to

                  forward all files direct to the Director of Public

                  Prosecutions and to the Police Complaints Authority.

                  Once a final decision is made by the Director the full

                  main file and the separate discipline files will be

                  forwarded to South Yorkshire Police following the

                  certificate of satisfaction from the Police Complaints

                  Authority.




                  L SHARP
                  CHIEF CONSTABLE
                  CUMBRIA CONSTABULARY




                                                                           42
           West Midlands Police




DOCUMENT SECTION




Reference No.   ___



Investigating L . SHARP. C H IE F CONSTABLE
O fficer
                  DOCUMENT LIST


 DESCRIPTION

Letter dated 7 June 1989, from
Mr Trevor HICKS, to the Right
Honourable Douglas HURD, MP,
regarding complaints involving
South Yorkshire Police.

Letter dated 25 July 1989, confirming
Assistant Chief Constable Mr K P D
COOPER, Northamptonshire Police, as
the investigating officer in the
complaint against South Yorkshire Police.

Letter dated 25 July 1989, from
South Yorkshire Police to Sir
Cecil CLOTHIER, Police Complaints
Authority, formally requesting
the Police Complaints Authority
to supervise the investigation.

Letter dated 4 August 1989,
from Captain E N TAYLOR, Police
Complaints Authority, confirming
his supervision of the complaint
on behalf of the Authority.

Letter dated 5 September 1989, from
Captain E N TAYLOR, Police Complaints
Authority, to Assistant Chief
Constable Mr COOPER, Northamptonshire
Police, informing him that the enquiry
will be dealt with by another force.

Letter dated 19 October 1989,
from Mr JONES to Assistant
Chief Constable Mr ANDERSON, South
Yorkshire Police, requesting
his complaint to be recorded and
investigated.

Letter dated 23 October 1989,
from Assistant Chief Constable
Mr ANDERSON, South Yorkshire Police,
to Assistant Chief Constable Mr JONES,
West Midlands Police, requesting
Chief Constable Mr DEAR, West
Midlands Police, to undertake
enquiries into complaints made by
Mr Les JONES.

Letter dated 25 October 1989, from
Captain E N TAYLOR, Police Complaints
Authority, to Assistant Chief
Constable Mr ANDERSON, South
Yorkshire Police, confirming
supervision by Captain TAYLOR on
behalf of the Authority.
DESCRIPTION

Letter dated 27 October 1989, from
Assistant Chief Constable Mr JONES,
West Midlands Police to Assistant
Chief Constable Mr ANDERSON, South
Yorkshire Police, acknowledging
receipt of letter dated 23 October
1989, regarding complaint made by Mr
Les JONES and accepting responsibility
for the investigation on behalf of
Chief Constable Mr DEAR, West Midlands
Police.

Letter dated 24 April 1990 from
Detective Chief Superintendent FOSTER,
West Midlands Police, to Solicitors
of Superintendent GREENWOOD,
regarding pre-viewing video and
photographic evidence before
subsequent interview at Furnival
House, Sheffield.

Letter dated 10 May 1990, from
Chief Constable Mr SHARP, Cumbria
Constabulary, to Solicitors of
Superintendent GREENWOOD informing
them his appointment as investigating
officer and enclosing visual material
as requested.

Regulation 7 Notice dated
5 September 1989.

Regulation 7 Notice dated
7 November 1989.

Letter dated 17 July 1990,
from Mr Leslie SHARP, Chief
Constable, Cumbria Constabulary,
to Mr Richard WELLS, Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police, regarding
routing of papers for criminal
investigation.

Letter dated 24 July 1990,
from Mr Richard WELLS, Chief
Constable, South Yorkshire
Police, to Mr Leslie SHARP,
Chief Constable, Cumbria
Constabulary, agreeing with
routing procedure.
•            •
                                                                                               DOCUMENT No. <
 Tel:- 01- 428 -7313                                                                            Trevor & Jenni Hicks


    Home Office,
    50 Queen Anne's Gate,
  London.                                                                                               Middlesex.
  SW1.


  f.a.o:- The Right Honourable Douglas Hurd                                    M.P.                       7    th June 1989.

 Dear Home Secretary,


                                                re: Hillsborough Disaster


 I am     the      father          of    the    late     Sarah         and Victoria Hicks               who unfortunately
 ‘-"■‘re among the 95 people so tragically killed at Hillsborough.


 You     will     require           little      reminder          of    the    increasingly         acrimonious        rounds
 of    accusation             and       counter    accusation            that    abounded          in    the   media       until
 you had the good sense to issue your instruction to the police and request
 a general cessation.
 Despite         acute    provocation             and       at    times       great    personal         anquish,      my    wife
 and     I have         resisted         numerous        opportunities            to    fuel    that      deplorable         and
unseemly          state       of     affairs,       preferring            to    assist       the    Taylor       Inquiry      in
 its difficult task - including being prepared to await the outcome before
making detailed comment to the media.


I write          to you       today       to request             your comment and            intervention following
    ;e statement,         widely reported                   in the media,             by South Yorkshire's Deputy
Chief     Constable            Peter       Hayes       to    the       effect    that     "no      further      action       was
required”          in         connection          with           the    actions        and     behaviour         of        Chief
Superintendant David Duckenfield.
I was under             the    impression that               Lord Justice Taylor on the one hand and
the internal Police Investigation by the West Midlands force on the other,
would     draw conclusions                 when     and      only when          they had concluded              their work
and    had       time    to     deliberate.            Despite          the    careful       wording,      the     issue     of
this statement by the Deputy Chief Constable pre-empts these findings!


Words fail me when I try to convey to you the hurt and totally unneccessary
anguish      this untimely statement                        has given my wife,               myself and presumably
the    other      families.             Apart     from      the    crass       nature    of this action,              I find
the need to issue such a statement at this time beyond contempt.



                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                             DOCUMENT NO. 1



                                                             2


  One can only conclude that this is yet a further attempt by South Yorkshire
  Police     to      divert     public    opinion          away     from    their    appalling     performance
  both on the fatal day and subsequent to it.

                                                                                             7
  Apart     from     obvious     offence       to    the    bereaved,       how are    the public       to view
  this premature ’’absolution" by the Deputy Chief Constable!
  That a senior police officer - who by his own admission deliberately chose
  to deceive his superiors (and others!) should not be disciplined is totally
  incredible.
  Even    if one believes Chief Superintendant Duckenfield’s reasons for lying
  to the general public at the time,                   (and I am bound to say that I personally
   In o t !)_ there could have been no credible reason to have misled the Deputy
 Chief Constable.


 Is    it   purely       coincidence       that       this       provided     an    excuse   for    the    Chief
 Constables silence during the lead-in /initial week of the Taylor Inquiry,
 when the fans were able to give their views?
 I trust      that      under    the   circumstances             you   will   understand my        fears    of   a
 "whitewash"         at the least and at the worst a deliberate attempt to ’’close
 ranks” and distort the course of justice.


 I regret that Mr.Hayes’s insensitive and untimely public action has further
reduced my opinion of the South Yorkshire senior police.
 It leaves me no alternative but to formally complain directly to yourself,
  .id to ask you as the vanguard of a Government claiming to be ”committed
to    law and        order” to make        an       unequivocal        statement     of your opinion         and
intended actions in the wake of this regrettable development.


I will await your urgent response during the course of today or tomorrow,
but   would       advise      that    should    I fail           to recieve    an appropriate response
I reserve         the   right    to    follow Mr.Hayes              example and release          this     letter
to the media tomorrow evening.




T r e v o r Hicks.

                                                                                                                 2
Discipline & Complaints                                 ACC/GD/HR 235/F27/89
                                                                25 July 1989




D J O'Dowd, Esq., QPM, BA, MSc, CBIM
Chief Constable
Northamptonshire Police
Wootton Hall
Northampton
NN4 OJQ




Dear

Hillsborough Disaster

A letter of complaint, directed through the Home Secretary, has been made
against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield of this Force arising out of the
above.

I write to formally request that you allow Assistant Chief Constable,
Mr K P D Cooper, of your Force to undertake this enquiry on my behalf.

For your information, my Chief Constable has asked the Police Complaints
Authority to supervise the investigation.

Yours sincerely
                                                  DOCUMENT No. 3


                                                    25 July 1SS9




Sir Cecil Clothier KCB QC
Chairman
Police Complaints Authority
8/10 Great George Street
London SW1P 3AE




MR IS.2VC5. HICKS,'
MIDDLESEX

I enclose tor your information copies of correspondence from the
above named in connection with a complaint he has Icdgea against
Hr Peter Hayes, Deputy Chief Constable of this Force.

In ay view the correspondence also constitutes a complaint
against Chief Superintendent David L'uckenfield. I have caused
the complaint to be recorded and would ask you formally to
consider exercising supervision of the conduct of the
investigation under Section 37(i)(b) of the Act. Assistant Chief
Constable K D P Cooper of Northamptonshire Police has teen
appointed to investigate the complaint, subject of course to your
agreement should you decide to supervise the investigation.




                                                                    4
        ' ;          if      :■(
                                                                                         10 G t v . t f G .w - e         London *y.\ i f ’ .Vv!-i

\ OMPLAiN i S
      ,X 3 j' i
  I -\\ I f H j KITY



     Mr V [-licks

                                                                                         O u r reference

    Mmdfnsr*
                                                                                         D ale               4 Augu st I9S9




                                J f' ic A


   I arn w i i t i n g as a M e m b e r o f the Po lic e C o m p l a i n t s A u t h o r it y .

  p J > S letJ e-r df tCd 2f Ju,ly l9 S9 ? Mr WriSh t t h e C h i e f C o n s t a b l e of the South Yor kshire
        i_e. ad vi s e d you t h a t ho c o n s i d e r e d the l e t t e r you had w r i t t e n t o t h e H o m e ' S e c r e t a r y
  on / J u n e c o n s t i t u e d a c o m p l a i n t a g a i n s t C h i e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t D u c k e n f i e l d . Su bs e ­
  q u e n tl y he a p p o i n t e d .< P D C o o p e r Esq, A s s i s t a n t C h i e f C o n s t a b le N o r t h a m p t o n s h i r e
  1 olice, to i n v e s t i g a t e the m a t t e r .

  Souih Yorks hire Pol ice ha v e now r e f e r r e d t h e m a t t e r to t h e A u t h o r it y , wtio h a v e d e c i d e d
  yourUc a s e lSe m v e s t l Sa tion o f your c o m p l a i n t . I shall be t h e M e m b e r r es pons ib le for


  I ha ve a s k e d Mr C o o p e r t o a r r a n g e a m e e t i n g to di sc us s various p o in ts with you.                      I am
  sure he will be in to uch very s hortl y.


                      '\y>            .1 -7, ~c-




 E N TAYLO R
 A u t h o r i t y M e m be r




                                                                                                                                               5
     i.    O   L IC        E
                                                                     iu   Ureat Oeorge btreet, London SW1P3AE

rOMPLAINTS
  A u th o rity                                                                           Telephone: 01-273




   D 3 O’Dowd Esq QPM BA M 5c                 CBIM                  Your reference
   C h ie f Constable

  W o o n o n HaiThlre          P ° liCC                            Our .reference   INV/8 9 1 3 1 /7 9
  Northampton                                                                              V     *« >
  NN4 OJQ                                                           D le     3




 I ? ± - v l° tA° d a y ' S    tei«P(?°ne conversation regarding the Hilisbrough enquiry. As discussed
 LTSLSar;• ^ief Const,abie cooper’ asthe curre,n               o m ^ x
                 ° V e ° m ° ers named by Mr Hicks in his statement of 20
  ug      I 1989.     It   js   important that the notices are served without delay.

                   ^ 0°Per ‘s on*y required to serve the notices and the enquiry will then
2L       .     ■ another force* As soon as the situation regarding the appointment of
the new Investigating Officer is resolved, I will inform both yourself and Mr Cooper in
order that arrangements can be made for the transfer of documents etc.

Again thank you for your assistance in this matter.




E N TAYLOR
Authority Member
                                                      DOCUMENT No.»


                                                               LIVERPOOL



                                                               19 October 1989
 South Yorkshire Police Authority
 Snig Hill
 SHEFFIELD
 S3 8LY

 For the attention of Mr K S Anderson -
 Assistant Chief Constable


Dear Mr Anderson

Re;   Hillsborough Disaster

It is my belief, for reasons stated on the attached schedule, that
the following officers are guilty of "neglect of duty":

1.    Chief Superintendent David Duckinfield
2.    Superintendent Roger Marshall
3.    Superintendent Roger Greenwood

Please cause my complaint to be recorded and investigated                  in
accordance with the "Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984".

Yours faithfully




Les Jtfnes
Enc                           3.
                                    SOUTH V


                                        230CTl98iy

                                              ACC
                                    nmr.IPi nVE & COMPLAINTS




                                                                                 7
                                                                 DOCUMENT No.




     Chief Superintendent David Duckinfield

     1.     Failed  to  acquaint     himself   with    planning/oroblems
            (control of Cup Tie).

     2.     Failed to monitor crowd numbers packing into Pens 3 and
            4.

     3.    Failed to act when it became obvious that Pens 3 and 4
            were overfull as he had an excellent viewpoint from the
            police box above the Pens.

     1.    Failure to make provision for fans coming through gate
             C  after he had given the order for the gate to be
            opened.

     ’*    Failure to act when it was obvious that people were in
           distress.

     >.    Attempting to mislead the Assistant Chief Constable and
           others regarding the origin of the order for gate 'C' to
           be opened.



 ■Superintendent Roger Marshall - Ground Commander (External)

 1.        Failed to control and filter fans away from the immediate
           vicinity of the turnstiles even after 14.17 hours when
           it was oovious that he had lost control of the turnstile
           area.

2.         No order was given to restrict the aporoach of further
           fans.



Suseyintsndent Roger Greenwood - Joint Ground Commander (Internal)

1.        Failed to carry out his assigned duty by placing       himself
           m a position by players tunnel

          Having a radio and using his eyes he should have been
          aware of the dangerous situation and controlled his
          officers accordingly.

2.        Lack of   instructions to his officers to monitor      Pens.

3.        Totally   ineffective in mounting a rescue.

i.        Failing to send officers    to rear of      Pens   3 and   4 to
           relieve pressure.
    TELEPHONE:
   SHEFFIELD (0 7 4 2 ) 7 6 8 5 2 2
                                                                                                         7

                                                                          SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                             SNIG HILL
                                                                                 SHEFFIELD S3 SLY

   K. S. ANDERSON
   A S SIS TAN T CHIEF CONSTABLE                                         ACC/AF/MR 3 4 5 / F W 8 9
                                                                               23 October 1989
   iC o m p l a i n t s / D i s c i p l i n e )




 J Mervyn Jones Esq MSc
 Assistant Chief Constable
 West Midlands Police HQ
 PQ Box 52
 Lloyd House
 Colmore Circus Queensway
 Birmingham B4 6NQ




Dear

LES JONES           O'

I enclose copy of a letter dated 19 October           1989   relative to the above.

I have recorded the ma tter as a complaint against the police under the above
reference and would be grateful if Mr Dear would undertake the investigation.

Additionally,           I have asked Mr E N Taylor to undertake   supervision of the
enquiries.

Yours sincerely




                                                                                                     9
                                                                            DOCUMENT No.                    i




      P olice                                             10 Great George Street, London SW1P 3AE

    '"OMPLAINTS
                                                                           Telephone: 01-273 6 4 ^ 0
      AUTHORITY

     K S Anderson Esq                                     Your reference

     Assistant Chief Constable                              345/F H /89
     South Yorkshire Police                               Our reference
     Snig Hill                                              1NV/89 131/121 ENT
     SHEFFIELD                                            Date
     South Yorkshire                                        25 October 1989
     S3 8LY




     Dear Mr Anderson

     COMPLAINT BY LES JONES

     I confirm that the Police Complaints Authority have decided to supervise the investi­
     gation and it will be incorporated in the investigation currently being undertaken by Mr
     Dear.

     I shall be writing to Mr Jones advising him that the Authority will be supervising the
     investigation of his complaint.


     Yours sincerely


i



     E N TAYLOR
     Authority Member

     ja




                                                                                                       10
                                                                                     DOCUMENT No .
  J MERVYN J O N E S M S c
                                                                                  F U R N I V A l HOUS E
  a s s is t a n t c h ie f c o n s t a b l e
                                                                                  Fumivfit G<ite
                                                                                  Sheffield S1 4Q N
                                                                                  Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 3 1 5 4 6
  WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                                         Fax:         0742 731483
  T’ O Rox 5 2 , Lloyd House
  f.n lm n rn C irr u s Q u e e n s w a y                                         Medico Legal Centre
  R im nnqtinnt R4 g ^ Q                                                          Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 6 1 0 5
  r - i o r (,one- 0 2 t 2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5                            Fax:         0742 726247

  NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION                                                   Your Ref:        ACC/AF/MR 345/F44/89
 Fowler Street
 Birmingham B7 5D A
                                                                                  Our Ref:         JMJ/DH
 Telephone. 0 2 1 3 5 9 3 3 3 2

                                                                                  Date:
                                                                                                  27 October 1989



                   K S Anderson Esq
                   Assistant C hief Constable
                   (Complaints/Discipiine)
                   South Yorkshire Police
                   Snig Hill
                  Sheffield
                  S3 8LY




                 Dea r M r Anderson


                 HILLSBOROUGH COMPLAINT -                       JONES

                ^ e s D e r r o f d! 6 recf pt of y ° ur letter dated 23 October 1989 in
                                      complaint against police made by the above-named.

                On behalf of M r Dear,                   who will act as In vestigating Officer            I
                matter                          resp o ns ib i li ty for the investigation into this



               c o m p l a i n t ^               P° liC6 Complaints Authority interest in the


               Yours sincerely




                                                                                                                    11

PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT                                Birmingham
                                                                         MJF/VSC

                                                                         24 April 1990
     Letter sent to:

  Hammond Suddards                                          , rn T ,
  Upnunrfh » —i . . ,                                  (For ACC Jackson)
  Davies Am o l d "cooper                            f^              Duc^ n f ield,

  R e v n ^ H ^ o 6 f Gilbert                          (For Supt Greenwood)
  Vin c l l t 3u l T tr rCharaberlaln                  (For Eastwoods)

  R u s s e n Jones
  Russell     ^o^8 f  r   TUrnbUU 4 COi63
                    & Walker                           (For ^Federated
                                                                  Murray)1 ^
                                                                       Ranks)

  Hfnr Sir

  HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION

 fLinite f°110Wlng 0ur telePhone conversation of 23 April 19Q0 and in
 Assistant Chie^Cons^aWe!’ 2                  1" ° Sent t0 y°U by Mr Mervyn Jones’


 LiKeiy
  \ e ? y mL
           to iSe
               beteuS
                    tednin
                   used int°inh^  r
                            interview 11f?ie the client,
                                       with your Vlde° and
                                                         forP ^your
                                                                f w a pearly
                                                                        h i c materia!
                                                                              perusal.




 Essi           1   ~    !K“    ” ’™

 At the same time this will give you the opportunity of viewing the
 interview facilities on site. There is no objection to your flient
wl     E«yP3
           reirnw l n Saif                      a"ythlng you may wish to d L " L
                                take PlaCe                  1 ■ » ! •- available


Sta?lonh? r » f Z , qUr leS beforeha"d I can be contacted at Nechells Police
Station in Birmingham on 021-359 - 1742 .

I trust the arrangements made are suitable for you and your client..

Yours faithfully




M J Foster
Detective Chief Superintendent



                                 N ech ells P o lic e S t a t i o n , Birmingham
  H IL L S B O R O U G H IN Q U IR Y T E A M
                                                                 DOCUMENT N
                                                         FURNIVAL HOUSE
                                                         Furnival Gate
WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                  Sheffield S1 4QN
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                   Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 3 1 5 4 6
Colmore Circus Queensway                                 Fax:        0742 731483
Birmingham B4 6NQ
Telephone: 0 2 1 -6 2 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5          Medico Legal Centre
                                                         Telephone; 0 7 4 2 7 2 6 1 0 5
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION                            Fax:       0742 726247
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA                                        Your Ref:
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2 extn. 6 9 1 2                                     7.02/RJH/6363      001
                                                         Our Ref:
                                                                                  LS/SA
                                                         Date:
                                                                                  10 Hay 1990




  Barlow Lyde and Gilbert
  Beaufort House
  15 St. Botolph Street
  London EC3A 7NJ



  Dear Sir

 On 1st April 1990 I was appointed to take over the Hillsborough Disaster
 Inquiry following the appointment of Mr G Dear to the post of Her Majesty’s
 Inspector of Constabulary. Mr Mervyn Jones, Assistant Chief Constable, is
 overseeing the Coronal aspects on behalf of the Coroner Dr Stefan Popper
 and I shall take charge of the Criminal Investigation and matters relating
 to complaints against the Police.

 I now enclose for your information copies of the video and photographic
 material you requested when you met Detective Chief Superintendent Foster
 at Furnival House.

We are now in a position to commence the interviews of your client at your
earliest convenience. To assist this if you contact Detective Chief
Superintendent Foster direct on 021 359 1742 the necessary arrangements can
be made.

Yours faithfully




L SHARP
CHIEF CONSTABLE
CUMBRIA CONSTABULARY

Copies to:          Vincent Hale & Co             Hammond Suddards
                    Hepworth & Chadwick           Walker Morris Scott Turnball
                    Davies Arnold Cooper          Russell Jones & Walker
PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE A T ____                                                             13
        Northamptonshire Police


           From:.
                        K P D COOPER, Assistant Chief Constable

           To:
                        Superintendent R GREENWOOD                                                  5 September 19                   89

                                                                         Reference No.       C&D222'89

                                           The Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 Regulation 7

                                        NOTICE OF REPORT, ALLEGATION OR COMPLAINT

           In accordance with the requirements of Regulation 7 or of the Police (Discipline) Regulations, 1985 I hereby
           .,             . .                           canplaint
           inform you of a                                                                      which has been made against you.

                                                                    COMPLAINT
                                             NATURE OF

         Mr Trevor
              1 ,   ,
                      Hicks of |___________________________________________________________________________________________ | WMiddlesex
                                                                                                                                L tJ tl » has
                                                                                                                                          J ia o

         catplainea that at m e roottaii match between Liverpool and Nottingham
         Forest on the 15th April 1989 at the Hillsborough Football Ground you
         neglected to discharge your duties in that you:—
          (a) failed to prevent a dangerous build up of supporters outside of the
               gates;
         (b) failed to control the movement of supporters subsequent to the openinq
               of Gate 'C'; and                                                                                                               *
         (c) failed to respond to the developing tragedy and were slow to effect a
               rescue operation.
         H                 t^lese complaints could disclose possible offences against
         the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985.

           You are not, as the Regulation explains, obliged to say anything concerning the matter, but you may — if
           you so desire — make a written or oral statement concerning the matter to me or to the Deputy Chief
           Constable. (The-Chief Constable has delegated his authority under Regulation 15 of the above Regulations
           to the Deputy Chief Constable)

          YOU ARE, HOWEVER, WARNED THAT IF YOU MAKE SUCH A STATEMENT TO ME OR TO THE
          DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE, THE STATEMENT MAY BE USED IN ANY SUBSEQUENT DISCIPLIN­
          ARY PROCEEDINGS.

          You have the right to consult a friend at all stages of the investigation and service of this form does not
          necessarily imply that disciplinary proceedings will follow. It is served to safeguard your interest.




                                                                                                      investigati   Officer


        Acknowledgement: I acknowledge having been served with the original of this Notice.
SI
c .9*
                         I do/do not wish to make written/oral statement to the
                         Investigating Officer/Deputy Chipf r.nn«tahlp----------

II                              Date                    Signaturi                               ank
                                                                         1 ---------
        Service:                I served ttye\original of this Notice upon the within

                                named a                                         o 6A           on       <*                                t \9& >

                                Signatur                                                       Rank          -A . C. > C.        .

          Insert the word "report".
                                                                                                                                 300290
                                                                                                                                 Form 4A           14
                                                                                                             DOCUMENT No; 3              wp   666
                                                                                                                                         (S O. B 1 6)
                                                                                                                                         ( A m e n d e d 4 .8 5 )
                                                                                                                      C & D Ref .

 West M id la n d s                                 The Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 Regulation 7
                                                                                                                      □ ate
 P olice                                         NOTICE OF REPORT, A LL E G A TIO N OR COMPLAINT


 From                                                                                    To:


      Mr G.J. Dear,                 Chief Constable                                              Superintendent Roger Greenwood


      In accordance w ith the requirements of Regulation 7 of the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985, I hereby inform you o f
                                         COMPLAINT                                                                 which has been made against you.

  N AT U R E OF *                  COMPLAINT



      On Saturday, 15 April 1989, at H i ll sborough Football Ground, Sheffield,                                                    a
      disaster occurred in w h ic h 95 people died.

      Leslie Jones of                             Liverpool, the father of one of the
      deceased, Richard Jones, has made the following allegations relating to your
      duties at the ground on 15 April 1989;

      (a)       You failed to carry out your assigned duty by placing yourself in a
                 position by the players tunnel.  Using your radio and your eyes you
                 should have been aware of the dangerous situation and controlled your
                officers accordingly.

      (b)       You failed to give instructions to your officers to monitor the pens,
                 for o v e rc ro w di ng in relation to crowd safety at your briefings.

      (c)       You were totally ineffective in mou nt i ng a rescue.  That is you made no
                attempt to or ganise the Police Officers in a w ay w hich would have helped
                bring about a successful rescue operation.

      (d)       You failed to send officers to the rear of Pens 3 and b to relieve
                pressure when you were in control of the area.   This was whe n you knew
                gate 'C' was b eing opened to allow supporters in.




  You have the right to consult a friend at all stages of the investigation and service of this form does not necessarily imply
  that disciplinary proceedings will follow. It is served to safeguard your interests.

  You are not as the Regulation explains, obliged to say anything concerning the matter, but you may if you so desire, make
  a written or oral statement concerning the matter to me or to the Assistant Chief Constable. (The Chief Constable has
  delegated his authority under Regulation 15 of the above Regulations to the Assistant Chief Constable).

  YOU ARE. HOWEVER, WARNED THAT IF YOU MAKE SUCH A STATEMENT TO ME OR TO THE A33I3TAMT-
  QHICr GONSTABfcE, THE STATEMENT MAY BE USED IN ANY SUBSEQUENT DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS.




                                                                                                              In
  *   In sert th e w o rd " re p o rt'', "alleg atio n '' o r "co m p la in t" as appropriate.


                                  I acknowledge having been served with the original of this Notice.
ACKNOWLEDGE­
MENT
                                                                                                                                         Sank       Numbar
(copy to b« tignad)             D ata



                                  I served the original of this Notice upo™ me i^ im nan
SERVICE                                                                                                                                 Rank        Numbar
                                T im a

                                                                                                                                                       ..
                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                          DOCUMEtIT No.


  ]

                                                              LS/SA

                                                              17 July 1990



 Mr Richard Wells Esq
 Chief Constable
 South Yorkshire Police
 Police Headquarters
 Snig Hill
 Sheffield S3 8LY




Following our telephone conversation of recent date I write to you with a
proposition in connection with the routeing of the papers arising from the
crime investigation into the Hillsborough disaster.

You will know that my investigation into the criminal and disciplinary aspects
is being supervised by the Police Complaints Authority. At the end of my
investigation, which is not far off, the PCA must make a statement that it is
satisfied with the conduct of the investigation.    That statement will be sent
to you, the complainants and to the officers whose conduct has been called into
question. The only exception to that will be the PCA statement in respect of
your Assistant Chief Constable Mr Walter JACKSON. In his case the PCA
statement will go to your Police Authority.

In strict accord with the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, the way for
this to be achieved is for me to submit my original report to the PCA, and at
the same time send a copy to you (or your Police Authority). Once the PCA is
satisfied with my investigation it sends the forementioned statement to that
effect, to you (or to your Police Authority).

You (or your Police Authority) are then required first to consider matters
related to any criminal offences revealed in the report and refer them to the
Director of Public Prosecutions. Thereafter you are required to subnit a
report to the PCA setting out your opinions as to the merits of the complaints
against police officers; any disciplinary charges preferred or proposed; the
merits or otherwise of convening a disciplinary tribunal; and any reasons for
not preferring disciplinary charges.

My proposition is that for various reasons; including the referral of the
matter by Peter Wright to the DPP in the first place; the complex circumstances
of the investigation; the bulk of the documentary and other evidence; and the


                                                      Continued.
                                                            DOCUMENT No. 1 4




                                       2.




need for expediency; you allow me to deal direct with the DPP in so far as the
crime aspects are concerned. Of course, you will receive the PCA statement at
the appropriate time and you will receive all of the evidence and reports in
time for your consideration of the disciplinary aspects with the PCA. The
matters relating to your Assistant Chief Constable would not be affected.

I hope that this letter is comprehensible and that you will agree to my
proposal, in which case a short letter of reply would be appreciated.




CHIEF CONSTABLE
CUMBRIA CONSTABULARY
INVESTIGATING OFFICER



Enc




                                                                                 17
                                                                          DOCUMENT
  I I I EPHOVE:                                                      SOL TH YORKSHIRE POUCH
  SHEFHELl)                                                           POUCH HEADQLARTERS
  II IIA: 5r<m                                                            SNK, HILL
  I V \: *07421 523243                                                     SHEFFIELD S3 SLY


  R B W ELLS (JPM St A
  CHIEF CONSTABLE                                                               24 July 1990


  L Sharp Esq QPM LLB PBIM
  Chief Con stable
 Hills borough Inquiry Team
 c/o West Mid lands Police
 Nechells Green Police Station
 Fowler Street
 Birmin g h a m B7 5DA




 Many thanks for your letter          of   17 July   1990 which   concerns      the   routeing
 of your report to the DPP.


 I quite under s t a n d that there   are exceptional circumstances which surround
 your investi gation and that         the bulk of the material which accompanies
 your report is considerable.             It is also relevant that the matter was
 referred to the DPP by Peter          W right in the first instance, and the need
 for expediency should require        no argument.

Of course, I am directly concerned only with the matters which involve
officers of and below the rank of Chief Superintendent, so I cannot speak
for my Police Authority which is c oncerned with officers of ACPO rank.

I have no objection to your submitting               your   report   to   the   DPP   through
the PCA w i thout sending a copy to me.

I und ers t a n d that in due course I shall receive a statement from the
PCA in respect of your conduct of the investigatio n and that I shall
receive all the reports and supporting evidence in good time for me to
consider any d i sciplin ary aspects of the case.

I trust that this letter is sufficient for your purposes                        and   that   it
will h e l p to bring the m atter to a swift conclusion.




R i c h a r d Wells
