     c




N,




         k
                                                                                  £XP:C>M.        &Q
                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                               Ref:
        From: PC i837 Brookshaw                               Station/Dept:   Doncaster
    To:       Chief Superintendent Thompson                    Date:          2 5 th May   1989




              SUBJECT:
                          Report concerning Hillsborough Semi Final Duties
                          Saturday 15th April 19§9


                My duty on this date w*g on Serial 2**, with PS 1628 Dolan in charge and Insp
                Humphries in overall command.

                After attending the briefing at the ground and taking refreshments myself and
                PC 552 Hartshorn took up a position at the main entrance to Hillsborough shopping
                precinct arriving at 11.30 am. At 11.50 am Insp Humphries directed us to the
                Park Public House on Wadesley Lane where we arrived at 12 noon.

                The premises were closed. For some 2 hours we were constantly asked by Liverpool
                supporters, where the nearest Pub was that was open. We informed those enquiring
                that to our knowledge no license premises were open in walking distance and the
                best thing to do was to get into the ground early.   By 1.30 pm their was a .
                constant stream of spectators walking down Wadesley Lane towards the ground.
                They were noisy and at least half were drinking alcohol of some sorts.

                In the main Strong Pills Lager was drunk along with cans of beer, litres and
                carafes of wine and Large take away plastic vessels 01 Strongbow cider. PC
                Hartshorn and I spent th° next hou? taking Pub glasses from persons in the street.
                As soon as we approached those carrying the glasses they appologised and although
                suffering fro the affects of drink behaved themselves when speaking to us in
                order to avoid arrest, thus missing the match.

                I was asked on about 30 occasions if I had any tickets for the game or ii I
                knew where they could be purchased. I said no.

                From 2 pm the crowd became more noisy and more drunken people approached the
                ground. I could see and hear bottles and glasses being thrown and smashing in
                the raod and gardens in Wadesley Lane but it was not possible to identify the
                specific persons responsible due to the size of the crowd.

                At 2.30 pm I a r r e s t e d __                       unemployed
                         Liverpool for an offence of drunk and disorderly. He threw a bottle
                whilst drunk which smashed in the rear yard of The Park Public House. I arrived
                at the police room about 2.tf0 pm and documented          At 3*06 pm I was in the
                Gymnasium when I was told to get out on to the perimeter track as soon as possible
                which I did. I saw one youth running towards the kop on his own and I was soon
                drawn to gate 3 at the pen at Leppings Lane where I attempted to extract persons
                from the crush. I carried two stretchers towards the kop with Liverpool supporter
                and formed the cordon in the centre of the field later. I did not stay with a
                body.



                pc 1837




Gen/2
