   * ^1?ATJ1 ANTHONY LIA5I32S   POLICE CONSTABLE 2016
     S2 Sub division^Woodseats Police Station,Sheffield.


On Saturday,15th April,1989, I commenced duty at V/oodseats Police Station at 8.k5am
for deployment at Hillsborough, football ground for the Liverpool v Nottingham Forest
F.A. Cup semi final. We arrived at Hillsboruogh at around 9•30am were we v/ere briefed
by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and several other senior Officers. After the        briefing
v/e v/ere deployed to the Penistone Soad/Kop enclosure where a further briefing took place
given by Superintendent Greenwood and Inspector Booth .Ive v/ere made av/are of possible
potential problems on the terraces and outside the ground. I was then depletedas a member
of Serial 9 with responsiblities for turnstiles Nos k3/kk on Penistone Road.
     We supervised the entry of Forest fans and prevented them taking any dangerous items
into the ground and searches of numerous fans v/ere made. We v/ere under constant supervision
from the .Serial Sergeant,P.S. 767 Jessop who remained at the turnstiles . './e were also
checked periodically by Inspector Booth and other Senior Officers.
      Me remained at the turnstiles until around 3.10pm when Sgt. Jessop gathered us
^^gether and informed us we v/ere requiried inside the ground at the Leppings Lane end .
At this time we all believed there to be a pitch invasion in progress. The turnstile
Operators v/ere instructed to close the gates and they complied v.dth this request.
     The Serial then went round the rear of the Kop and made our way through the crowd
to the perimeter fence and v/e were let out through, a gate behind the goal. We had an
easy passage through the Kop and there appeared to be ample room     on the terrace.
(Whilst working or: the turnstiles, I noticed that we never had any groat build up of
Forest supporters and the queues were never more then about 15 to 20 at any one time)
       Once on the pitch I could see that a large number of Liverpool fans v/ere already on
the pitch and that more were climbing over,-the perimeter fence, I also recall seeing
others being hauled up into the stand abo've the Leppings Lane Terrace by other fans.
       Initially I thought there had been pitch invasion as did the Forest fans as I
j^^all the Chant "OFF THE PITCH" being shouted by Forset fans. The serial as aUaole
walked towards the Lepping Lane Terrace at a normal walking place ,still believing it
to be a pitch invasion. After reaching the Leppings Lane Terrace I could see several
supiDorters squashed tightly against the perimeter fence and they were obviously having
difficulty breathing. Police Officers were stood on the fence    trying to get the crowd
to move back ,but they seemed to take no notice. I can recall one of the gates directly
behind the goal being opened, and there v/ere several Police Officers pulling fans through this
gate ana out onto the pitch. By now I had realised that the situation was serious because
I can recall seeing two people being taken out of the crowd who v/ere obviously dead and had
already started to turn a bluish colour. By this time I had. become detached from my
serial and gave assistance v/ere I could. The body of a young male,Caucasian,approx.20yrs
old with blonde hair was passed through the gate to myself and another Officer who was
stood next to me. He had stopped breathing and was also a bluish colour. Together with the
other unknown Officer v/e took him to the side of the pitch nearest the South Stand and laid
him on the grass. ’
                  The other Officer g:,ve mouth to mouth rescuscitation whilst I gave

                                                                             9 ^ 300 \
         heart massage . v;e kept this going for around        IGminutes butwith, no success.
  A fireman and. a supporter then took over from us and. I did not see what happened to this
  man after leaving him there. I returned to the perimeter fence and helped other injured far.
onto the pitch. 3y this tiae the pitch was full of Liverpool Supporters and when the Forest
Fans started chanting    a large group began to run towards the Forset end of the ground
obviously wanting to fight. Along with several other Police Officers we attempted to stop
the fans getting to the other end of the pitch( I also recall several Liverpool fans,mostly
in their 30*s, urging the Liverpool fans to go back and help their friends and not make - .
maaters worse than what they already v/ere) Host      of the      fans did return tothe Leppings
Lane end but others were still in an aggressive       mood. She Liverpool   fans on the Leppings
Lane end had a mixture of emotions. Some did alll they could to assist         in helping fellow
fans ,others appeared to be in shock walking round aimlessly, others were venting their
anger on us and the press whilst others where hysterical and unable to control themselves.
By this time I realised that v/e had a major disaster on our Lands as I could see bodies
everywhere I looked on the pitch and Police ,Fireman,Ambulance and Supporters were giving the
k ^ ^ of life to prostrate bodies all over the pitch. I cannot recall seeing any stretchers
ai^^his time and fans v/ere making makeshift    stretchers from the advertising hoardings
around the ground. The bodies v/ere beginning to be ferried by Police Officers and supporters
to the rear of the North Stand. By now I had somehow become part of a cordon of Police
acoross the pitch around the halfway line. I dont recall how I came to be in the cordon and
X know realise that I was probably in the early stages of shock. I remember looking at the
bodies of the supporters as they v/ent past me ,as I was worried that I might feiow some of them
( I am Liverpool born and several family and friends attended at the match and v/ere actually
on the Leppings Lane Terraces). I remember small outburst of sporadic fighting breaking out
in small sections around most parts of the ground.
         By now I had lost all track of time and can ~nly remember there being a tannoy
announcement that   the match had been abondoned. The ground gradually emptied of fans and
our serial eventually regrouped. V/e took up our after match poations        on Penistone Road to
su^t*vise bus queues but this turned out to be a pointless exercise as most of the fans
had by now left the area.
         Ue then returned 'to the North Stand for a debriefing. 3y now rumours numbered the
dead to be over thirty. I approached my Serial Inspector,Mr. Booth and asked him if I could
make some enquiries regarding my immediate family and friends whom I knew to be at the game.
In the circumstances this proved impossible for obvious reasons. Everyone in the stand sat in
stunned silence,and some v/ere crying,
        ..e returned to l/oodseats Police Station and went off duty at 7.15pm.
              .My own comments about the incident are few ,mainly due to the fact that
a lot of what hap>xmed   around me I am just unable to remember. While at the Leppings Lane
end of the ground   ,its>$eemed to take a long time    for any,Senior Officer to take command       ^
but this was-understandable   in view of what was taking place. Problems with communications
were clearly apparent as onlyN^ie Serial Sergeants had radios ,so the rest of us were
unaware of v/hat was needed to be osjie
 jte to Xiis situation a: tnat Lime all the serials were probably broken up and everyone^-eara
whatever they could to the best of their ability     anc although. 1 am Liverpool      and had
family at the match I can state categorically that 3very irolice Office;             est in
what was a very ca^xicuit ana aia-crescin^       :ion.

      i can only describe                                    loci: and once 1 arr ived hone
<2 broke dov/n but managed to pull myself tohether^asfl knew I v;ould be receivi]
calls from family and friends ,anxious aboujt-iay welfare and that of their friends and
family at the game,
      1 dont think anyone at the^-gSround will ever forgot that day as long as they live
and no amount of training         ever prepare anyone for what happened.
      I have good fripasfas in Liverpool and. here in Sheffield but I can put my hand on my
heart and say w^tKout any hesitation that all my colleagues did everything humanely
possible ta-'save lives and help people at the game and at the end of the day this was
  ts»<lc accident, which in my opinion has been likely to happen for the last tan years,
unfortunately it had to happen here in Sheffield.




                                                    P.A. Liasides P.C.2016
