                        ■..........................'           V,A

        .




 >jjl m u m ^
II .o       —             n ^ w s c ^ 'P r
rfe -S M M fb                       l \ i 6lM.fci>T
-rdtviScfixPT




                                          'V'. .A
                                   ;v-       ■"•'‘ ■




                                                     -.-.V           •%'                                                     . :•              ■■        •.          - --V   ■ ■■   ■
            ;   v   A                          . :     v   a               •:   > ,• :   A   -   -   A   -   :   .   ^ ■ . v V v - \ : - V v        v   ; - V 7 ';      ^
                                                     SUPERINTENDENT BERNARD DEAN MURRAY Callea

                                                                                    Examined bv MR. PHILLIPS:
                6

                         Q. Bernard Dean Murray? - A. Yes, sir.

                         0. Superintendent of Police in the South Yorkshire Police? - A.
                            Yes, sir.

                         0. How long have you been a Superintendent? - A. I have been a
                            Superintendent since 14th March, 1988, sir.
    c.
                          Q.     Have you   had experience in the F Division                                                                                            ofSheffield since
                                you were a Superintendent? - A. Yes.

                          Q. Were you there before then?     - A. I have not servedin F
                             Division before March 1988, no, sir.
                D         Q. In particular, have you had                                                                         experience of footballmatches?-
                             A. Yes, sir.

                          Q. Were you    the Officer who was incharge of   the league match
                             between Sheffield Wednesday and Liverpool on 14th January,
                             1989? - A. I was not the Officer in charge, but I was at that
                             game, sir.

                          Q. Can we look at Tab 21 in the second volume of the Souxh
                             Yorkshire Police documents. Do we see there - unfortunately
                             the pages are not numbered - but about the fifth page,
                             Appendix B, your name under "Ground Control”. Is that right?
   €                         - A. Yes, sir.

                          Q. And above you, overall command, Chief Superintendent Mole? -
                             A. That is correct.

                          Q. And then we have some Chief Inspectors and some Inspectors.
                             So you were the only Superintendent at that match. Is that
                             right? - A. Yes.

                          Q. And were you concerned, therefore, not just with the ground
                             control but with the other duties of a Superintendent at that
                             game? - A. With the duties of the....?

                          0   . of a Superintendent at that game? - A. If I am in charge of a
                                game I would normally run it anyway from ground control.

                          Q. Yes. Is that what happened on this occasion? - A. Chief
                             Superintendent Mole would be in overall command and I would be
                             the Officer in ground control making decisions on the ground.
                H         0. Was Chief Superintendent Mole there at the time? - A. Where?


. L. H arpham Ltd


   Y YYYY-               ' Y. ' A y : Y y v v a Y Y Y .Y -^ y y Y -Y '/ Y Y , Y :vy :;Y. Y :-Y.. Y Y Y Y y a Y Y v ’ Y Y^-1- Y '- A a Y ; Y y Y Y Y ;:Y- Y ■    ■■
   Y , - Y Y " '             Y-.-:. YYYY' Y Y Y ^ ‘Y -'Y Y Y y Y Y Y ■ : Y \Y Y ;-"'Y-Y - Y " : YY :Y Y J Y S Y ; ■ ? ' . YY: A y Y -                      "YY:
   Y p - > . Y Y Y ‘ -'YY s a ^ Y Y a y Y Y Y >:Y Y / Y y Y Y ^ Y , : ^ ; Y v ;: y a             v .Y - ; , -                                                      '
   ^ Y Y 'W Y            :Y                                                                  Y Y Y Y y y :-:/ - Y          -A Y      Y ^ y -y v Y Y y . Y Y Y   Y Y Y Y vyy                   >■ y   ' Y Y--   Y
    --                            A .   Yc ;    - Y x - ' - . ' , ; : Y-a'-yy'. ,    -   .      ' ^ : ' a . : a a ' •• '
                                                                                             Cy..                           r •' •    - : y “- ’    ya. a v        • ,._v. T ^ y ^ a -   -a   •,
                           63

                                               B.D. MURRAY


0. At the game? - A. Yes, he would be at the game.    As far as I
   can remember.

0. Were you concerned with the operational order that was made at
   that time? - A. Yes, sir, I would be.

Q. And you were concerned with making it with Chief
   Superintendent Mole? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. We see from the first page of that entry, do we not, that the
   away supporters were to be accommodated - item 1.23 - in the
   West Stand and the Leppings Lane terrace? - A. yes, sir.

0. That was the location for them. Is it right there were no
   Sheffield Wednesday supporters at that end of the ground? - A.
   Of all the matches I have policed there we have not had
   Sheffield Wednesday supporters at that end of the ground.

Q. So the whole of the Leppings Lane terrace was available to the
   Liverpool fans? - A. Yes, sir.

Q   Would you turn now, please, to Serial 9, the duties there. Do
    you see there in Phase 1, ’’Maintain order. Ensure pens are
    filled in accordance with instructions from control”? - A.
    Yes, sir.
Q. In relation to the Leppings Lane terraces? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You would, of course, be the one giving those instructions,
   would not you? - A. Yes, sir.

Q   Why did you think it necessary to put that in the order for
    this particular match? - A. This is a league game with only a
    small crowd expected.     I think, the attendance is expected of
    2 , 0 0 0 to 3,000. If at all possible with away supporters to
    maintain maximum segregation we confine them to the two centre
    pens. That keeps them the maximum distance away from the home
    fans.
Q. So it was really to keep them apart from the Sheffield
   Wednesday fans? - A. That is the idea, yes, sir.




                           /G. Was that in fact how
                                                       64

                                                                    B.D. MURRAY


                 q   . was that in fact how it worked out when you cane to giving
                       directions from control that you put then all into Jie
                       centre two pens? - A. I cannot remember, sir. We would
                       trv and assess the number of supporters that were coming
                       and would be standing on the terraces and deciae w».ew..er
                       to give then the centre two pens, the centre two pens *nd
                       the south pen or whatever. Ke would try ana get it accurate
           B           the first time because it saves the problems or supporters
                       rushing round when you open pens and climbing fences.

                 0. Was that Serial in fact pasted inside the pens on the
                    Leopings Lane terraces? - A. They voula main-axn tna-
                    from the concourse outside sir.
                 Q. Would there be Officers in the pens themselves? - A. Ho sir.

 € ’             0           «ow would they then ensure that they were filled in
                             ‘
                             accordance with instructions? - A. If we filled tne centre
                             two pens there would be an Officer on tne ga^es at the
                             back of the terrace on the outside.
                     0. And otherwise the Officers would simply be directing them
                        down the tunnel or wherever? ~ A. Yes sir.
           D
                        in the case of the natch that we are concerned w i t h o n t h e
                     Q. 15th oe April of this year, you accept, do you, tnat the.e
                        was no similar kind of provision for organising tne liverpool
                        fans? - A. Wo sir, they were given the wnole terrace Cnc
                        let then go where they want to.
                     0        D<d you think that was a practical proposition? - A. it was
                             a system that had worked well in the past and I could see
                             no benefit in changing it.
                     n       do vou think it was likely that they would be able to wove
                             from the centre pens to the side pens? - A. They can anc
                             I now appreciate the difficulty because there is only one
                             gate at the back.
                     Q. That is righton each side? - A. Yes sir.
                     o        Kow coming to the match, I think you had a good deal to
                              do with the planning of the o p e r a t i o n for t h e match on uhe
                              15th of April, didn't you? - A. Yes, I did sir.

                      Q. You attended various meetings.            Is that right? - A. Yes sir.

                      o       First of all on the 20th of March with c h i e f Superintendent
                              KOI £ - A. I think that was the day that we found o u t «
                              w e r e " having the match. I don’t think it was a meeting as
                              such.
                         o         t think with Mr. Mole and Mr. Sewell on the same day
                              y ^ c L e iS the conclusion that you ought to repeat the
            H                 order for the previous year? - A. Yes.


J.L.H*»ph*mLtd
                                                         65

                                                                     B.D. HURRAY


                      Q. You considered that that had gone off pretty well, had you?
                         _ A. Yes. There were a number of problem areas which I
                         applied my mind to, but generally the event had gone off
                         well.
                      Q. You say in your statement that the order was to be prepared
                         by Chief Inspector Beal and Inspector Sewell? - A. Yes sir.
               B
                      Q. What then was your role and that of Chief Superintendent Mole's
                         as you understood it? - A. To overlook the order and to sort
                         of input any information that was necessary.

                      Q        You had    an instruction, I think, to reduce the nutiber
                               men used   on the various serials, didn't you? - A. I was
                               asked to   aim for a reduction in manpower, yes sir. I was
                               asked to   aim for 1 0 %.
                      Q. And did you in fact achieve that? ~ A. Well I thin«. t:ie
                         1 0 % was achieved, yes sir.

                      O. Now you had I think some views which you expressed about
                         improvements that could be made on the previous year, is
                         that right? ~ A.Yes sir, I did.
                D
                       q   . you had carried out the same role on the previous vea-,
                             had you? ~ A. Yes, I had.
                       Q. And you made some alterations I think to the Serials tha^
                          were at the junction of Leppings Lane and Pemstone Road?
                          — A. With a match of this nature all supporters i.rom^
                          Liverpool, or the majority, would go along Leppings Lane
                          towards vJadsley Bridge Station and the coaches parked up
                          Penistone Road. The majority of Nottingham supporters
                          would go in that direction on Penis tone Road to the coaches
                          which are parked on the bus depot at Herries Road anc that
                          makes the Leppings Lane roundabout a natural sort o. meeting
                          point and one which we felt should be reinforced.

                          n    is the bus depot in fact on the roundabout itself or just
                               on the corner of the roundabout? - A. You turn right and
                               it is about 1 0 0 yards on the left-hand side, sir.

                          Q.          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     In Herries Road? - A. It is
                                in Herries Road.
                           n    That is the bus depot for Nottingham Forest? - A. It is
                  Gl            actually the Sheffield City Council bus depot but they_
                                allow No t t i n g h a m Forest to use it for parking their eocenes.

                                         MR PHILLIPS: Had you had trouble at that area tne
                           Q. p r e v i o u s ‘year? - A. No sir, but it always is a potential
                              flashpoint and one of the Superintendents in chJrSe ^
                              the Nottingham sector was particularly concerned tnat the.e
                              mav be a problem there and so it was foreseen that we
                  Hi          might have problems and the resources there were reinforcec.



J . L H arpham L td
                                  B.D. MURRAY


Now you also I think made some alterations to Serial 1 that
was concerned with the perimeter track in the ground, didn't
you? - A. Yes sir, that was increased.

What was the object of that? - A. Well mainly to provide
more cover on the track. We were also going to support that
at the end of the game with several other Serials to control
and monitor any pitch invasion that may follow at the end
of the match.
Had there been a pitch invasion the previous year? - A. Yes.

When had that occurred? - A. That had occurred at the Leppings
Lane end when Liverpool supporters had corae over the top,
over the fences and round the sides.

At what point in the game? - A. At the conclusion when
Liverpool had won.
As *ar as the West Stand Serial was concerned, did you make
some alterations to their duties? - A. The West Stand Serials?

ves. You say they were ”to be particularly vigilant"? “ A.
Oh yes sir. At half-time particularly at the previous mater,
there had been a lot of climbing from the terraces into tne
West Stand and they were to be vigilant to prevent people
climbing up from the terraces on to the West Stand.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: What were people doing that for?
 - A. It was presumably to get a better view of the gene, my
 Lord. It was obvious there was no seats for taent. Tiiey
 werebeing helped un from above by supporters and quite large
 numbers of them clirabed up at half-time to the higher vantage
 point above.
       MR. PHILLIPS: Was this from Pens 3 and 4? - A. This
 was mainly from the railings that run between the centre
 railings and the railings at either end of 3 and 4. Also
 some came over from the raised terrace on the north or
 the Viest Stand.
 Had there been particular crowding in Pens 3 and 4 in the
 previous year then? - A. Not that I was aware of.

 Can vou give us any idea of how many people were doing this
 sort of thing the previous year? - A. I cannot give you the
 numbers. It was sufficient for me to be concerned about
 it   What I was concerned about was that people were climbing
 up only a few feet away from Police Officers who obviously
 could not see them. When people lean over the stand K is
 impossible for an Officer to see what is going on only a
 few feet away from him.
 were the Officers in the West Stand given any specific
 duties in relation to the terrace down below? - A. Not that
 I know of, no sir.                  ,
                                67
                                     y
                                          B.D. MURRAY


Q. There is nothing in the printed order of course that tells
   us that? - A. The only specific duties they were given in
   relation to that was to watch for people climbing up from
   the terrace.
Q       They were not required to look into the terrace down below
        to see how it was filling up during the hour, half-an-hour
        before the match started? - A. That is not a part of t;ieir
        specific duties, no sir.
O       It is certainly not part of their written duties, that is
        true. - A. .1 would expect all Officers and all Stewards
        to be aware of those type of problems. Similar to fire,
        we don *t brief them particularly, but if it comes to
        anybody's attention I would expect to be notified that
        they had a problem of whatever type.

n       Did you have any Officers at all who were concerned to
        keep a watch on the filling of Pens 3 and 4 of the Leppings
        Lane terrace? - A. There was no one who had a specific
        duty as such.
0       Do you think there should have been? - A. I cannot recall
        ever having a problem in the time that I have been there
        but obviously as a result or events, yes.

Q. With hindsight you do? - A. Kith hindsight.

n. Although it was not part of the detailed, any part or the
   Serials' written instructions, was there an oral instruction,
   to your knowledge, given to any of those Serials to loo/,
   out for this kind of problem? - A. There wasn’t an oral
   instruction given by myself or Hr. Duckenfield or anyone
   else at the general briefing. Whether any of the Super­
   intendents, Inspectors or Serial Sergeants gave s p e c m c
   instructions at their own briefings I don't know sir.

    Q. But you did not in fact include it in the instructions you
       gave, in the oral instructions you gave, to t n e Inspectors.
       - A Vo sir. The briefing that I gave the staff at tne _
       start of the event I did not include it. I did not consicer
       it a particular problem.
    q   . I think you made some further provisions for segregating
          supporters in the Kop? - A. Yes sir.
    Q. Who belonged to. the wrong side, as it were, from the rest
       of the people? - A. Yes.
    q   . And some provision for buses to be outside in Leppings
          Lane and Penistone Road? - A. Yes sir.




                               /Q. That is for the end
                          68

                                                    B. D. HUEEAY



Q. That is for the end of the match, is not it? - A. Yes,
   these uere all based on the experiences of the previous
   year.
Q. Yes, and I think you also made some alterations, did not
   you, to the provision of seals and call times for senior
   Officers and so on? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Nou, uhen ue coie to your particular role    in thepolicing
   of the match, you uere -the Superintendent   in Control.   Is
   that right? - A. Yes.

Q.    There was also a     Superintendent in charge of   theground,
     Hr. Greenwood? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. And Superintendents on the outside, Mr. Marshall and Hr.
   Chapman, I think? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. For the two ends? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. What was your role? What would you say your role was as
   distinct from that of Hr. Greenwood, for example? - A. I
   would say that my role was overall control of the Control
   Eoom and the event itself and obviously adviser to the
   Officer who was in charge, which was Mr. Duckenfield.

Q. So you were with   Hr. Duckenfield, or intending to be with
   Hr. Duckenfield,   for the match itself? - A. Well, Hr.
   Duckenfield took   up the role which I expected to take up,
   which was in the   Control Eoom.

Q. Yes, and that is where you intended to be? - A. That is
   where I was for the whole - well, I intended to be for the
   Whole of the event.
Q. You were, therefore, particularly interested, were you
   not, in communications? - A. Yes, indeed.

Q. Is that one of the major tasks that you had to undertake?
   - A. Yes, it was.
Q. You had, of course, for that purpose. Sergeant Goddard and
   some Constables? - A. Sergeant Goddard and two Constables.
   Sergeant Goddard was to carry out all radio operations,
   both incoming and outgoing. PC Bichard was to operate the
   cameras and to operate the radio link that we had with our
   Force Operations Eoom and PC Eyan was to be in charge of
   the public address system and monitor the telephones that
   we had from various places.
 Q. Now, your task, as the Control Superintendent, is going to
    be considerably affected by the quality of the
    communication system that you have got, is not it? - A.
    Very much so, yes, sir.
                                               B. D. MUSSAY




In the 1989 preparations, you made a neu arrangement, did
not you, for a Coaaunications Officer to be available at
the ground? - A* Yes, I did, sir. Yes.

Is that Hr. Sanderson? - A. I did not know who it was
until he arrived, but I asked for a Coaaunications Officer
to be present because we had had soae problem the previous
year.
I was going to ask you about that. Vhat problems had you
had the previous year? - A. Well, the probleas the
previous year were breakthrough froa soae radio station -
a commercial radio station - music that was coming over
the radios. The equipment was checked and we could not
find any fault and, on my pre-briefing with the Club on
the Thursday before the event, I checked with them and
there were no local radio stations that would be operating
and transmitting from the vicinity of the Police Control,
so we did not expect that, but I thought it would be very
handy to have a Communications Officer available if we did
have a problem.
So you were not expecting any particular problem to arise.
It was a just in case provision? - A. That is correct,
yes.
Now, I think, after this initial meeting and these
alterations that you had made to the previous year’s
operational order, you had further meetings, did you not,
at Hammerton Road on 22nd March with Hr. Hole? - A. Yes,
sir.
And is this the meeting where the question of the
allocation of the ends was dealt with? - A. That is
correct, yes.
And this was a decision that was made by the Police,
having heard representations, I think, from British Bail
and from the Football Association? - A. There was someone
- I do not think they represented the Football Association
- who said that Liverpool were concerned about being given
the lesser share of the tickets.
      LOBD JUSTICE TAYLOB:   Well, I think we have really
 covered this ground, have not we?

      MB. PHILLIPS:   Sir, yes, I am taking it just for
 continuity really:
 You agreed, did you, in any event, with the allocation of
 ends? - A. Yes, I had a further discussion with Hr. Hole
 and we did look at any other options and decided that we
 would have to go ahead with what had been agreed,
                         70
                                                  B. D. HUEEAY



  especially in respect of the fact that the fans had
  travelled to those particular ends last year and would
  probably do the same again, regardless of where we housed
  them in the stadium.

Q. How, you had various other meetings, I think, on 29th
   Harch and 5th April, and then, I think, on 10th April you
   had a meeting at Hammerton load with Chief Superintendent
   Duckenfield and the the Sector Superintendents? - A. Yes,
   sir.
Q. And you also had British Transport Police there at that
   time. That is right? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. What arrangements in particular were you concerned about
   at that time? - A. It was whether or not we should go
   ahead as planned and it was to inform the Sector
   Superintendents of the new contingency arrangements that
   had been made and to find out whether they had any
   particular problems.

Q. The new contingency arrangements? - A. I am talking about
   the support of Officers on the track at the end of the
   game, the increase of the flashpoint at Leppings Lane, the
   fact that we were arranging for Officers to be on standby
   outside the ground in buses.

Q. Yes. Now, I think then, on 13th April, you went with
   Inspector Sewell to the Club? — A. Yes, sir.

Q. And had a meeting there with the Club Secretary? - A. Yes,
   sir.
Q. And did you look at the ground then? - A. Yes, I went
   completely round the ground after the meeting.

Q. Can you remember what was discussed at that meeting? - A.
   There were several things.  I asked the Club if they were
   completely satisfied that the gantry for the TV cameras
   over the West Stand was safe and they were. We had a look
   at that afterwards and it seemed perfectly safe. We did
   discuss coaches for executives who were coming to the
   match. We discussed who the referee was, what the
   arrangements would be with Hr. Clough, where he would sit.
   Several things. General things.

 Q. Did you look particularly at the Leppings Lane end of the
    ground? - A. Not particularly, sir.

 Q. Well, you included that in your tour of the ground, did
    you? ~ A. Yes.
 Q. Were you concerned about the signposting at that end of
    the ground? - A. Ho, sir.  I have never been concerned
                          71                            >

                                                  B. D. NUSSAY



  about signposting.  I have never noticed the signposting.
  I have just accepted the ground as it is.

Q. Hell, do you say that, if you had said anything about
   signposting, would that have made any difference, do you
   think? - A. I think it may well have made. The Club might
   have taken notes. When I first came to Sheffield,
   Hillsborough, in 1988, I had a look round the football
   ground then and the only areas of concern I had were about
   the glass in the West end of the North Stand and the Club
   agreed to look into that and did cone back to me and tell
   ■e that it was shatter-proof;  it could not be broken.

Q. So you have looked around the ground on several occasion
   then, you say, not just on this occasion on the 1 0 th
   April? - A. Oh, no, sir, I have been round the ground
   before.
Q. And you have never at any stage taken any particular
   notice of the absence of signs to people coming through
   turnstiles A to G? - A. It has never struck me.  It has
   never been apparent to me, no.

Q. Now, I think then you went and participated, did you not,
   in the briefing by Hr. Duckenfield, yourself and Inspector
   Sewell on the day before the match? - A. Yes, sir, Friday
   14th.
Q. And we have your briefing notes available, do ue not? - A.
   Yes, sir.
Q. In which I think you followed Mr. Duckenfield, both on the
   Friday and on the Saturday, did not you? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. And there is just one matter on the briefing notes I want
   to ask you about, Hr. Murray. On the second page there is
   an item head "Travelling fans*? - A. Yes, sir.

q.       "From Liverpool one special train with 350 on board
         will arrive at Wadsley Bridge station at 4.02.“

     Do you see that? - A. 1402, sir.

Q. I am sorry, 1402, yes. You are quite right. Where did
   you get the figures from - the figure of 350? - A. That
   would come from our intelligence Officers.

 Q. Did you have that information on the Friday? - A. This is
    Friday’s briefing notes.

 Q. Yes? - A. This was not included on Saturday.  If I can
    explain, sir, my briefing sheet? These briefing notes
    were given to the Superintendents, Chief Inspectors and
    Inspectors on the Friday. The briefing took far too long
                         72

                                                    B. D. HURRAY



  - somewhere in the region of three-quarters of an hour.
  It was obvious that we would not be able to hold Officers’
  attention for so long and so my briefing notes were cut
  down considerably and, on the originals, where there is a
  line through, it was omitted from the Saturday briefing.

Q. I see. So really then,you just covered some of the points
   on the Saturday briefing? - A. Yes.

Q. He see at the end of those notes there is a handwritten
   series of items, starting with "Inflatables" and going on
   to various other things? - A. Yes.

Q. Here those part of the Saturday briefing? - A. Again the
   ones that are not crossed out were on the Saturday
   briefing. The ones that are crossed out were purely on
   the Friday briefing.
Q. So you assumed then on the Friday - and 1 see that is
   crossed out for the Saturday - but you had assumed on the
   Friday that you would be getting 350 people on a train? -
   A. One special train.

Q. One special train, yes. How, on the day itself you, of
   course, were in charge of the Control Room. You decided
   to create a log, did you not? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Has there, in fact, a log being kept at the Force Control
   Headquarters? - A. If I can explain the situation, what
   happened with the log is Hr. Duckenfield said that he
   would like a log kept of the events. One had never been
   kept before.  I spoke to the Sergeants who normally did
   duties in the Control Eoom regarding a log writer and it
   was decided that we could not possibly afford another body
   in that small Control Room, so I said well, regardless of
   that, 1 would like to try and keep a handwritten log,
   which would be useful, and what I did was opened a
   computer log on the 11th April - that is on our Force
   Command and Control system. I opened an incident for any
   information or any entry in relation to the semi-final to
   be put on that computer log.

Q. Is that at Snig Hill? - A. Ho, sir. Hell, that facility
   is available?to every Police Station in the Force and it
   was opened ffcom my own Police Station.

Q. From Hammerton Road? - A. From Hammerton Road.

Q. And you also wanted to keep a separate log in the Control
   Room itself? - A. Hell, I wanted to try and keep a
   handwritten log as well - a log from the Control Room,
   yes.
 Q. And we have both those, do we, in this bundle - I hope it
                          73

                                               ^   B. D. MURRAY



   is before you - of communications, one appearing to have
   been typed? - A. Yes.

Q. By computer, which runs up to page 15, and then there is a
   subsequent log which has been typed, but was obviously
   handwritten at some earlier stage? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. The second one is your handwritten, hand kept log, is it?
   - A. Yes, up to 10.18 it was written by Sergeant Goddard
   or PC Ryan. From 10.40-it is my hand.

Q. Yes, I see.   So you kept it from then onwards? - A. Yes,
   sir.
Q. Has there any particular reason for that? - A. Mainly it
   is to act as a memory jogger. When I was trying to recall
   the problems that we had in the last semi-final, I found
   it difficult after the event to recall everything that had
   occurred and every area that caused us concern or a
   problem, so I tried to keep a handwritten log.

Q. And we notice, of course, that it stops at 1421? - A. Yes,
   sir.
Q. That was when it was no longer possible to keep it going,
   was it? - A. I would think that at some time after that we
   were too busy to pay much attention to the log.

Q. Yes. Hell now, I think you were concerned with the
   briefings ihere and with the issue of radios. Is that
   right? - A. Yes.




                                  /Q. Here there checks
                           74
                                  O
                                             B.   0.   HURRAY


Q. Were there checks carried out on the equipment at the
   ground before the match?   A. Yes, sir, there were checks
   carried out on the radio equipment and on individual
   radios, which takes 8 considerable time.
Q. You then, of course, had your civilian communications man
   at the ground.    I think he was in the Control Room to
   start with?    A.  He was in the Control Room initially,
   yes.
Q. And had to leave because of lack of space?   A.   That's
   right.   It is quite restricted there and I told him that
   he could stay for a while, make sure everything was alright,
   but once we got busy if anyone else came up, he would have
   to go, and he did, in fact, go.
Q. Was the public address system tested as well - the ground
   public address system?   A.   The public address system
   was tested before I got into the Control Room.   In fact,
   they were working on one of the speakers which was immediately
   adjacent to the Control Room on the wall that faces Leppings
   Lane when I arrived at the Control Room.   That one was
   certainly working because I went and had a look at it.
Q. I think you had various duties to do and were receiving
   reports from various sources during the course of the next
   hour or two, is that right?   A.   Yes, sir.
Q. One of the entries on your log is at 13.14 you have the
    entry which looks like "I 14, Liverpool train on time,
    ETA 14.00, contains 130."    Is that right?   A.   That's
    right, sir.    It is India 14 - it is the Inspector.
   ’Liverpool train on time, ETA 14.00, contains 130" that
    should be 430.
Q. 430?   A.   I am almost sure it is 430, yes, sir.
Q. Have you got the handwritten version there or just a
   typed copy?   A.   No, I haven't.   It does say "130" on
   the handwritten version and it is obviously an error.
Q. That was a message you received form the Inspector with
   that particular code?   A.   Yes, sir.
Q. You went, I think --    Were you in the Control Room
   effectively for most of the time from about midday onwards?
   A.   Yes, the only time I was out was when I went to
   see the referee and when I left it at five past three.
Q. We may be hearing from Sergeant Goddard that there was
   a conversation between you and Chief Inspector Creaser
   at this stage^ and I cannot put it any mre accurately than
   between midday and 2 o'clock, to this effect.    I wonder
   if you can help us with it.    He says, or I anticipate he
   will say, that Chief Inspector Creaser came into the Control
   Box and asked Superintendent Murray about the Leppings Lane
   terraces.    Do you remember that?   A.   I can't remember it,
   sir.
                                     B.   0.   MURRAY


And it was stated by Superintendent Murray that the
standing fans would find their own levels in the pens,
rather than trying to fill one pen at a time.   A.   I
can't remember the conversation.   Chief Inspector Creaser
asked me about it after the event - some time after the
event - and I said that I could not remember speaking to
him but if he had asked me I would have said, "Yes, they
find their own level.".
That is what you would have said?   A.   Yes, and I am
sure that if Sergeant Goddard says that he came in, he
did.   We do get quite a number of visitors to the Control
Room prior to the event.
I think you said you went to see the referee.         A.    Yes,
si r .
And you informed the referee about the coded message for
emergencies and so on.   A.   Yes, sir.
That message was not, in fact, used on this afternoon,
was it?   A.   No, sir, it wasn't.   That is the message to
stand by to evacuate the ground.
That is, as far as you a-e concerned, what it means - just
to evacuate the ground?   A.   To stand by to evacuate
the ground or part of the ground.
I think you then, at just after 2 o'clock, were in the
Control Room again when Mr. Jackson came; is that right?
A.   Yes, sir.   Mr. Jackson was there when I returned
from seeing the referee.
And Mr. Duckenfield was there as well?   A.          Mr. Duckenfield
had been to see the referee with myself.
Were there any problems that you could identify at that
time?   A.   No, sir.   The only problems were the usual
problems of people drinking in public houses and shop­
lifting and the usual problems that we associate with
a big event.
These were the reports coming in to you?       A.      Yes, sir.
Were you, at quarter past two, able to look around the
stadium?   A.   Yes, sir.
And did you notice how it was filling up?       A.      Yes, sir.
How was it?   A.   The Kop and the South Stand appeared to
be filling quite well.   The North Stand and the West Stand
and the Terraces probably seemed to be about a quarter full.
What about the centre pens?  A.   The centre pens were
filling - they always do; they are the most popular.
 Were you concerned about the way in which the Leppings
                            76


                                            B.   0.   HURRAY


     Lane Terrace was filling up at that time?   A.   No* sir.
     I found nothing unusual about it, apart from the fact that
     there perhaps were not as many as I would have hoped there
     would have been by then.
Q. Can yoj compare it with what you had seen the previous year?
   A.   I cannot compare it with times.     I had no sort of
   perception as to what the situation would have been like at
   a similar time.    I just cannot do that at all.
Q. We know from your log that you got a message at 17 minutes
   past 2.   A.   Yes, sir.
C|. From Superintendent Marshall.    A.   Yes, sir.
Q. Asking for Leppings Lane to be closed.        A.    Yes.
Q. You looked, did you, at Leppings Lane, or what you could
   see of it from the television cameras?   A.   I looked
   at the monitor for Leppings Lane and I could not see a
   problem,but if Mr. Marshall was asking for it to be closed
   then it would be closed.
Q. You would have a limited view of Leppings Lane, would you
   not?   A. Very much so.    Just the area outside of the
   turnstiles.
Q. Were you able to move the cameras about to see further
   along Leppings Lane?   A.   It is very restricted is the
   view.   There is no view to the left and only a restricted
   view to the right.
Q. Do you recall what you did see when you looked at those
   cameras in response to that message?   A.   I saw that --
   I didn't see anything which 1 considered was unusual for
   Leppings Lane but I think Mr. Marshall had asked for
   Leppings Lane to be closed.   He said that pedestrians
   and traffic was getting mixed up and so we closed it, or
   gave instructions for it to be closed.
Q. How would you go about closing Leppings Lane?   A.    What
   I would do is look for the serial that was at the bottom
   end and look for the serials that were at the top end
   and ask them to depute Officers to stop traffic in Leppings
   Lane.
Q. This is 2.17 or just afterwards, is it not?           A.    2.17, sir.
Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    That is right, is it, because
      there has been a bit of a doubt about the time.    That is
      your log - 2.17.   A.    Can I say, my Lord, that 1 have
      been trying to sort of sort times out in my head and found
      it almost impossible without working from one fixed point.
      It was my impression that it was much later than 2.17 but
      in view of the time ttet I have been wildly inaccurate in
      other matters, I would accept that 2.17 was the time and if
                            77


                                             B.    D.    HURRAY


     I wrote 2.17 and then 2.21 for an entry after it, I would
     think it would be 2.17, yes, sir.
Q.        HR. PHILLIPS:   In order to close Leppings Lane,
     you have to stop buses going down it, do you not?
     A.   Yes, sir.
Q. Because it is, in fact, a bus route.      A.         It is indeed!
Q. For South Yorkshire Transport.     A.    Yes.
Q. Did you take any steps at that time to have buses diverted?
   A.   No.   Initially I tried to — sent messages out to close
   Leppings Lane.   It was not closed.   The serial at the
   bottom end of Leppings Lane, the roundabout end, did
   receive the message and acknowledged it.   I could not
   raise the serial at the top end and asked one of the
   Inspectors or Hr. Harshall - I cannot remember who -
   to send an Officer up to close it at the Catchbar Lane
   end.   Some time after that, I can only estimate --
Q. We know from what Hr. Harshall told us because he, in
   fact, went, that when he got to Catchbar Lane there was
   a queue of three buses waiting to go down Leppings Lane
   and they, in fact, were sent down.   That is right, is
   it not?   A.   Yes, it is.
Q. And you knew, did you not, because I think you heard from
   Superintendent Harshall that he had gone up to Catchbar
   Lane.   A.    Yes, sir.   He told us that Leppings Lane
   had not been closed some 5 minutes afterwards.
Q. And I think he asked you, did he not, to get in touch with
   South Yorkshire Transport?   A.   Yes, he did.
Q. Did you do that then?    A.   That was passed to one of
   the Liaison Officers in the gym to get in touch with
   Hr. Hiddleton.    I am trying to think.   I think he said
   they could ret get him on the telephone, could someone
   up at the bus depot go and find him because he was at
   Herries Road Bus Depot, I think, organising the parking.
Q. Who was the message passed to in the gym?            Can you
   remember?   A.   Inspector Sewell.
Q.   So we can ask him about that.   A.    Yes.
Q. Was there no link that you had between the ground and South
   Yorkshire Transport?   A.   Only the telephone.
Q. Had it previously been necessary to close off Leppings Lane?
   A.   No, I had not known Leppings Lane closed before, sir.
Q. Did you foresee when you were planning this exercise           that it
   might perhaps become necessary to close it off? A.              No, sir.
Q. The quantity of people coming along Leppings Lane would,
   of course, be the reason why it would want to be closed,
                                      B.   D.   HURRAY


would it not?   A.   Yes, it would.
And you did not foresee them being of such a quantity
as to require its closure?   A.   I couldn't recall it
being closed before and I could not foresee it being
closed on this occasion before the event.
So no contingency provision had been made in advance
to get hold of the South Yorkshire Transport?   A. No, sir.
On your entry on your log it says, "Superintendent M. closed
Leppings Lane.   Then closed."   A.   Yes, sir.
As if the order has been put into effect.        A.   Yes, it was.
But only partially.   A.   When I say "Closed" it means the
orders have been given to close it.
Why did you not get in touch with South Yorkshire Transport
before Superintendent Harshall asked you to, when you were
first asked to close Leppings Lane.   A.   I can't --    No
particular reason.
Did you not think of the fact that it was a bus route?
A.   I knew it was a bus route but, yes, it didn't strike
me.   Sometimes the obvious doesn't.
I think it was 5 minutes later, was it not, when you got the
message that traffic was still going through?   A. Yes,
indeed.
Had you during that 5 minutes had the opportunity of
looking at the closed circuit television cameras again?
A.   Well, the opportunity is always there, sir, because
the cameras are there.
But you appreciate that when you were first asked to close
the Lane, you thought that there was nothing unusual about
what you could see in Leppings Lane.   A.   Yes.
 Now, plainly Hr. Harshall thought differently.   Did you
 continue to watch the videos or the cameras in the succeeding
 few minutes?   A.   Probably, sir.   I can't remember.
 You cannot recollect what the situation disclosed at that
 time?   Whether it justified the request?   A.   Well,
 my impression, looking at the monitors, was that there
 wasn't a real problem, that there wasn't a problem, but
 I appreciated that he had a far better view, being on the
 ground.
 Can we come to half past two.   A.    Yes, sir.
 I think it was at 21 minutes past 2 that your log runs
 out so from that point onwards do we reckon that you are
 getting to be more busy?   A.   Yes, unless --    There
 would come a time when perhaps after 21 minutes past there
                                79



                                                   B.   D.    HURRAY

     was nothing to particularly record, but I would accept
     that we were probably getting busy by then.
Q. Then the ground was filling up, was it?              A.        Yes, sir,
   half past two.
Q. What could you see on the Leppings Lane side of the
   ground?   A.   By half past %yo I saw that the Leppings
   Lane terraces were beginning to fill.   The centre pens
   again, there were more people in those   than elsewhere and the
   raised area, which are the popular parts of the ground.
Q. What about the area immediately below the Control Box?
   A.   There were clear spaces in the area below the Control
   Box in the North Pen.
Q.    Was that more than you would have expected from your previous
     experience or about the same, or what?    A.   I wasn t — ——
     I couldn't sort of compare that with the siutation last year.
Q.   This is just half an hour before the kick-off.                 A.    Yes,
     it i s .
Q. At that stage the Kop end was pretty full, was it not?
   A.   It appeared to be pretty full, yes.
Q. That was not true at the Leppings Lane               end, was         it?
   A.   No, it was not full.
Q. Apart from the centre two pens.             A.   The centre two pens
   and the raised area were filling           and the rest, there was
   room - plenty of room.
Q     Did you think there was        much more room in the centre pens
      at that stage at 2.30?           A. I think there was much more
      room than --
Q. In the centre two pens, in Pens 3 and 4?                  A.    There was
   some room in them, yes, sir.
 Q. How much room?. How many more people do you think could
    have got into those two pens at that stage, 2.30?
    A.   I don't know numbers-wise.   I can't say.
 Q. Did you think there was likely to come a time when you
    would need to divert people from those two pens?
    A.   I never considered that, sir.
 Q. You saw, did you not, what was going on outside the
    ground, outside the turnstiles?   A.   Yes, I did.
 Q. And what was going on there?   A.   There was a large
    crowd of people outside the turnstiles.
 Q. People going for particularly Turnstiles A-G.   A.   It
    seemed from the pictures that I could see that the crowd
    was thickly spread across all the turnstile enclave.
                                                     80


                                                                     B.   D.   MURRAY


                           Q. And did you think there was room inside the ground for
                              those crowds?   A.   Yes, sir, I thought there was room
                              for those and more.



                  6




  ©


                    D




                                                           /Did you think there.




                      HI

J . |_ H » rph » m L td
                               81


                                                    B.D. HURRAY




O. Did you there was room in the centre two pens, 3 and 4, for
   the crowds you saw outside the turnstiles? - A. I did not
   consider whether there was room in any particular pen. I was
   looking at the terrace as a whole and the North Stand and the
   West Stand.
Q       If those people had gone to the wings, that is to say to the
        south and north end of the terraces, there would have been
        sufficient room for them? - A. Yes.

0. Is that what you say? - A. Yes.
0       Now, what did you think at this time about the prospect of
        getting those people into the ground before kick-off? - A. At
        2.30 I was almost sure we would get them in for 3 o ’clock.

O. Why did you think that? - A. Because   looking at thearea and
   looking at the crowd and knowing the   turnstiles canturn
   quickly, I just thought we would get them in.

O       But did you see the back of the turnstiles where the people
        come out into the yard? Did you see how they were operating?
        - A. I can’t remember whether I saw them at that stage. I did
        pay particular notice of them later.

O        Because if one looks at thevideo in fact one sees there are
        in fact sometimes considerable gaps between one person and the
        next one coming out of the turnstile?   They were not, in
        other words, operating totally efficiently, were they? - A. I
        didn’t notice that at 2.30. I didnotice   it later.

O.       you did? - A. Yes, I did.
 O      At what stage    did you notice that?- A. I would think just
        before quarter-to-3 I became concerned about the turnstiles.

    q   you were concerned about turnstiles then? — A . I was concerned
        that people were not coming through the turnstiles.

    O    Did you take any steps at that stage then to find out why? -
         A. I tried to get in touch with the club, the safety and
         security officer.

    O. Was that Hr. Lock? - A. Yes, sir.
    O. Did you have any success? - A. I didn't.    I tried by radio.

    O. Had you a prearranged system of getting into contact with Mr.
       Lock? - A. Just by the radio, sir.
    O    Does he have a radio on your frequency? - A. No.   We have a
         radio on the stewards’ and the club’s frequency.

    O. And you couldn’t raise him? - A. No, sir.
                               82


                                                       B.D. MURRAY


O. What else could you do, having failed to raise Mr. Lock? - A.
   With regard to the club?

0. With regard to the       turnstiles which you were concerned about?
   - A. Yes. I could        not raise Mr. Lock. I was then overtaken
   by what I consider       were more serious events, that is requests
   for the gates to be      opened in Leppings Lane.

0. That of course was all related to the flow through the
   turnstile, was not it? - A. yes, sir. I would think so.

Q. Can we, as it were, go back to the chronology we were on
   before. Did you a conversation with Chief Superintendent
   Duckenfield about the crowd and getting them in? - A. Yes,
   sir.
0. Did you have a conversation about the delay of kick off at
   this time? - A. Yes, sir.

0. How did that arise? - A. I think Mr. Duckenfield asked me to
   remind him what we had discussed about delaying kick-off, and
   I said that normally we would not delay kick-off if people
   were just late, but if there was something that kept them from
   getting into the ground or getting to the ground, i.e.
   accidents or physical problems over the Pennines, etc., then
   obviously we have to delay the kick-off.

0. I am sorry, did you agree with that principle that you should
   delay it only in those circumstances? - A. I think the option
   is always open that that was the general rule. That was our
   sort of agreement and our perception, and I think that is a
   fairly common one.
q        This was a discussion you had with Mr. Duckenfield about the
         reasons why you may or may not delay kick-off? First, what I
         am interested in is what time did this discussion take place,
         to your best recollection? - A. It would be about 2.30.

 O       Can you think of any event or anything that   was occurring
         outside that gave rise to this discussion?    Why should you be
         thinking about it at that time? - A. It was   about the time
         that I suggested there were a lot of people   out there and we
         would get them in.
 q   _      you were sure you would get them in, questions of delaying
         kick-off would not really arise, would they? - A. You would
         think not, sir, no.
 Q. If you had thought they would not get in that is when you
    might think about delaying kick-off, is not it? - A. Yes.

 Q       Was there a time you thought that when you were having this
         discussion? - A. Hot at that time, no, sir.

 Q. Did you the question of delaying kick-off, was it raised again
    before 3 o ’clock? - A. No, sir.
                                83


                                                     B.P. MURRAY


0. Did you think it was appropriate at any stage before 3 o ’clock
   to consider it again? - A. i would think that it probably was.
   There was obviously just before the players came out it was
   obvious the people were not going to get in through the
   turnstiles by 3 o ’clock.

0. That would be about 5-to-3, would not it? - A. 5-to-, 10-to-3,
   yes.
0. Did you mention it? - A.. No, sir.

Q. You did, however, think it might be appropriate? - A. I did
   not think it would appropriate, otherwise I would have
   mentioned it. Again it was a thought that didn’t come into my
   head. Things were happening then that were demanding my
   attention.
Q. I think you had various bits of information coming into
   your control room, had not you, from this point onwards, from
   half-past-2 to 3 o ’clock? - A. Yes, sir.

0.       Not just of the ground and Leppings Lane but all around,   too?
         - a . There were many things happening.

0. I think you had some trouble with a ticket tout, had not you?
   _    Yes, sir. I can’t remember the timing, but certainly
   there was a ticket tout selling tickets outside the Leppings
   Lane end for the Kop, and our little contingency on the Kop
   was already full. The tout was in fact arrested.

q    .        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Selling tickets outside the
         Leppings Lane end? - A. Selling tickets to Liverpool
         supporters for the Kop end of the ground, yes, my Lord.

q             hr. PHILLIPS:   So I think he was arrested, was he? - A.
         He was arrested.
0. This was a report you had received by radio, is it? - A. Yes,
   sir.
 0. So the radio was working then at this stage? - A. Yes, it was.

 q   .          LORDJUSTICE TAYLOR: As a matter of interest, he was
         arrested for what? - A. He was arrested, I would think, for
         causing obstruction, my Lord.
 0. Obstructing Officers in the course of their duty or what? - A.
    By the course of his actions he would have been causing an
    obstruction in the highway. People would have been gathering
    round him and he would be causing an obstruction.

 0.       Ifhe had been selling them for the Leppings Lane end would it
         have been any different? - A. I doubt it, my Lord, if he had
         been causing an obstruction, no matter where he was selling
         them.
 q   .        MR. PHILLIPS:   You were keeping I think a good watch on
                                  84


                                                       B.D. MURRAY


        the turnstile cameras during this period as well as taking
        these messages, were not you? - A. The turnstile cameras, sir?

0. The cameras aimed at the turnstiles and the gates? - A. I was
   trying to. It is difficult.

0. Did you get a request from the mounted Inspector, Inspector
   Hand-Davis? - A. Yes, sir.

O. You give in your statement a time of 14.40, 20-to-3? - A. I
   would think it would be about that time.

0   . Yes. - A. He asked for the assistance of other mounted
      Officers.
0. And did you do something about that? - A. Sergeant Goddard,
   who was the radio operator, picked it up straight away and
   asked Sergeant Sorsby who was in charge of the mounted
   Officers at the other end of the ground to let him havewhat
   he could.
0. Did the mounted Inspector give you any reason for his
   request or any appraisal of his problems? - A. No, sir, he
   just said he wanted additional mounted Officers to Leppings
   Lane.
0. Again, when you got that request did you look at the cameras
   at what was going off? - A. Yes, sir.

0. What did you see? - A. I saw that the crowd was now becoming a
   lot denser than it had appeared in the past, and the mounted
   Officers appeared to be getting jostled. They did not seem to
   be working as a group. They appeared to have been split up
   and getting surrounded with people.
o.               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Your view of it was that the
            crowd was denser at 2.40 than it had been? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. I think you probably heard Mr. Marshall say that in fact it
   had been reduced, and although it was of a different mood it
   had been reduced by then? - A. My impression was that the
   crowd was larger and denser, more tightly packed.   We had
   been looking on the video from a distance, an overview, and I
   think it was once Mr. Hand-Davis asked for assistance that we
   got a close-up, which tended to show the mounted Officers
   being surrounded. We sent mounted Officers, and I also
   dispatched the only spare serial we had, which was the
   reserve serial in the gym.

    Q. If I can just follow this through a little ahead. Was it then
       your view that the crowd was increasing outside in numbers
       right up until the gate was opened and let a lot of them in? -
       A. Yes, my Lord.
    q   .        MR. PHILLIPS:    Where did these mounted Officers go
            from? - A. They would have to come from the Penistone Road
            side of the ground.
                                                  B.D. MURRAY



Q. What was the situation like there? Was it safe for them to
   leave that part of the ground? - A. From what I can recall it
   would be up to Sergeant Sorsby to allow what Officers he felt
   fit as he was in charged of the mounted detail at that
   location.
Q. And would they go down the south road, as it were, alongside
   the river to get to Leppings Lane? - A. I don't know whether
   they went through the South Stand or through one of the side
   roads.
Q. You say you deployed one of your reserve serials? - A. Yes,
   sir.
Q. This was at the same time, 20-to-3? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. They had been in the gymnasium, had they? - A. Yes, they had.

Q. Where did you send them to? - A. I sent them to the Leppings
   Lane end.
Q. Did you give any particular instructions where they were to go
   at that end? - A. No, they had an Inspector with them. I sent
   them down there obviously to do what they could.

Q. Which Inspector is that? - A. Inspector Delaney.

Q. Were they to go outside or were they to stay on the inside of
   the turnstile? - A. Those instructions were not given. I just
   sent them down there to support the Officers down there and
   see what they could do, sir.
Q. And did you then get a message to use the Tannoy system? - -A.
   Yes, sir.
Q. Was that put into effect? - A. Yes. P.C. Ryan was asked to
   Tannoy out on to Leppings Lane to tell people to stop pushing.

 Q. Did he do that? - A. P.C. Ryan?

 Q. Yes? - A. Yes, he did.
 Q     You heardhim on the machine talking into it? - A. Yes, I
       heard him talking into it, and Itold him to keep saying it.

 Q. So at this stage you have a request already for Leppings lane
    to be closed. That was some 20 minutes earlier? - A. Yes.

 q w   You have had requests for further mounted Officers, and you
       have responded and sent also a reserve serial of men? - A.
       Yes.
 Q. And a request for Tannoy messages to the crowd? - A. Yes.

 Q. And you had also been watching the video yourself? - A. yes,
    sir.
                                                86


                                                                     -B.D. MURRAY

              A
                      0. Were you getting then concerned about the state of affairs
                         outside the gates? r A. At that ti*e, yes.

                      Q. What were you thinking you were going to be doing about it,
                         apart from sending these extra Officers? - A. Well, I was
                         hoping at that time that they could Bake the best of the
                         situation and recover things.

                      Q. That these extra Officers would be sufficient, you mean? - A.
                         They were the only reserve I had at that time, sir.

                      Q   Did you consider any other options that you had to deal with
                          this particular problem? - A. I didn’t - without taking
                          Officers away from other locations who were on specific
                          duties, I had no other reserves to deploy.




                                                     /Q. I understand that




J . L. H arpham Ltd
                                                         87            >




                                                                   P.P. MURRAY


                         O       I understand that but what I am asking you is vrhether you
                                 considered that you had any other options apart from those
                                 that you in fact put into effect? - A. I did not consider
                                 taking any independent action in dragging Officers away
                                 from other areas.  If I had a request for them then I v/oulc
                                 have obviously had to look very closely where I could
                                 deplete other areas to provide Officers. I had no Orficers
                 B               at immediate disposal that I could deploy.

                         0   . You started to get difficulty with communications, didn't
                               you, about this tine? — A. Yes, we did.

                         0       Can you recall as exactly as you can when it was that the
                                 radio started to aalfunction? - A. Only from recorcs. I
                                 think it was about 2.42.
                         0       What record are you referring to? - A. I have seen a record
                                 sir where there was a message cent to the Operations ..oor,
                                 and where P.C. Bichard refers in the radio message that
                                 the radio is down and there is an engineer working on it.

                         O. I don't think we have got that. The engineer in fact
                            came out straightaway, didn't he? - A. Yes sir, whau         .
                  D'        >aopened was at about that time Sergeant Godcarc was sending
                            a    ssace out to one of the Inspectors and the reply cane
                            in that was very distorted and broken. As you v/oulc expect
                            he said: "I can't reac the message can you repeat" ar.c tr-en
                            we got information fron another Unit that our radio was at
                            fault, it was us that was breaking up and they were having
                            difficulty in hearing us. I asked P.C. Ryan to get in toucn
                            v’ith the gymnasium or the Police Room anc get tne Comnunica--io.i»
                            Officer to'attend straightaway, but within a fev; seconcs ne
                                eared at the Control R o o d and he said he had been noniuormg
                            ou? messages? There was obviously a problem with the breaxmg
                             up and he had cone to see if he could deal with it.

                             O    Well now he tried various things, I think. Were conmuni-
                                  cations in fact restored? - A. They were restorea sir.

                             0. After how long to your recollection? - A. I don't know. 1
                                think it may have been only a minute or it mignt have^been
                                shorter it might have been longer. It was a period o
                                disruption because the radios are underneath cne bench
                                and it meant everybody moving out of their positions and
                                moving round the Control Room.
                     gI O         Fow the radio which was out of action for this sliort period,
                                  this was the one that you were using to communicate between
                                  the Officers on the ground and your particular Conurol Room.
                                  - A.Yes sir.
                                  _you had other communications with Hamraerton Road, for
                                   example? — A. Yes sir.
                     h |q.         Did you have other channels available on the hind-held sets?
                         1         - A. We had the Force Operations Room but we had no
                                   channels that we could work to the ground service.

J . L H a rp h a m Ltd
                                      P.P. HURRAY


So in fact you got a message did you through the Force
Control Roon which had been sent by Superintendent Marshall
on a radio to them? - A. I think Mr. Marshall was calling
for a further Tannoy message, a further P.A. message anc
also the Land Rover which is fitted with P.A. to be sent
round to Leppings Lane. We could hear his message and
he could not receive what we were sending out to nin, tnat
was obvious, and Mr. Duckenfield also said:^ See ii we
car cet a traffic car as well to assist him and P.C. Bichara
then got on the radio to .the Force Operations Room and asr.ec
for a traffic  car and it was then that he infornec nin we
were having trouble with the radio.
So you could hear from Superintendent Marshall that he wantec
these Tannoys to be sent out and you complied with t.iat
request? — A. Yes sir.
You also got I think the Land Rover to come
C o n s t a b l e Buxton in it? - A. He did not get hold o; the
Land Rover from the Control Room. P.C. Bu:;ton he*rd t;.e
message which all units could hear and attencec 0 1 m s o*n
accord.


 S)7c eett* nc CXt-lCUlt*        ±u             ^     i.
 'Jhe'-her it was the zoo® lens that gave me tnat impression
 f d o not kr.O'.  It seened to be a lot tighter crowc than
 it had been before.
 Did you look at what was going on in the terraces? - A. I
 don't think so sir.

. At this stage? - A. Mot consciously.
  do vou remember looking at those terraces at any stage
’ between sav 20-to-3 and 3 o'clock? - A. I am sure tnat
  f r o n time ‘
               to time I would be looking all round tr.e srounc.

  nin anything register with you as to the quantity o: people
‘ in Pens 3 and 4? - A. I could see that there were a lo; o,
  people in Pens 3 and 4, as there were in other areas o: the
  ground. There was nothing unusual.
  "Nothing unusual"? - A. Nothing unusual to me at all.

  Did you during the course of this Pe^iodach?£ks^ e turnstile
  figures with the Ground Control Room? - A. rfo sir.

i That was a facility that was available to you, wasn't it?
‘ - a! S it was a facility that was available ana could be
  used.
> You would be the one I think, wouldn't you, of the Senior
  Police Officers who would be concerned with that aspect
  o? it* - A I think I would be in the best position to
  ask for those figures, yes sir.
                                   B.D. MURRAY


VIhat, if you had asked, could you have found out fron the
Control Room of the ground about this part of the ground,
about this end of the ground? - A. They could have tolc me
exactly hov many people had come through each set or
stiles leading to the different parts of the ground anc the
overall total figure.
Could they have done that immediately if you had got in
contact with the Control Room? - A. At very short notice
I think sir, yes.
Was there any system for you to be informed without asking?
- A. There was an Officer down in the Control Roon who
permanently works there and is in touch with the Control
Room bv radio who could have notified me of any concern
that he felt hinself.
Did you receive any infonaation without asking for it? -
A. lie, I didn't sir.
      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Can you help on this: you
were asked what sort of information you could have cot and
you said you could have learnt how many had come through
each set of turnstiles? - A. Yes, my Lord.

A point arose this morning and I just wonder if you can
follow it through. Does that mean you would be able to say
fron 1-10 which was for the North Stand, hov/ many had cone
throuch that set, or how is it split? - A.I would have to
ask the Club. I think the figures v/ould cone up pro^ajly
between Turnstiles 1-S; 9-16 and A-G. Normally I woulc
ask for the total number of visiting fans. Tnat is; a
facility I have used it for in the past. I don t Kno./
whether it would be an immediate reply if I asked for say
 the number in the West Stand, the North Stand or the
Leppings Lane terraces.
 Vie might have to look at this later with the Club, I thin»;.,
 but as we v/ere referred this morning to figures whicn
 sugaested that a great many more had gone through the West
 Stand turnstiles than should have done, but I wonder wne^ner
  that is a fair division because people going througa those
  turnstiles, that is ’C ’ isn't it? - A. I do know, my Lore,
  that Turnstiles 1-10 */ere used for the North Stand and
  9 and 10 v/ould be included in the West Stand total, so uhey
  should be subtracted from the West Stand total and acdec
  to the North Stand, my Lord.
 That is what I was wondering, so there may have been a couple
 of turnstiles feeding into that figure that we were given
 of 5,619 which in fact were being used for the Nortn
 Stand? - A. That is correct.
 So we may not have got more in than we should have done?
 - A. No.
        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   We will look at it later.
                               90

                                          B.D. MURRAY


O             HR PHILLIPS: Was there any particular reason why
        vou did not ask for these figures at any stage? - A. There
        was not a reason except I went by what I could see, ay
        own visual perception.  I don’t often ask for the figures.
        It was not something I do on every match or every occasion
        and it did not occur to me.
n       Of course what you would see would be open spaces effectively
        in the south-west and north-west corners? - A. What I would
        see?

Q. Yes? - A. Yes sir.
Q. You then I think saw or heard a message asking for the cates
   to be opened? - A. Yes I did, sir.
Q. That was from Superintendent Marshall? - A. Yes sir, ir v/as.

Q. You recall that message, do you? - A. Yes, I do.

O       Do you recall him saying that people would be crushed? - A.
        Not initially.   I recall a message from Superintencenu
        Marshall saying:   "Ke have cot to open the cates at
        Leppings Lane."
q    . He was at pains to stress that his request was for the
       gates in the plural to be opened? - A. Yes it was, s_r.

    Q. That is right? - A. Yes, indeed.
    O. Did you yourself look at the situation at the turnstiles
       vhen that request came over? - A. I think I hac loo/tec ct
       the situation before the request came over anc I hac seen
       that people did not appear to be coming through the turn­
       stiles at anything like the rate that they snoulc have been.

    o    Did vou have any other requests at that time when the
         request case trim Superintendent Marshal!? - A. It was
         about that time, immediately before, shortly be.ore, I
         cannot say from inspector Bennett who asked for assistance
         down at Leppings Lane.
    O    Where was Inspector Bennett? - A. Inspector Bennett I think
         he was one of the Logistics Officers and he shoulo nave
         been in the gy mnasi um, he had gone down to check the
         property Store at Leppings Lane. I think he was on top
         of the turnstiles. That is from my knowledge.

    Q. So he asked for assistance as well? - A. He asked for
       assistance at Leppings Lane.
    o     What did you do in response to that? - A. Well before I
        ’ could do anything Inspector Sewell came on the air and
          told me that he had, no P.C. Ryan told me, I thin«*
          Inspector Sewell was on the *phone to him about another
                                            B.D. MURRAY


     matter, told us that he had some spare Serials In the gyn-
     nasiuia, I don't know whether he said eight or ten, bUu the^
     were 'D' Division Serials.
  These are the ones that have been in the City Centre bringing
* the fans from the Midland Station? - A. These are tae ones
  that bring the fans from the Midland Station. If they arrive
  after quarter-to-3 they go and stand by in the gyia. He hac
  eight or ten Serials and I asked for five Sergeants and
  50rer.. These were eight nan Serials so Inspector Sewell
  despatched six Serials, ;hich would be si:: Sergeants anc sv
  sen sir.
2. To where? - A. To the Leppings Lane end.
^       Acain to the inside or the outside of the turnstils=? -
        t I inspector Bennett. That is v/here I was sending tr.ea.

0       Uere these men despatched before the instruction «as giver.
           n-Jn the cate’ - A. Before the instruction was given,
        yes, but I don't* know whether they were despatched be .ore
        or after the first request came.
o       uov7 many recuests were there then to open the gate, to your
        recollection? - A. I would think there were tnree or .-nay oe
        four.
o. All from Superintendent liarshall? - A. Two in quick j>uccession
* fair1 v cuick succession with a brea.:. ciiortly c.*.te. t..
   llllrd recuest ?.C. Bichard who is the Video Operator said
   s o m e thirg to the e£ feet of -The gate has gone- or ^ h e gate
   I-churst" and as I looked up at the video screen i cculc
   see that people were coming through »C' gate.
   situation was recovered and the gate was closec. Afte.
    that there were two more requests from Mr. Marsnall.

                   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Those Officers      that havebeen
    Q. ^psoatched fron the gymnasium, hov/ would they aave gone -o
       L e p p i n g s Lane end, t U m the inside or round the outsrde?  .
       - A. From the inside, ray Lord.
    o So when they got there they would have remained on the Insioe
       of the turnstiles? - A. Yes, they would.
                 »«p PHILLIPS* Would they in fact have been in that
    Q-         hetween the fence and the outer wall that leads to
              T3nri-h Stand   The gymnasium is at the back of the 53cr*.n
                         it; - a. That is the area they would approach.
         ? S y «oilS approach along the Korth Stand concourse and
         they would come out this side.

    Q. On this side of the fence? - A. Yes.
    ^         uit-nesses speak of there being a line of Officers in
               area on the approach to the Horth Stand when Gate A
              opened    S i s S o u l d be some of the »en who had come
          from the gymnasium? - A. It is possible. I don t know si*.
                                       B.D. HURRAY


     Were they able to get across that fence into the rest of
     the concourse? - A. There is a way through, I think Hr.
     Marshall described this morning.

     Through that gate there? — A. Through that gate the*e.

     Was any specific instruction given to these men as to what
     they should do when they get there? - A. No sir.

>    Was any instruction given to anybody by you or by anybocy
     in your presence to any of the Officers in the concourse?
     - A. tio sir.
3.   I am thinking particularly about closing off the tunnel.
     Do you follow? - A. Yes sir.
3. Was any attempt made to pass such instructions on to w.ie
   Stewards? - A. No, not that I know of. Certainly not from
   the Police Control Room.
Q. The instruction of course was given to open the gawes, wasn t
   it? - A. Yes sir, it was.
Q. Was it in that f o m : "Open the gates" in the plural? ~
   A. Definitely. Sergeant Goddard, I thin.< he said:         ^
   "Officers at Leppings Lane open the gates. Open the cates.

0. Do you know of any instruction that was given to concentrate
   on Gate C to open that one first? - A. Ho sir, there was no
   instruction. I think the camera probably fixed on that
   gate because you cannot see the other ones from the camera
   position.
Q. You can't really see Gate B at all, can you? - A. ho sir.

0. And Gate A of course v/e know also was subsequently opened?
   _    Yes, but it obviously was not open at that time.

o     Can you describe to us how that came to be opened? “ A.
      There was a call from, I recognised it as Sergeant Higgins
      from his voice, who was the spare Serial that we deployed .
      at 20-to-3. I can't remember whether he said he wanted
      Gate A or the gate to the Jlorth Stand opening and within
      seconds he followed it up with: “If you don't open it
      it is going to go and someone will be killed.

Q. When "he made that request had Gate 'C* already been opened?
   - A. Yes, Gate C was open.
 Q. Opened I mean for the second tine? - A. Yes sir, because
    I was a bit surprised that Gate A was still closed.
    Hr. Duckenfielc immediately said: "Open qate A.

    o O* course the previous instruction had already gone through,
       had it not, to open all the gates? - A. To open the gates.
                               93
                   0
                                          B.D. MURRAY


Q. And at that time the radio was on talk-through, was it not?
- A. Yes, it was sir.

Q. So all the Officers could hear what was said? - A. The radio
   was on talk-through for the whole of the day from start to
   finish.
Q. So an Officer behind Gate A could have heard the earlier
   instruction to open Gate A? - A. Yes sir.

Q. You then concentrated I think on looking at what was happening
   in the ground fron that point onwards. Is that right? -
   A. Yes sir.
C. Uhat did you see in the Uest Stand and terraces? - A. V'ell
   just before the kick-off, I think it was just before the
   kick-off, again I an guessing at the time, I saw something
   happening behind the goal. One of the P.C.s was opening
   the gate and was obviously helping soaeone out.

Q. That was just before the kick-off? - A. I think it was just
   before the kick-off.
Q. vrhat would that put it, 2-minutes-to-2? - A. About 2-ninutes
   to l-minute-to-3. I cannot recall the gane starting and
   I can't recall anything about players being on the.field.

Q. Can you help us with this: when the gates v/ere cpenec
   did you see an influ;: of spectators into Pens 3 and 4?
   - A. Ko sir.
Q. Vfere you looking towards Pens 3 and 4 after the gates were
   opened? - A. When I saw the gates opened I was obviously
   looking in that direction.

 Q. But it would take half-a-minute or so I suppose for people
    to walk from those gates through the tunnel to Pens 3 and 4?
    - A. I never saw any particular movement or anything that
    gave me any concern at all.
 q   .         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Where did you think they were
         all going these people? - A. Well, my Lord, my first
         impression was that we should open the gates and we should
         open the gates to prevent people being crushed and suffering
         outside and once the gates were open into the concourse
         where they would disperse throughout the ground. I never
         saw them going in any particular direction. I never considered
         where they were all going to go.
 q             MR. PHILLIPS: The obvious place for them to go was
         down the tunnel, wasn’t it? - A. It is now that I know.
         I know the ground. • I know where the tunnel is. I know
         where C gate is. I had never drawn any sort of realisation
         that people coming through C gate would go towards the tunnel
         or whatever, I have never envisaged C gate as an entry gate
         of course, but the two things just did not register, did
          not tie up. It seemed so obvious after the event but
         certainly I gave it no thought and no realisation before.
                              94

                                                       B. D. HUSKAY



q   . you say now that at about two minutes to three you sau
      something happening behind the West Stand? - A. Yes, sir,
      behind the goals.
0       Behind the goal at the West Stand end, yes. What do you
        say you sau? - A. I saw the Policeman at the gate open the
        cate and he appeared to be helping some people out up on
        to the track. Only a handful. People came up on to the
        track and....
Q. How many uould you say? - A. I would think four or five,
   sir. They just seemed to be standing around rather
   aimlessly.
Q       But did the Policeman who had opened the gate send them
        anywhere - A. They tended to drift down towards the corner
        where we were, which is the South side, and there was a
        Policewoman there and it was obvious that she only had to
        open the gate to her pen for these people to be rehoused
        in that area.
Q       Well now, when you saw these four or five people taken out
        - which pen was it they were taken out of? 3 or 4? - A.
        I cannot recall, sir.  I would think it must be 3, but
        that would only be guessing.
    Q. Was the gate then closed or did it stay open? - A. As far
       as I recall, it stayed open, but again I cannot recall.
       Hy attention was then diverted down to the Policewoman an
       I was impatient that she should take these people off the
       track and rehouse them.
    Q    Can you help us with the identity of the Police Officer
         who opened the gate to pen 3 or 4 , whichever it was. - A.
         Well I know that PC Smith was on Gate 3, but I did not
         look*at that Officer and say, "Ah, that is PC Smith."

    O. Can you help us with the identity of the Policewoman on
       pen 1, who you say was not aware of these people? - A.
       Yes, that was definitely PC Bichardson.

    Q. And what do you say she was doing? - A. She was
       standing. She did not realise what was happening really.
       Like I say, one or two of the people walked down to only
       few yards away from her and she did not see them. She was
       not watching the game.  She seemed to be looking down
       parallel with the South Stand.
    q   . So what happened then? - A. There was a Chief Inspector -
          Chief Inspector HacEobbie - who was in plain clothes,
          went down to give her a hand and draw attention to what
          was happening and help her put these people in the pen.

     Q. So that four or five were put into pen 1, were they? - A.
                           95

                                                     B. D. MUEEAY



     As far as I can recall, sir.

Q.   Were there any other people by now getting out on to the
     track? - A. Yes, there were quite a number of people
     coming out now.
Q. What was happening to the*? - A. Well, they appeared to
   just be standing behind the goal and watching the
   proceedings.
Q. Did any Policeman do anything about them? - A. The
   Policeman that was there - there were only a couple
   initially on the track. I have seen similar situations
   where, if you try and help someone and you open the gate,
   people will tend to jump out and come out and stand about
   and watch the game, and this is what appeared to be
   happening to me. They were not going anywhere. They
   certainly were not going to sort of run on the field and
   stop the play, but they were standing around watching the
   game on the track.
Q    Was Hr. HacBobbie still down there? Did he stay down
     there after he had spoken to Policewoman Eichardson? - A.
     As far as I know, he was.
Q    And was this still before kick-off? - A. Oh, no. I cannot
     recall the kick-off.  It must have been taking place
     fairly quickly. Hy impression was that the game stopped
     at about a minute or two minutes past kick-off. I thought
     it had only been playing for a minute.  I had no idea
     there had been five minutes’ play.
 Q. All right.  Did you look at the pens 3 and 4 when you saw
    these people coming out? — A. Yes, I did.

 Q. Did you see the state of them? — A. There was nothing
    untoward about them.  I could not see anything
    particularly wrong with them.
 Q. Did they not seem to you to be overcrowded? - A. They did
    not seem to be overcrouded, sir.
 0. When was the first time, if at all, you became concerned
    about the people in pens 3 and 4? - A. When I got down to
    the pitch.
 Q. And when was that? - A. Well, I initially went     down to try
    and stop the game.
 0    Yes but Superintendent Greenwood beat you to it, did not
      he?’- A. He did, indeed. As soon as I saw Superintendent
      Greenwood stop the game, I went back up to the Control
      Eoom, but I was only there for a very, very short time —
      half a minute or a minute — and Hr. Duckenfield asked me
                           96

                                                    B. D. HUEEAY



     to go down and clear the people off the pitch and move
     the* towards the wings.  I went down, went on to the
     pitch, looked for soie Officers who I could use for this
     task and then, as I was looking around, I could see that
     people were dazed, people were injured, people were
     sitting around, obviously in some sort of distress. As I
     approached the goals, I could see that there were lots of
     Police Officers by then around the gates. I could not see
     the gates, just the Police Officers, and then I sau people
     against the fence.

Q. Well, when you had been up in the Control Soon, both
   before you went down to try to stop the game and when you
   returned for a brief time, had you at that point, or
   either of those points, looked over to pens 3 and 4? - A.
   I had not noticed anything, sir.   I went down. My
   intention was to stop the game, to catch the linesman’s
   attention.  I tried.   I actually got hold of him and told
   him to stop. He just ran straight past. He was obviously
   intent on his duty.  As soon as Isaw Hr. Greenwood on the
   pitch, I went straight back up toControl.

Q. I was wondering, you see, whether you had noticed a
   flattening in the bottom, right-hand corner of pen 3,
   where we know, you see, that a number of people fell, and
   you would not see heads so much as a flatter area? - A. I
   could not see the pens from where I was on the pitch.

Q. No, no, but when you are in the Control Box? - A. No, sir.

Q. Did you see anything like that? - A. No. If you are
   looking on to the pens from the Control Box, it is very,
   v e r y difficult to see across the front because of the
   rail. That tends to sort of obstruct our view. I was in
   the Control Eoom. There was---

Q.        LOKD JUSTICE TAYLOX:   Are you talking about    ? -
     A. The Police Control Eoom.

Q. No, the radial fence? - A. No, I am talking about the
   barriers at the front of the pitch, my Lord, that stop....

Q. The bit that comes back at the top and obscures the view
   of the very front.  Is that it? - A. Yes. There were
   three experienced Officers in that Control Eoom uith me,
   who are very experienced, have worked, some of them - at
   least one of them - for many years, who obviously - I say
   obviously - did not bring anything to my attention. They
   obviously did not notice anything strange about the pens
   at all. I saw nothing that caused me to be concerned.    I
   assume that when people were first being helped out they
   were youngsters who were perhaps being pushed or crushed
   against the front, which is not unknoun to me from my
   experience of other football grounds going back many
                           97

                                                        B. D. HUEEAY



     years.
q.        ME. PHILLIPS:   You see, the decision was taken to
     stop the match? - A. Yes.

Q.    What perhaps I should ask you is what particular event or
     what thing that you saw generated that intention to stop
     the match? - A. It vas Superintendent Greenwood who
     obviously clearly intended the match to be stopped.

Q. Yes? - A. By that time there were a large number of people
   on the track, on the grass, actually on the playing area,
   and Superintendent Greenuood, I could see him quite
   clearly head and shoulders above the croud - I do not knou
   uhether he uas standing on an advertisng hoarding or uhat
   - and he just gave a signal.

Q.        LOED JUSTICE TAYLOE:    What sign did he make? -    A. He
     went like that.  (The uitness waved his arms.)

Q.    Towards the box? - A. Touards the Control Soom.

Q.    Is that a signal that means something to you? - A. It just
     clearly meant to me call them off, get them off the field.
     I understand that a radio message may uell have been
     received by Sergeant Goddard as I heard him say over the
     radio, "Stop the game. Stop the game." If I can just
     sort of put you in the picture at this stage, that once
     the radios had gone down, we had no sort of loudspeaker
     type system on the radio. We were operating purely from
     hand-held personal radios. Sergeant Goddard and I changed
     places because the radio operator had disturbed everything
     and he would be operating with a radio held most of the
     time to his ear and speak into it, and it was difficult at
     that stage to know what people were communicating and uhat
     everyone uas talking about.

Q. Sorry, I am not follouing this.  Is this to do uith the
   defect in the radio? - A. Yes, my Lord.

Q. I thought that had been put right a little time before
   this? It uent off at 2.42? - A. Yes.

Q. You thought it had come on again in about a minute? - A.
   Yes.
Q. And we are talking about after the match started? - A. Can
   I explain what happened?

Q. Please, yes? - A. In the Control Eoom we have two radios,
   one as a back-up in case the main one goes down.
                                           I
Q. Yes? - A. It was the main radio that went down. The
   engineer tried to repair it and he could not do so, so he
                             98 *•
                                                   m
                                                        B. D. HUSKAY



     then connected us to the standby set. Nou, the
     loudspeaker is on the desk in front of the three
     controllers.
Q. I think you can probably look at this, if you uould like
   to, in the big volume marked "West Midlands", towards the
   very end of the thick bundle. 48?

          HE. PHILLIPS:    48, sir, yes.

Q. Or 50? - A. 48, my Lord.  If you can see the black box
   behind the telephone, the black shape behind the
   telephone?
Q. Yes? - A. That is the desk-mounted loudspeaker for the
   radios.
Q. Yes? - A. And that is connected to the main radio. When
   ue turned to the secondary set, that loudspeaker was not
   in use. The speaker is actually in the radio set which is
   under the desk and fixed and cannot be moved.

Q.        HE. PHILLIPS:   Do we      see that on photograph 50?   -   A.
     Yes, sir.

Q. Where is it? - A. What, the          ?
Q. The one under the desk you are talking about? - A. It is
   the blue box immediately in front of the chair. It is
   very difficult to see, but it is that strange-looking blue
   box underneath the shelf.
Q.       LOED JUSTICE     TAYLOE:     That is the very long blue
     piece? - A. Yes.
Q.       HE. PHILLIPS: And the speaker is in that? - A. The
     speaker is in that, but the....

Q.       LOED JUSTICE TAYLOE:     I think we are going to have
     an opportunity of seeing this tomorrow morning, but if you
     could just help me. There appear on that shelf or desktop
     to be what has been described as the tulip microphone,
     then there is one like this at the other end? - A. Yes.

Q. And then there is something black, which seems to be
   impinging on the pitch there.  Is that right? - A. The
   tulip mike is what we would normally use for
   communications.  That was replaced by a telephone-type,
   which you can see on the desk, with a curly cord - the
   black one.
 Q. Eeplaced when? Eeplaced after this defect, you mean? - A.
    Eeplaced at the time of the defect. This is the system ue
    were uorking off then. The standby radio uith the
                              99
                                    O
                                                        B. D. HURRAY



        telephone handset mike.

Q. So the tulip goes off and the black telephone-type thing
   comes on?   Is that it? - A. Yes. The controller could
   not use that because he could not get it up to the desk.
   He said he could not get it up to the desk and was working
   off a personal radio.
q   ,        HE. PHILLIPS:   So when you say communications were
        restored, they were restored, but not with the equipment
        that you should have had? - A. They were restored in the
        talk-through mode and the only means of communication we -
        had or were utilising was by way of a hand-held personal
        radio, which was exactly the same as every other Officer
        who had a radio.
Q. And how many of those did you have in the Control Eooa? -
A. He had one that ue kept as a standby set and I had my own
   that I had brought with me to the event.  I usually kept
   it in my coat pocket, and we used those two.  I used one
   and Sergeant Goddard used one.

Q.          LOED JUSTICE TAYLOE:    It is probably my fault, but I
        do not understand. This black telephone-looking one seems
        to be sitting on the desk.    How do you meanyou cannot get
        it up to the desk? Do you    mean you   cannotget it    higher
        up to your ear or what? - A. It does in the photograph, my
        Lord.  I understand that, to operate it, the controller
        has to sort of move his chair round and operate fro* that
        position, which is not only uncomfortable, but very---

A. The thing on the extreme right there, is that the tannoy
   or uhat? - A. That is the public address system.

q            h e . PHILLIPS:   So you were not getting anyproper
        communications fro* the perimeter track.   Is that what you
        are telling us? - A. That is correct.   I heard nothing
        froa the perimeter track at all, but Sergeant Goddard must
        have heard something because he was     eitherasking    or
        shouting, "Stop the game.    Stop the   game."

    Q. All the Officers on the perimeter track were issuedwith
       radios, were not they? - A. Not all of them,    no,sir.

    Q. Hell, according to the operational order, that was what
       was intended, was not it? - A. Certainly the Community
       Constables who work that duty all the time carry their own
       radios.
    Q. If Sergeant Goddard got it on his radio, you would have
       got it on yours, would not you, if you were on
       talk-through? - A. Yes, I would.
    Q. But you say he must have heard something that you did not?
                                                                            B. D. KUKKAY



                             - A. He was holding a radio to his ear and aine vas stood
                             on the desk.

                        Q. I see.    You were not then using yours or trying to use
                           yours?    - A. Hot at that stage, no.

                        Q. And the request to stop the gaae, as far as you could see,
                B          arose as a result of the people getting on to the track
                           and the pitch, not as a result of what was going on inside
                           pen 3. Is that what you are telling us? - A. I think the
                           gaae obviously could not go on because of the aaount of
                           people who were spilling on to the pitch and the
                           goal aouth.

                        Q.    Well now, you say after the gaae had    stoppedyou went down
                             to the track? - A. Yes, I did.

                        Q.    And Superintendent Greenwood, was he down there at the
                             tiae? - A. Well, I had seen hia there before I went down
                             to the pitch.


                 D




                                                          /Q. Did you stay down.




                    H



. L H a rph a m L td
                               101
          9
                                               B.   D.   HURRAY


Q. Did you stay down on the track or did you go back to the
   Control Room?   A.   After the game had been stopped,
   I immediately went down to the Control Room and then
   returned to the pitch and requested Mr. Duckenfield.
   When I was leaving the Control Room I can remember
   P.C. Bichard asking for an ambulance or a couple of
   ambulances to be on stand-by.    When I got down on to
   the pitch, I could see. the people distressed against
   the fence who were obviously injured, and there were
   obviously many of them, and an ambulance        Excuse
   me.
Q. You realised, I think --
             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Oust a second, he wanted to
        complete something.
             THE WITNESS:   One ambulance or two ambulances were
        not going to be enough.
q   .         MR. PHILLIPS:   So what did you do about that?
Q.            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Officer, would you like a
        short break?     A.   No, thank you, my Lord.     I didn't
        have a radio. My radio was on the desk.        I wanted some
        ambulances.     I went and I approached a Sergeant and I
        took his radio off him.      I called the Control Room and
        I was acknowledged.      I asked for a fleet of ambulances.
        I could see at the back of the Leppings Lane Stand that
        people were just standing there, looking out on to the
        field as though nothing was happening.       I had realised
        that people were jammed against the fence, that Officers
        were having great difficulty in getting them out of the
        gates and that the only relief would be if people would
        move back.     I asked for tannoy messages to be passed to
        tell people to move back and I think I asked for some
        cutting equipment for the fences.       If I didn't ask for
         it then somebody who was immediately in my vicinity
         did, but I seem to think it was me.
 q               PHILLIPS:    Were those tannoy messages played?
        Did you hear any?     A.   I cannot say I heard any.
    Q. Did you make any further request for tannoy messages?
       A.   Yes, I did.   As I stood I noticed that the people
       were still standing there, there was still no movement
       and I asked for further messages to be passed, keep
       passing messages to tell people to move back, and while
       I stood there and watched I could see no movement at
       all at the back of those pens.
    Q. In response to your later request were any tannoy
       messages played to your recollection?   A.   I can't
       recall messages being played.   I can't recall that I
       could hear them but I don't know whether I would hear
       them on the field of play anyway.
                                               B.   D.   MURRAY


What time would you say this was when you made your second
request for tannoy messages to be played?   A.   I would
think the first request was very quickly after I got on
the pitch.   It would be 7 minutes past 3, shortly after
the game had been stopped.   My second request would be
one or two minutes later.
    And there were by that, time, were there, a number of
    Police Officers on the pitch and on the perimeter track.
    A    Yes  indeed. The fence was getting quite thick with
    Police Officers but there were Police Officers who were
    giving mouth-to-mouth and helping people.
    And helping people out of the pens?  A.   They were
    helping them out. They were helping them over.   They were
    helping the injured.
    Did y o u see anybody, any P o l i c e Officers, coming into the
    pens from the rear?     From the tunnel?        A.   No, sir.
    No, sir, not at that stage.
    Did you, in fact, yourself go round to the back?              A.   Yes,
    I did.
    What was your purpose in going round to the back?
    A    ^o see if I could get people to move back.   To see
    if I could get people to move back.   Nobody seemed to be
    taking any notice.
     Did vou take any Officers with you or did you go on >our
          ?      a        i didn't take any with me.    I went round to
     s e e w h a t ' t h e situation was.    I got round to the tunnel —

  How did you get          there from where you were? A.     I would
' go up   the South        Stand and straight through the gates and
  further over.
  _     .   _ l,__ 1 , 9   t       Yes* by the side of the Control
* Room, round the          back   of the concourse and into the tunnel.
  What did you find when you got into the yard at the back
’ of the Stand’         A.   I can't say that I   noticed anybody
  « anything in the yard at the back, in the concourse at the
  back         when I got into the tunnel there were quite a few
  p e o p i e in, problbly no more than 50, and there were some
  Police Officers, an Inspector.
      There were some Police Officers already in the tunnel?
      A.   Yes.
|. And 50 other people?            A.   Yes.
i Which way were they going, forwards or back — ?   A.    I
  don't think they were going anywhere; they were just sort
  of hanging around, not doing anything.
                                       B.   D.   MURRAY


Were you ehie to get on to the terrace from the tunnel?
A.   I can recall sort of clearing those people out of
the tunnel with the Police Officers and the Inspector
said something to me.     I cannot remember which Inspector
it was or what he said.     He said something to the effect
that, "We have got them all out now and they were all drunk"
and I think he meant the people that were in the tunnel.
That was my impression*     I can't recall whether I got to
the fence.     I didn't go down to the perimeter fence.
Down to the terrace itself?   A.   No.   I can't recall
whether I went to the terrace and looked down.   I can't
recall.
So you cannot say how full the terrace was then when
you were in the tunnel?   A.   No.
And did you see any Police Officers in the terrace when
you were in the tunnel?    In other words, had other Police
Officers gone through to the terrace from the back?
A.    I have got to that situation now where I can't
remember.    I have got a picture that perhaps, perhaps,
I went and I could see Police Officers in the well but
I have been seeing videos and things that have confused
me on that point.    I don't know whether it is what I
saw and remember it or what I have seen from the video.
So I think then you went back to the pitch, did you not?
A.   Yes, I did.
And this would be about - what - twenty past three?
A.   Roughly about that time.
And who was in charge on the pitch at that time?
A.   Well, I knew that Mr. Greenwood was down at the
front looking after the sort of rescue attempt.      As I
looked around then,   one or two people were causing
problems.   Some of the fans were starting to get
agitated and noisy, were sort of threatening the Notts
Forest supporters, were shouting what a shitty ground
it was and it was a little bit ugly.
You, I think, dealt with incidents yourself as you came
across them, did you not, on the pitch - one or two
incidents?   A.   There was one or two.   There was a chap
who was hopelessly drunk who climbed on to the goalposts.
The Officers pulled him down and the crowd reacted angrily.
I told them to let him go and not arrest him, just send him
on his way.
 Did you, in fact,.then get Sergeant Dyson and a serial that
 he had?   A.   I noticed that there were quite a few
 Officers deployed along the perimeter at the Kop and also
 a large number along the perimeter at the North Stand,
                               104



                                           B.    D.   MURRAY


        but there was no-one on the South Stand and this is
        where I could see we might have a problem and we had
        enough problems without people sort of fighting on the
        pitch or on the terraces.   I went to the North Stand
        and took one serial from there.   There were sufficient.
        A Sergeant I knew as Sergeant Dyson, told him to go
        across to the South Stand and just prevent the sort of
        problems that I have referred to.
Q. At 25 past 3, or thereabouts, did you have some discussion
   or meeting with a Senior Fire Officer?      A.   Yes, a
   Senior Fire Officer approached me and asked me if I
   w o u U make some arrangements for people to be taken out
   through the South Stand, again adjacent to the Control
   Room.      I immediately went to that area and there were
   about three Police Officers there.      There were some —
3   .        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I am sorry, to be taken out
        where?    A.   The Fire Service wanted me to clear a path
        on the west end of the South Stand, my Lord, to allow
        people to be taken - the casualties to be taken - out
        in that direction.    There were about three Police Officers
        in that location and when some of the fans saw what was
        happening they volunteered their services and agreed to keep
        the area clear and the area was cleared, although I don't
        know what numbers, if any, casualties were taken out in
        that direction.
q           MR> PHILLIPS:    In fact, a lot of people were being
        taken in the opposite direction, were they not?   A.   They
        were being taken towards the gymnasium and some were being
        taken towards the tunnel.
Q       But did you see any going out that way between the Control
        Box and the  South Stand?   A.I didn't, but I believe that
        some were taken out that way.
Q. Did you then, after speaking to other Officers and so on
   on the pitch, go back to the Control cabin?   A.   Yes, sir.
   I did.
Q. After half past three, was that?         A.        Yes, sir, it would
   be after half past three.
    Q. And speak to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield?          A.   Yes, sir.
    Q. Did you see any ambulances at that stage?    A.  I saw
       there were some ambulances behind the Control Room.
    Q. Behind the Control Room?      A.   Well, behind the South
       Stand. .                                     ,
    Q. On the South Stand road?      A.   Yes, on that road.
    Q. And there was one on the track, was there, on-the perimeter
       track?   A.   There was an ambulance on the perimeter track.
                                             B.   0.   MURRAY



I think the Assistant Chief Constable was present, was
he not, in the Control Box?   A.   Mr. Duckenfield and
Mr. Jackson were in the Control Box when I arrived.
Did you then participate in arranging for other Police
Officers to come into the ground from elsewhere? From
off duty?     A. 'Yes, there were already a lot of
arrangements in hand.   Officers were coming from all
over the Force and some were offered from Humberside
and accepted.
Did you have further discussions then concerning ambulances
and the movement of them to Penistone Road?     A.    Yes.
One of the Senior Fire Officers said he would like the
ambulances to be taken round to Penistone Road, the
gymnasium    side, where the casualties were going to     be
taken out    and all the ambulances were taken around     to
that location.
I think afterwards you had visits from the Team Managers
and later on, as we know, an announcement was made.
A.   Yes, sir.
Over the public address system.      That is right, is it
not?   A.   Yes, sir.
 You assisted in that, I think, did you not, in repeating
 that message?   A.   I made the announcement, yes, sir.

 You made the announcement?     A.    Yes, I did.
 And by and large that was complied with, was it?          A.   It
 was received very well, yes.
                 Cross-examined by MR. HYTNER:

 Mr Murray, perfectly obviously both from foresight and
 h ^ d s ^ o ” ! Where you have a terrace divided up into
 sections or pens, it is crucial for somebody to monitor
 the numbers who go into the pens.        Do you agree.
 A.       If* the pens are self-contained, yes, sir, but they
 are not.
 Whether a pen is self-contained or not, it is crucial
 that —      let me put it another way.  If the pen is self-
 contained it is crucial to monitor the numbers in that
 p e n - for somebody to do it?   A. I have never known a
 problem with those pens and people can move from one pen
 to the other.
       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Is that what you mean by
* self-contained?  Without any access to another pen?
  A    What I mean, my Lord, is that people can move from
  one pen to another and do do, not just through the gates
  but over the fences.
                               106

                                            -s>
                                                  B.   D.   HURRAY


q.        MR. HYTNER:   Mr. Murray, whfct I am trying to deal
     with at the moment is, what steps ought to be taken with
     foresight.   Now, if there is a terrace divided up into
     separate sections so that each section is given a
     specific capacity, it is crucial that somebody monitors
     the numbers that go into the pens, is it not?    A.  I
     would say it was advantageous if the pens were completely
     separate pens.
Q. Are you saying this, that whether it was the Police or
   whether it was the Club who was responsible for crowd
   spread, so long as those single gates at the top of the
   stairs were open, the numbers in each separate pen were
   immaterial to safety?   A.   If I had been aware of e
   particular problem in that area in the past, then perhaps
   it was something that I could have addressed my mind to
   but the way I see it is that that is one terrace with
   pens which are interlinked by gates which are kept open.
Q. So does it come to this, that at 1 o'clock or whenever it
   was that the turnstiles were opened, so far as the Police
   operation was concerned, the packing of individual pens
   on the Leppings Lane terraces was a matter of no concern
   at all?   A.   It was of concern.
Q. W e l l , whose concern was it? A.  I think the concern
   has got to be everyone - the Police, the Club, anyone.
Q. Why was it a concern of the Police if, as you say, fans
   could spread from one pen to another through a gate or over
   the railings?   A.    I am sorry, I am not following you?
Q. You see, I tried to put simple questions at the beginning.
   You first of all said you could not see a problem.   Now
   you say there is a problem.   Can I start again --
              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   He did not say there was
         a problem, he did say he was concerned.
             MR. HYTNER:    Yes.
              THE WITNESS:   Can I just say, sir, there is a
         concern if a pen becomes over-full or an area of the
         ground becomes over-full.
 q   .        HR. HYTNER:   Naturally.   Do you regard Pens 3 and
         A as areas of the ground for that purpose?   A.   For which
         purpose?
 Q. For the purpose of overcrowding causing concern.   A.    I
    think that overcrowding can occur anywhere in the ground.
                                                       «
 Q. Can I start again, Mr. Murray.   If you have an entire
    terrace, like the Kop, which is not divided by radial
    fences, it is regarded as one area or one section; do you
    follow?   A.   Yes, I follow you, sir.
                           107


                                            B.   D.       HURRAY


Q. It has a capacity which is controlled by means of a
   computer related to turnstiles; that is right, is it not?
   A.   Yes, sir.
Q. If you have a terrace which is radially separated into
   four or five pens - I think it is four pens- - and the
   turnstiles only indicate the total number of spectators
   in all four pens but e a c h .separate pen has a safety
   capacity allocated to it, is it a matter of concern
   how many people are in each separate pen?       A.   I think
   that the problems you are relating to me could occur
   anywhere in the ground.       Just because the Kop is a large
   open space does not mean, to me, that we could not have
   a problem there, as we could in any part of the ground.
Q. Is that because overcrowding leads to danger of crushing?
   A.   Well, it is not just overcrowding, sir, it is also
   behaviour and the way that people react.
Q. In that case, whose responsibility did you understand it to
   be to monitor the numbers going into each section of the
   Leppings Lane terraces or into the terrace as a whole?
   A.   I think it is both the responsibility of the Police
   Officers and the stewards who were there to monitor
   and report any concern.
Q. So far as the Police are concerned, would that embrace
   the Police in the Police Control Room who have a view
   of the Police monitors, the Police or the Police presence
   in the Club's control room who have a larger number of
   monitors to look at, the Police on the perimeter fencing
   and the Police in the West Stand?   A.   Yes, and any
   Police Officer who sees a problem or something that he
   identifies as a problem.




                                  /Again, I am not trying...


                                                      »
                               108

                                                    & ^ D ,_m R R A Y


0. Again, I am not trying to trap you, Mr. Murray, but I want to
   get this right. I don’t want to get an answer from you that
   you then resile fron later. Each of the Police bodies that I
   have set out you agree have an individual responsibility to
   monitor the numbers going into any particular section of the
   ground for overcrowding? - A. Yes, sir, by their visual
   awareness.
0   . And I think you also said in fairness to yourself, you also
      say that the stewards have the same responsibility? - A. Yes,
      I think so, sir.

0. Can I now come to the position as you saw it at 2.17. Again,
   please understand I am not trying to trick you with specific
   numbers, because the numbers may well be inaccurate, but if it
   is right that at 2.17 the North Stand and the terraces were
   about a quarter full, that would actually leave round about
   18.000 people still to come into the ground? - A. Yes, sir.

0. Now, again, the figure may not be totally accurate because
   your estimation of a quarter may not be totally accurate. It
   may be a little less than 18,000. - A. I think I estimated at
   half-past- 2 there was a half.

0. Yes, I know, but for the moment let us deal with 2.IS. Now.
   with something like 18,000 people still to enter the ground
   you receive a message some 2 minutes later from Mr. Marshall
   asking for Leppings Lane to be closed because of the situation
   in the Lane itself? - A. That is correct, yes.

0. There could not at that stage have been more than say 6,000 to
   8.000 as estimated by Mr. Marshall in the Lane itself? - A.
   Yes, that is correct.

0. I don't suppose for one moment you have thought about it in
   this way, but now one can examine the actual figures, if there
   were something like 6,000 to 8,000 people in Leppings Lane
   including the concourse and the turnstile area, and in
   addition to that there was another 1 0 , 0 0 0 still to come behind
   them, there was potentially a very dangerous situation
   building up. Is not that right? - A. If your figures are
   right, yes, sir.

    0   . You see, I am only giving figures which I hope are
          mathematically accurate based on your own observations.

              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    And Mr. Marshall’s.

              MR. HYTNER:    And Mr. Marshall’s, of course:

    0. Again, there may have been few than 6,000 to 8,000. There may
       have only been 4,000 to 5,000, but the position is that
       however many there were in Leppings Lane there was the balance
       of the 18,000 still to come? - A. If that 18,000 is correct,
       sir.
    Q. Or it may be 15,000 or 16,000.     You follow?   It is a lot of
                            109

                                                B.D. MURRAY


     people even if the figure is not exactly accurate. Looking
     back on it, bearing in Bind that the request from Mr. Marshall
     was a very unusual one, it would have been *uch better, would
     not it, indeed it would have been crucial, for either Mr:
     Marshall to have asked for you to have volunteered the state
     of play within the ground itself, because he would not know
     how many people were already in the ground? - A. Yes, that is
     correct, sir.

Q.   And that was not done by either of you? - A. No, sir.

Q. It was necessary in order for him to make his own appraisal of
   the situation in a policing sense, to know how many people
   were already in the Leppings Lane and North Stand end? - A. It
   would have been useful to him, yes, sir.

Q. It was clearly necessary in policing terms for Mr. Marshall to
   respond to a situation which was apparently unique, that is,
   people coming in at such a rate at 2.17 or 2.20 or even 2.25,
   as to cause the closure of Leppings Lane. That is correct, is
   not it? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. There was nothing in the plan devised by yourself and Mr,
   Mole, and which had been taken over from the previous year, to
   deal with that unprecedented situation, was there? - A. No,
   sir.
Q. And although I am sorry to have to ask you this, because you
   may feel it unpleasant to be put in a position of criticising
   a fellow Officer, plainly if there was nothing in the plan to
   envisage this situation and it had now arisen, something ought
   to have been done by Mr. Marshall other than simply leave
   Officers to deal with the situation on the ground on the basis
   of the orders they had been given or the briefing they had
   been given prior to the game at all?   Do you follow? - A. I
   understand Mr. Marshall to say he could have dealt with a
   crowd that was co-operative, but unfortunately he was faced
   with a crowd that was unco-operative.

Q.    No, we have not come to   that yet. Let me start again. The
     plan that had been taken over from the previous year did not
     envisage this situation arising? - A. That is correct.

Q.    We are dealing now with   2.17. The     situation had arisen.In
     responding to a novel situation which the men under him had
     not been briefed about, it was necessary for Mr. Marshall to
     respond by giving specific instructions in order to contain
     the new situation? - A. Yes.

Q. You see at this stage, Mr. Murray, Mr. Marshall accepts that
   the crowd were good humoured and well behaved. The essential
   thing to be done was to prevent crowd pressure building up in
   the area of the perimeter gates and the turnstiles. Is that
   right? - A. I don't know, sir.
 Q. Well, just think.   The greatest danger of crushing, a crowd,
    is if there is forward movement which comes up against an
                                                   B.D. MURRAY


immovable object? - A. Yes, sir.

Like a wall or a fence. - A. Yes.
    The two potentials for crushing were the perimeter gates, the
    perimeter fence, and the wall by the turnstiles. - A. Yes,
    sir.
    Therefore in policing terms once the situation had arisen at
    2 17 where these hordes were coming down Leppings Lane, the
    important thing in policing terms was to prevent a build up of
    crowd pressure either close to the perimeter fence or close to
    the turnstiles? - A. I understand that is what Mr. Marshall
    was trying to do.
    That is what should have been done. - A. I understand that is
    what he was trying to do.
    The way in which you do that is not to put your Officers and
    lltr horses within the danger areas where the crowd pressure
    may build up, because that is simply going to trap
    Officers in the same crush as the crowd? - A. I don t know
    Shit the intentions of those particular Officers were or what
    t h e i r b r i e f was from Mr. Marshall, but surely they were sent
    in there for a purpose. They were operating in there for a
    purpose.
  It may be you think you are the wrong person to answer this
‘ because you are not as it were a mounted Policeman man.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Mr. Hytner, I was going to
     suggest not I hope being offensive in any way, perhaps it is
     not profitable to explore every aspect of the matter with
     every Officer.  I don’t think this Officer really was in a
     position to know what the orders were that were given down on
     the concourse.
          MR. HYTNER:  No, but he was, as it were, in overall
     control. I am certainly not going to investigate this with
     every Officer.
          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      We will be having, I know, mounted
     Officers.
          MR. HYTNER:   Some of these questions ought properly to
     be put to Mr. Hand-Davis:
o     can I now cone to 2.30. Again these figures nay be very
      difficult to get accurately, but at 2.30 you thought the North
      Stand was about half full? - A. Yes.
-     Th.f „ould leave about another S.OOO to c?me into the ground.
      » u l d m t it’ - A. It depends which side of the half you are
      looktnS at     You are looking at the low side and I might have
      been looking at the high side.
O. Yes, I agree.      These figures are very, very approximate. - A.
                                                   B.D. MURRAY


     Yes.    Well, it could be 4,000, not 5,000.

Q. Yes. As far as the West Stand was concerned andthe standing
   terraces, about how many do you reckon still had to cone in
   there at 2.30? - A. The West Stand was filling.  It was what I
   would call filling. That is over half-full and on its way to
   filling. Not full, but doing well. The terraces, it is very
   difficult to establish, but certainly there were plenty in the
   centre two pens and plenty in the raised area, and there were
   quite a lot in the rest of the terrace.

Q. The situation was this, was not it, at 2.30, that the two
   centre pens were not filling; they were full; but the two
   wing pens had thousands to come? - A. That was usually the
   state of affairs on a match like this.

Q. So again we have got a situation at 2.30 wherethere are very
   many thousands of people still to come into the ground? - A.
   No, you said that, sir. I said there were probably 4,000 to
   5.000 to go into the North Stand at the extremeand probably
   4.000 to go into the West Stand terrace.

Q.    Yes,    very many thousands.

Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     How many to go into theWest
     Stand? - A. I would think, my Lord, probably if I had to put a
     figure on it I would think there was probably about 4,000
     spaces on the terrace at half-past-2 .

Q. On the terrace or the terrace and the West Stand? - A.
   Probably up to 4,000 spaces on the terrace, my Lord.

o.        MR, HYTNER:   Again, these figures may well be
     approximate, but we are getting to something like 8 , 0 0 0 in all
     to come? - A. Yes.

O.   Did you think you would get all those in by 3o'clock?       - A.
     Yes, I thought half-an-hour was sufficient.

O. Again this has been explored with Mr. Duckenfield, but I have
   to ask it you because it is certainly plain on your statement,
   one of the considerations which weighed with you as to whether
   the kick-off was to be delayed was whether it was the fault of
   the fans or whether it was not the fault of the fans? - A. I
   think "fault" is not the word I would use, sir. I think what
   was said was if it was purely a case of people not turning up
   at the right time for the kick-off then it would not normally
   be delayed.

O. Yes, because it is their own fault? It is their own look out.
   Was that the attitude? - A. I don’t think it was ever meant to
   be as dogmatic as that.                  ,

O.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     What is the distinction between
     having a large crowd outside who are not going to be able to
     get in by 3 o ’clock because there has been fog on the Pennines
     or having the same crowd similarly unable to get in because
                                112           -v

                                                    B.D. MURRAY


         they have chosen to come late? - A. I don’t there was ever an
         intention that because people came late deliberately en aasse
         that we would not delay the kick-off. It could have been
         24,000 people that came late, and obviously the situation
         would have been completely different. I think everything we
         set has to have an alternative option. The option is always
         there.
Q.            MR. HYTNER:   One of the reasons for delaying the kick-
         off is to avoid the impatience that arises outside the ground
         of fans who think they are going to miss the kick-off and who
         may indulge in some pushing or shoving in order to get into
         the ground early? Is not that one of the reasons why you do
         delay a kick-off? - A. That would be a consideration.

0. It is not just a reward for those who have not done anything
   wrong or a punishment for those who have come late
   deliberately. It is a matter of crowd safety, is not it? - A.
   I don’t see it as a reward or a punishment. I see it as quite
   an important decision to make. There are other
   considerations; the behaviour of the people inside; what
   will happen after the event; the arrangements that have been
   made after the event. I think it is something that has to be
   given a lot of thought.
o.            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I suppose if you do it too lightly
         then people just get to rely on the fact that kick-off will be
         delayed? - A . This is one of the main problems, my Lord.

0    .        MR. HYTNER:   And you may get impatience inside the
         ground. Nobody is suggesting it is an easy question to solve.
         What I have to put to you, however, is that the one
         consideration you should never take into account is that
         people have turned up who turned up late who might have turned
         up earlier. That simply should never be part of the equation,
         should it? - A. I thought that was what I was just saying,
         sir.
0. It is not apparently what you said in your statement.          Do you
   follow? - A. No, sir. I don’t.

0    . Perhaps I had better read it to you, because itmay be a total
       confusion and it may be you said something you did not mean to
       say. Have you got your statement in front of you? - A. Yes, I
       have.
O. I think it is page 9.        The middle of the page:

              ’’About this time Chief Superintendent Duckenfield asked
              me to remind him of what we had decided about delaying
              the kick off. I informed him that we had agreed that if
              there was an identifiable problem, such as a serious
              accident on the motorway, or bad weather over the
              Pennines, which prevent people arriving on time, that we
              would delay - but if it was merely that people had
              arrived in time, but decided to go elsewhere, rather
              than the ground and arrived at the last minute, then we
                             113

                                                    B.D. MURRAY


          would not normally delay it".

     - A. Yes, sir.   "Normally” .    "Not normally delay".

Q. When you think about it that should not be a consideration at
   all, should it? - A. What, that people come when they want and
   we have the match when they arrive?

Q. If there is a press of people outside the ground and they are
   impatient to get in there may be a danger of crushing and
   disorder. It does not matter why that is, does it? - A.
   No. If we are talking about the circumstances you are
   talking about, no.

Q. Was it a consideration on this particular day that it passed
   through your mind and was perhaps discussed with Mr.
   Duckenfield that these were latecomers who had been drinking
   around the town? - A. No, sir, not at all.

Q. Can I just go on.
Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I suppose the thinking behind it
     is this, that people who are held up by fog or an accident
     won’t take the delay of kick-off to be held up by fog or an
     accident next time, because that is just something that
     happened to them, but if people stay in the public houses
     until the last minute and roll up then and know that last time
     it happened the kick-off was delayed, then they would
     be encouraged to do it more? Have I got it right or not? - A.
     Yes, my Lord, exactly.

0   . It is a difficult equation.




                                     /Q.   MR. HYTNER:   There were
                                                                                                114

                                                                                                                    B.D. MURRAY



                    Q         HR. HYTNER: There were four requests
                        Mr. Marshall for the gates to be opened? -A. Yes sir,
                        would say there were four.
                    Q. And quite a bit of time elapsed between the first and the
                       last? - A. Yes sir.
           B        .           t sure whether we can work it out exactly. It was
                        w e U over five minutes, wasn't it? - A . N o s i r , I woula
                        say under five minutes, probably abou- 3, 3%.
                                           • _                 to 4 minutes. Was the
                    q. Khat w£®. ^ enin?ei.ween you and Mr. Duckenfield? - A. Tne
                       ^at“ r* f i n r s 5                 was the request came in to open
                                                                        h   a   p   p   e   n   e   d


                       Jhe r - i i     S n a r s h a l l was told to stand by presumably
                       while*the*situation was assessed as to wnat woula be *-..e
                       wnile^e s                     ^ ^ cQuld fae recoVered. At the
                       e J e c : ° : the request was coming in for other Serials to
                        same uime tne reque                 ^ d    atched froa the gyunasiua.
                       be despatched. S                 still passing his Tannoy messages
                        p -c;                                  the first and the’ last recuest
                            t   h   ewere either opened or burst open or forced open
                                        *   c   a   t   e   s


                        or whatever. That is what was nappenmg sir.
                            T --.i      to the burst gate in a moment. We weren't ^
                            I will con        T1> , difficult to cret the flavour anc
                            there, you we*'*• t '-the woras you actually spoke after

                             the ?J                             S
                                                                i r i eStOn ^                           •   r   ^   foIlt ^ rh a ^ UaS! ^ o S

                             S ? h e b ^ “ T                                    a           ^           s       ^d ? 3 ^3
                                dithering.                          X tninK Hr^ duck                                              an6 said:  "You
                                c o n s i d e r a t i o n ^            a n c I t urn ed^ ^                                              i used
                                                                                                                       v i r t u a l l y .


                                          yov^use but what it meant was -We have got to
                                t h e ° w o rd s

                                make that decision now".
                              * * t don't want to put words in your mouth in this way
                            * K9*
                              but ?hit      not i   far from what I was dputting     to you, that
                                  that is not                                   the decision
                              you were c o n c e r n e d t h a t                ^          _ r

                              after four reques                       . was not Withering. He
                              I was not concerned “ *s*derl               whether we could retrieve
                              was obviously s t l 1              , ..    ny opinion then that we
                              25 to^ope^the'gates with the final request of Hr. Harshall

                        0   . At that earticu 1 5!                                                                                  thly?* A
                              adverted to the *ans       e| iatel                                                       assumed that the gate
                              gate opened and it w                                                                      Wordsf that were given
                              L d been broken open? - A.                                                                   gate has burst"
                                    andB t he y                   were given by tie Video Operator.



H a r o h a m Ltd
                                   B.D.MURRAY


The impression being that they had gone through crowd
pressure? - A. That is what it conveyed to me, yes.

And similarly when you saw for the first time the fans
climbing over the gates, the fence, the perimeter fence,
it conveyed to you the impression, did it, that there hac
been some sort of pitch invasion? - A. No, not pitch
invasion. When I saw people climbing over the fence, are
we talking over on to the perimeter track?

Yes? - A. They were getting on to the pitch. They probably
wanted to see, probably wanted a better view. There v§as
something happening, I don't know what it was.

   was pretty obvious, wasn't it, in the way in which they
were climbing over and standing aimlessly around on the
track that they were out through pressure, not because
thev wanted to spoil the game or anything of that sort?
- a ’. It was not obvious to me and I never considered they
wanted to spoil the game. I thought they wanted to get
on to the track to get a better view.


                Cross-Examined by MR. JACKSOH:

Mr. Murray, may I take up the very last matter. In the
briefing you gave berore the game was there any particular
attention paid to crushing? - A. No sir.

Am I ricrht that in every case when we check the briefings,
we check the notes, we check everything that was said,
nothing was ever said to any of the Officers on the crounc
about crushing? - A. I don't know sir, but it was not
mentioned in my brief.
 Because at the end of the day there was a great deal of
 distress, was there not, shown by the Officers and ancer
 by the fans on the pitch? — A. Yes, there was.

 And if we look at the video we will see, will we not, at
 well after 10-past-3, many many Police Officers standing
 apparently doing nothing? — A. That is what it appears,
 yes sir.
 And is that   because no one ever briefed   them as to what they
 ought to do   if there was a crush at the   front of any one of
 these pens?   - A. I think it is possibly   because they did
 not realise   the full extent of what was   happening.

 Is it correct that no one was ever briefed as to the method
 of extracting people from inside these pens if there was a
 crush? - A. Ko one was briefed on that subject, no.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Is there some specific way of
 doing it?
                                116

                                              B.D. MURRAY


      MR. JACKSON: My Lord, it would have been, or will
be my submission that anyone who had considered the
Dossibility of crushing at the Leppings Lane end would have
instantly realised that the gate at the front was pathetically
inadequate.
       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: I follow that point. As I think
 I have said earlier in this Inquiry, I don't think I am
 going to require a lot of persuasion about that.

           MR. JACKSON:       I am-obliged,    my Lord.

       MR. WOODWARD: Sir, I do apologise for interrupting,
 but if the Officer is being asked that men on thefielc
 should have done something and it is being put that things
 could have been done, sir in fairness to the Orncer ?erna?s
 Mr Jackson would put what it is precisely suggestec tnose
 Officers should do. He has not answered that point.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: I was raising that point and
 then I rather think Mr. Jackson shifted his grounc on to
 saying that the gate was inadequate.
       MR. JACKSOiT: My Lord, nay I make it very clear.
 Hy point is exactly the opposite of that which apparent_y
 I have given the impression.
             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Oh by all means let's see ..i.a--
  it is.
             MR
            JACKSOU: The Officers were distressed; they were
          ‘apparently doing nothing; there was nothing they
  s t a n d i n g
  could do in the circumstances, but the picture that woulc
  be presented to the fans would be a large number o Orricers
  doing nothing at a time of emergency. That woulc be way
  the Officer would receive and his colleagues would receive
  abuse'from fans thinking they were doing nothing.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Again I am not wanting to stop
  you but I think that is pretty clear, isn't it?

         MR. JACKSON: That is what I thought.               That iswhy
   I am rather surprised at the intervention.

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: With Mr. Woodward I thought
   vou were suggesting there was some special technique for
   getting people out of a tennis court gate if they all got
   crushed inside, but you are not saying that.

              MR. JACKSOII:    I am obliged.

Q. Hr. Murray, may I take just one aspect of _the evidence that
   you have given and extend it a little.
          We have heard throughout the Police evidence that
    this was unprecedented the crush at the Leppings Lane
                             117

                                        B.D. MURRAY


     turnstile. May we take it in the order that my learned
     frienc Mr. Hytner did. At 2.17 or thereabouts there cane
     the first sign fron an Officer on the ground that some­
     thing unusual was happening, the request to close Leppings
     Lane? - A. Yes sir.
Q. At 2.30 there was a discussion between you and Mr. Duckenfield
   as to in what circumstances the game may be delayed? - A.
   Yes sir.
Q. Thereafter you sent extra horses, an extra Serial, and
   Tannoy messages all about the crush at the Leppings Lane
   turnstiles? -  A. Yes sir.
               •>

Q. A>-e ycu aware of the instructions that we would find if
   we needed to turn to them, that the Police ought to monitor
   the income of the particular gates. I will remind you if
   necessirv. It is at Tab 12, 144. It is quite clear, is
   it not, that that discussion between you and the Senior
   Officer, Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, was about the
   critical state of the crowd outside. All the things we
   nave mentioned, the extra horses, the extra Serial, the
   Tannoys, attempting to speak to Mr. Locke about the people
   not getting through the turnstiles. Ke find at Tab 12,
    144:"
           "Where limits are critical, Police should make
           arrangements to monitor turnstile counts".

     You had that ability; you had used it in the past. Can you
     explain why no attempt was made to cneck the number o~
     people then we would not have to be guessing and estimating
     and subtracting and dividing? “ A. Yes sir, the facility
     was not used. The estimates that I gave to you for 2.30
     were purely wy estimates on the space in the ground.

Q    I accept that estimates were used. I merely want to ask
     why were they necessary. You had the ability and had used
     in the past this facility? - A. Yes.

 Q    If it was worth discussing putting off the game, surely it
      was worth using the facility available? - A. I don't think
      there was a discussion about putting off the game, sir.
      There was a discussion about delaying kick-off and under
      what criteria kick-off would be delayed.

 Q. Finally, Mr. Murray, you used the expression and I hope
    I made an accurate note of it, when asked about the central
    pens being fuller etc. you said this was "usually the
    state of affairs". In other words it was common knowledge
    that the central pens filled up first? - A. Yes sir.

 q    Again we have no need to turn to it, but wasn't it quite
      apparent at 2 . 4 7 that the number of people outside whenever
      and however they entered, would cause a problem of over­
      crowding in the central pens unless checked? - A. It was
      not obvious to me sir.
                                     B.D. HURRAY


Would you say as you have so fairly done, with hindsight
it is obvious? - A. With hindsight everything would be done
differently.
Is *t fair to say that many of the questions that can be
answered so simply were not answered on that day because
your attention was not drawn to them? - A. Tbe majority
of our plans and operation of those plans is cown to
expedience and the experience that we have had in the
p'ast’ the information, th$ intelligence that we get, anc
based on the information and intelligence on t m s occasion
and ay experiences and the experiences of otner Orzicers
involved in the plans, they were made to tne oes. o. our
ability. We have never had problems in the pa&t, to ay
knowledge, with those two central pens and we die not
 foresee any problems on this occasion.

      MR. JACKSOK:    Thank you, Mr. Hurray.


                Cross-Examined bv MR. MULLER:

M-r. Murray, in relation to those two central pens 3 and 4
where vou say it is quite natural for those to rill up
first because it is an obvious vantage poinJ? - A. xt is
a popular part of the ground, yes sir..

 Is it your experience that they will fill up right to the
 back? - A. Generally they fill up, there are caps at u e
 front.
 So the implication behind that is they tend to fill up to
 the back. Is that right? - A. Yes, they do.

 if thev fill up to the back that means, doesn't it, that
 the natural gangway into the adjoining pens is blocked.
 — A. Yes.
 In those circumstances if that is what you would naturally
 expect to happen, can you tell us why it is you say tha.
 you would not think it would be necessary to direct People
 out of those central pens into the adjoining pens because
 they would do it naturally? - A. It is jusw that they do
 tend to find their way through the gates ana overspill
 into the other areas.
 is that likely to be so even with people who are strangers
 to that particular ground? - A. Well with respect sir .
         think these Liverpool fans very many o±. them \;ere
 S S J g S i ? It is o i l H year that they had been there before

  But the position is this, isn't it, that ,if you are going
  to encourage people to move into the adjoining pens at
  an appropriate time, the sensible thing is to keep those
  g a n g w a y s clear, isn^t it? - A. If we were going to encourage
  people, yes.
                               /Q. What I am suggesting
                         119

                                                  B. D. MURRAY


Q. What I am suggesting to you is that those gates should
   have been manned in order to encourage people to do
   precisely that? - A. Hell, I cannot see, if you are going
   to lock the gate back, there does not sees to be any point
   in manning it, sir.

Q. Precisely the reason I am putting it to you.   In order
   that the Officers who arfe there will keep the gangways
   clear to make sure that people do not pack up right to the
   back, but go through into the next pen?

        LOBD JUSTICE TAYLOB: Hr. Muller, do you mind my
   asking how this matter is related to the Fire Service?

        HE. MULLEB:   It relates to the situation that the
   Fire Service was concerned with matters of egress from the
   pen and, of course, they were responsible, with others on
   the Working Officers Committee, for allowing that position
   to arise which did arise, namely that there was the gate
   at the back and it was part, as the Fire Service
   understood it and said to the Working Party, that it was
   to be a condition of those gates being there, and only
   those gates being there, that would be under the manning
   of the Pol ice:

Q. Can I now ask you about another matter. Can you help me,
   please, am I right in understanding that it would be no
   later than about seven minutes past three when you were on
   the pitch itself or the perimeter of the pitch and then
   realised that people were being crushed up against the
   perimeter fence? - A. Seven or eight minutes past three,
   yes.
Q. And at that time you say, "I think I asked for cutting
   equipment"? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Am I right in understanding that, although you do not
   specifically remember it, you would not at all be
   surprised if, in those circumstances, you would be asking
   urgently for just such equipment? - A. I think I did. If
   I did not,- someone else very close to me did.

Q. But was it something that struck you as being obvious that
   was required at that time? - A. To get the fences down.

Q. And can you help us at all, from anything you may have
   discovered since or otherwise, if that happened about
   seven minutes past three, how it came about that it was
   not until 14 minutes past three - some seven minutes later
   - that somebody was asking the Fire Brigade to provide
   cutting equipment? - A. Well, my enquiries revealed, sir,
   that the first request was made to our CJaywheels Lane
   Depot and an Accident Unit was directed, but I think that
   would have been travelling from some distance. Presumably
                           120

                                                    B. D. HUSKAY



     at Clayuheels Lane there uas no cutting equipment
     available.

Q. Was it uithin your knowledge, as a Superintendent of
   Police, that the Fire Brigade had all manner of cutting
   equipment which could, if required, have cut down that
   fence very quickly, without causing direct injury from the
   cutting to people in the pen? - A. I would certainly hope
   so, sir.

Q. But did the Police have similar cutting equipment? - A.
   It is to my knowledge that we do have power tools in
   Accident Units and, if there had been an Accident Unit on
   standby at Claywheels Lane, as there could well have been,
   he could have been there very, very quickly indeed.

Q. It depended, therefore, on there being such a unit
   available at the time? - A. It did, indeed, sir, yes.

                 Cross-examined by HR. HAXWELL:

q.        HR. MAXWELL:   Hr. Hurray, your understanding was
     that it was the responsibility of the Police and the Club,
     by its stewards, to monitor the fans that went into pens 3
     and 4? - A. I think it is a general responsibility, sir.

Q. And that was done for the purposes of seeing whether there
   was overcrowding, not by counting heads, but by a visual
   check? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. And that would be generally true in the event of any kind
   of problem arising on the terraces, that you would carry
   out that visual check? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Having in mind they are fighting or drinking or any sort
   of disorderly behaviour? - A. If there is something wrong,
   I would expect a Police Officer to bring it to our
   attention or a steward to bring it to a Police Officer’s
   attention.

Q. Thank you. Now, in the context of your understanding, I
   want to draw your attention to this, that it was evidently
   part of the standing instructions that there was to be
   a pre-match briefing of stewards? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Hr. Duckenfield thought that you might be able to assist
   the Inquiry about that.  Was there on this occasion a
   pre-match briefing of stewards? - A. The Inspector in
      charge of the four stands briefed the stewards working in
      those particular areas.

 Q. So my enquiries should be put better to an Inspector
    rather than to yourself? - A. Well, the Inspector of the
    stand that you are interested in, yes, sir.
                              121

                                                        B. D. HUPPAY



Q. Inspector White is that? - A. Inspector White uould have
   briefed the stewards in the West Stand.

Q. In the saie vein, can I ask you this about the
   arrangements made for this semi-final. Was any
   arrangement made between the Club and the Police about
   distribution of stewards? - A. Hot that I know of, sir,
   no.
Q. Ho arrangement about the location and the numbers of
   stewards, as far as you know? - A. Ho, sir.

Q. Was it a situation where, in your mind, the Club and the
   Police were making separate and independent arrangements
   for managing the crowd that came? - A. The senior Police
   Officer, like I say, in respect of each stand briefed the
   stewards working in that area.

                 Cross-examined bv HP. GIBSOH-WATT:

q   .        HP. GIBSOK-WATT:   Just what I hope are a couple of
        short points, Hr. Hurray. You were, first of all,
        carrying out the same duties last year as this year at the
        semi-final? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. And I think you have really already indicated you regarded
   the fact that this year was a repeat of last year as
   positively helpful in making your preparations and plan?
   - A. Yes.
Q. The second point is this: do you recall whether you were
   present in the Control Poom when Hr. Kelly, the Chief
   Executive of the FA, visited the Control Poo® shortly
   after? - A. Ho, sir, I never saw Hr. Kelly.

Q. You were down on the perimeter track from the sound of
   things.  I will not trouble you further.

                   Cross-examined by HP. KALLIPETIS:

Q.           HP. KALLIPETIS:    Hr. Hurray, you are familiar with
        this ground, as   you told us, and you had taken part in the
        1988 Cup Final.    Is that right? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Is it right there was a meeting with the Ambulance Service
       before the 1988   Cup Final, I think on the Wednesday before
       the match? - A.Before the 1988 FA semi-final?

    Q. Yes? - A. I do not know, sir.

    Q. I think Hr. Sewell was the liaison Officer between the
       Police and the Amublance Service, was not he? - A. Yes, he
       usually is.
  >
                          122

                                                  B. D. MUSSAY




Q. And you had meetings between the 22nd Harch and 14th April
   of this year before this year’s seii-final - I lake it
   seven altogether, tiould that be about right - to discuss
   arrangements for the Batch? - A. If it is seven, yes, sir,
   I will take your word.

Q. And at least three of those were with Hr. Sewell in
   attendance? - A. Yes.

Q. But to none was any representative from the Ambulance
   Service invited. By that I mean South Yorkshire
   Metropolitan Ambulance Service? - A. Did a representative
   not attend the Meeting on the 22nd?

Q. Ho, I do not think we were invited to, Hr. Hurray. How,
   no criticism because it may well be, because Mr. Sewell
   was there, you were relying upon hi*. That is what I
   wanted to ask you? - A. Hell, I was under the impression
   that an Ambulance Officer had attended that meeting on the
   22nd. Unfortunately, I have not got a record of that
   meeting, so I cannot confirm it.

Q. If that is your impression, can you remember who it was? -
   A. I could say it was a tall chap with glasses.

Q. That is about six of the*, as far as I remember?- A. Yes,
   but I would only be guessing.  I do not really know, but,
   from discussions afterwards, someone has told me there was
   an Ambulance Officer at that Meeting, but I cannot confirm
   it.
Q. It could be Mr. Eason because he was one of the liaison
   Officers for the ground, was not he? - A. I think Mr.
   Eason is the name.

Q. But am I right, Mr. Murray, that everybody in control -
   and you are one of those, of course - would know where the
   Ambulance Service was located at the time of the match? -
   A. My impression - I heard what Mr. Marshall said, but my
   impression was that the Ambulance Officer would be in the
   South Stand.

Q. In the South Stand? - A. Yes.

Q. And Mr. Sewell’s duty, according to the orders drawn up
   for this match, was to act as liaison to Mr. Duckenfield.
   is that right? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. And if Mr. .Duckenfield wanted to contact Ambulance
   Services, for example, he would use Mr. Seuell for that
   purpose?.— A. Possibly.                  1

        ME. KALLIPETIS:    Sir, I am referring to Appendix A,
                           123

                                                    B. D. HURRAY



     in Tab 15.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes, I know the document.

Q.        HR. KALLIPETIS:   One last point, please, Hr. Hurray,
     if you can help me about this. You say that when the
     order to open the gate was given, you were unable to see A
     or B Gate? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Is there a facility in the Control Room whereby you can
   see the picture that is available to the Club video
   cameras throughout the ground? In other words, can you
   switch to....? - A. Ho.

Q. You cannot? - A. Ho, we cannot monitor the fieldside
   cameras at all.

Q. There is no facility at all whereby you can see the
   picture that the Club may have on its video monitors? - A.
   The only facility is that there is an Officer in the
   Control Room. A PC with a radio.

Q. Sorry? - A. There is a PC in the Control Room with a
   radio.
Q. I see? - A. But there is no way we could see it in the
   Ground Control.
                  Cross-examined by HR. GLASGOW:

Q.        HR. GLASGOW:   Likewise, there is not any way in
     which the Club screens in their room can see what you are
     looking at, is there? - A. Well, my information is that
     one of the monitors in the Club’s Control Room is
     continuously monitoring our recording camera.

Q.    Yes, absolutely right, Hr. Hurray. In other words,  they
     can look at whatever it is that you happen to be recording
     at that time? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

Q.    So if the Police recording    equipment happens to be
     switched on to one of the gate cameras, for example, that
     is the picture that will show also in the Club room? - A.
     Yes.
 Q. But they do not have any ability themselves to control the
    picture that is being monitored by you? - A. There is no
    facility whereby they can switch from camera to camera.

 Q. And so, broadly speaking, again rightly or wrongly and
    whether or not this is a good idea for the future - let us
    just talk about the facts that exist up Jto today - the
    division of responsibility is that, with the exception of
    being able to look at whatever you are monitoring - in
                            124
                                                     B. D. H U IIA Y



     other tiords, monitoring what you are Monitoring? - A.
     Yes.
Q    With that exception, the Club’s cameras are trained on
     their turnstile staff uatching the flou into the ground
     and the Police cameras are trained all round the ground,
     including the inside as well? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q    Specifically I uondered if you kneu this, Mr. Murray, but
     downstairs in the Club room under the stand they do not
     have cameras viewing the inside of the ground, on the
     stands or the terraces, unless one of yours happens to be
     showing on the monitor? - A. Yes.
0     That is right. Thank you. Hr. Hurray, would it be fair
      to say that you must have very considerable difficulty in
     renenfoering everything that you tried to do in that Contro
      Boom that afternoon? - A. I think that is fair, yes.

0. I am just a little concerned that you may not have done
   iustice to yourself on one matter. Were you, in fact,
   aware that regular calls were being made down to the Club
   Control Boom in order to find out what the turnstile entry
   figures were or has that gone completely- from your mind.
   - A. By whom, sir?
0     I cannot tell you who was making the calls, only that they
      were usually made to Police Constable Guest, who is your
      liaison Officer within the Club’s room? - A. Yes.

    Q. Let us take it in stages, Superintendent.   First of all,
       that is what ought to be done, is not it.    A. Yes.




                                    /Q. But you have a....
                            125



                                          B. D. MJRRAY


Q. But you have a Police Liaison Officer largely for the
   purpose of telling the Police Operations Room what
   information is being gathered within the Club's room?
   A.   That's right, sir.

Q. And what I am putting to you quite bluntly-is that the
   Officers under your control or, indeed, you yourself
   were doing that perfectly properly on this afternoon
   and you may have forgotten.  A.    That is news to me, sir.
Q. You had not remembered that and you do not even remember
   it now?   A.   I can't recall that at all.
          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Can you go on to put whether
     they got the figures or not.
         MR. GLASGOW:    Yes, sir.
          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    They did?
Q*        MR. GLASGOW:   I am putting expressly that either
     Police Constable Guest or Mr. Lock, who I think is known
     to you personally?   A.   Yes.

Q. Responded and gave you those figures at regular occasions
   during the afternoon.   I say, "you" - I am sorryj I mean
   your Control Box.   A.   I don't know anything about that
   at all.

Q. All that you can confirm is that that was the system that
   ought to have been operated and you are doubtless relieved
   to hear that it did, if I am right in what I am putting
   to you.        A.Yes, sir, but it never came to my attention
   at all.
Q. Your personal knowledge of the state of the pens then,
   Mr. Murray, would have been from looking out of the
   window?   A.   Yes, sir.
Q. And it is fair to say that your impression was of a growing
   density in 3 and A but, as appears from your own statement,
   even at   ten to three you thought that there was still some
   room even left     in the central pens? A.    I never sort of -
   I never saw any area that concerned me about the centre
   p e ns .
Q. May I take you away from the day now, please, and ask your
   help with the planning.   A.   Yes, sir.

Q. We are told in the very helpful background document that
   you have probably seen which the Police have prepared for
   us that the operation order which you help*ed to draw up
   for this game was produced and took the same format as
   all League matches.    Do you remember that?   Just for
   the sake of the note, it is Paragraph 4.62.   You can take
   it from me that that is what it says.    A. Okay, yes.
                          126


                                        B.   D.   MURRAY


Q. Would that be right - again, there is no reason why it
   should not - you take down the operational orders for
   previous games and follow the same format as the years
   went by, doubtless taking into account any changes which,
   as a matter of policy, had been decided to be incorporated?
   A.   Yes, sir.
Q. Were there any significant differences in the way in which
   League games were controlled and policed from the way in
   which a Semi-Final should be controlled and policed?
   A.   Well, the main differences, of course, is the pens -
   the filling of the pens on the Leppings Lane end.
Q. Could we look at that together, please, Mr. Murray.
   A.   Yes, sir.
Q. I think we can conveniently pick it up, if we may, at
   Tab 21 in the second volume of the Police documents.
   Could we just, as a planning matter, look together at
   21, which is the operational order for a League game.
   A.   Yes, sir.
Q. The very first entry at 21 is the Sheffield Wednesday/
   Liverpool game, coincidentally, but the one in January
   which was the League game.   A.   Yes, sir.
Q. If we can go through together to the various serials,
   the ones I want you particularly to look at are Serials 9
   and I think for completeness 10.    We have there got two
   serials together amounting to 2 2 men and their functions
   in Phase 1 are maintaining order and ensuring that the
   pens are filled in accordance with instructions from
   control; that is right?    A.    Yes, sir.
Q. And when the match is actually being played during Phase 2
   they maintain order in those pens.   A.   Yes, sir.
Q. So we have a total, as I say, of 22 Officers doing that?
   A.   That's right.   That's correct, sir.
Q. For a crowd wftich was anticipated to be 2,000 to 3,000
   people?   A.    Yes, sir, away supporters.
Q. May I just draw your attention to this, Mr. Murray.    If
   we go back just one page to see what they are doing in
   the West Stand, the Officers in the West Stand at the
   front - it is B, it is the second lot of the serial,
   is it not?   It is 6 P.C.s are located at the front of
   the stand very sensibly to prevent missiles being thrown,
   Stand tickets being dropped to the terraces and persons
   from climbing from the terraces and maintain order.
   A.   Yes, sir.                            '
 Q. That is right and, indeed, we see that, do we not, in
    the video that was made of the Semi-Final for last year.
                                             B.   D.   HURRAY


There is an Officer actually bending over, talking to a
fan who is trying to climb up.   I expect you have seen
that on the reconstructed video.   A.   Yes, I have.
And although at a Semi-Final game it is entirely sensible
that an Officer in the Stand should do that.sort of
supervisory function of silly behaviour taking place on
the terraces.   A.   Yes, sir.
And if we go back one more page, can we look at what the
Officers do - the Police Officers do in the Stand itself
and the enclosure.   There again the serial is divided into
two, A and B.   Three P.C.s - this is Serial 7 - are
located in the North entrance to assist the stewards and
three P.C.s in the South entrance to assist the stewards
in supervising entry and where necessary preventing entry,
etc.   What I wanted to draw your attention to and ask
your help over, Mr. Murray, is the conspicuous absence
of any reference to stewards on the terraces.    You see
where the Police Officers are helping on the Stands and
in relation to the entrances to the Stand, they are there
to assist the stewards.    A.   Yes.
The indication might be drawn - and I do not want it to be
an unfair one if it is, without your opportunity to comment
on it - when we talk about Serials 9 and 10, it does
appear that they are doing the whole job.   There is
no suggestion that they are there to help the stewards,
is there?   A.   No, sir.
Am I right in drawing the conclusion from that and from
other evidence that we have heard that at least at League
games you would accept that you would not expect to find
stewards on the Terraces at all?   A.   At League games I
would not expect to find stewards actually on the terraces.
And you have already - and I do not want to press the
point - said very fairly that you were expecting the crowd
at this game to level themselves out without anybody's
assistance.   A.   Yes, sir.
But it is right then to say that a job that is thought
to require 2 2 men to supervise 2 , 0 0 0 or 3 , 0 0 0 people
when the pens are in use can safely be done with no
Police Officers and no stewards at all at a Semi-Final?
A.   I think that these Officers are working mainly
in the concourse behind the turnstiles.
 Well, I wonder whether that is right, y°u        because
 that is what I thought, Superintendent, but if we go on
 through the order you see Serials 11 and 12 - we have
 got another 22 men at League matches doing that.    You see,
 that is what they are doing.   A.    They are outside the
 ground, sir.
                               128


                                               B.   D.   HURRAY


Q. I wonder whether that is right.        A.        Well, it does
   say.
Q. I do not mean to sound offensive when I say that.            It is
   meant as a question.   A.   It says they will prevent
   supporters taking missiles, drink, b a n n e r s i n t o the
   ground.
Q. I see, and your understanding is that all 22 of Serials
   11 and 12 are outside, are they?    A.   Yes, sir, in the
   Leppings Lane.
Q.          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    it is headed, "Turnstiles
        and terraces".   A.   I think tlv. Phase 2 shows that
        ten minutes after kick-off they will enter the ground
        at Leppings Lane turnstiles and take up positions.
q   .       MR. GLASGOW: I think that is very right.     So they
        are all outside, all 22.   A.   Those two serials are
        outside, sir, doing the searches.
Q. And so, to do justice to your point, going back to Serisls
   9 and 1 0 , they are expected to do the concourse as well
   as man the pens themselves?     A.   Receive supporters
   coming through the turnstiles and also maintain order and
   put them on to the pens.
Q. But when we take that forward to the game we are talking
   about and the operational order, so that you in fairness
   can refresh your memory from it, is Tab 14 in the fatter
   bundle, Bundle 1 --
             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Can I'just make it clear,
        not to inhibit you but to inform people, I would like,
        if possible, to finish this witness today.
             MR. GLASGOW:    I will go as swiftly as I can, sir.
Q. Can we just go very quickly to Serial 14.   Find your own
   way through to sub-section 7.   This is the serial under
   Inspector White.   A.   Yes, sir.
Q. That in so far as there is Police assistance on the Leppings
   Lane terrace, we have Se rial 14 there and including their
   duties on the concourse which we have seen in the League
   game, these people have to ensure that order is maintained
   on the terraces as well.     A.   Yes, they do.
    Q. Thank you.   There is just one more matter, I think, Mr.
       Murray, and I can do that most quickly by reference to
       your statement, if you have that in front of you.   Would
       you go to page 13, the last matter. A.      Yes, sir.
    Q. The request from you to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
                       129



                                    B.   D.   MURRAY


to decide whether or not the gates are to be opened.
Do you remember the point?   A.   Yes, sir.
I think I can most helpfully give you the times rather
than ask you them all over again.   We do know that
the first request was made, as you say, at 2.47.
A.   Yes, sir.




                                /Alright.       And we know.
                          130

                                               B.D. MURRAY


Q. All right. And we know that fiate C was opened officially by
   order at 2.52? - A. yes.

Q. We can see that. - A. Yes.

Q. It would appear to be a 5 minute lapse then between the
   request and the opening? - A. If the request was at 2.47, the
   gates would not be opened immediately the order was given.
   There was a little delay after.

Q. There would be some pause? - A. Yes.

O. What concerns me more, Mr. Murray, is the next pause, because
   we also know that gate A is opened at 2.58. So in other
   words, another 6 minutes later than that? - A. I will accept
   that. My impression....

Q. I think you can safely accept that. - A. My impression was
   that gate A followed very quickly after the rest of the gates.

O. That is what I wanted to draw your attention to if I may to
   the second of the paragraphs on your statement where you say
   that the request came at about 14.50. This is the urgent
   request from the unit behind gate A? - A. Yes.

Q. And that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield immediately
   authorised the gate to be opened. Assume, please, Mr. Murray,
   that the figures I have given you are correct and the times
   are correct, and that that gate A was in fact opened at 2.58.
   - A. Yes.
Q. Therefore a full 11 minutes after the first request was made.
   Why on earth did not somebody say at that stage, "All gates
   were ordered to be open 5 minutes ago. What on earth are they
   still doing with two shut and only one open?". Why didn’t
   somebody say that? - A. I don’t think we knew at that stage
   there were two shut and only one open.

Q. But, Mr. Murray, somebody in the Police control room as we saw
   on the film which I think you have seen, zoomed in on gate A
   and so somebody in your room's attention was specifically
   being focused in every sense of the word on gate A? - A. I can
   only assume the Officer did that when the request came in.

Q. And gate B, that was never opened? - A. No, I appreciate that,
   sir. I did not know.

Q. And truly, the position in the control room was - let’s talk
   in round figures - a full 1 0 minutes after the first request
   for all gates to be opened, nobody even spotted the fact that
   only one had been opened in response to a direct order in the
   plural? - A. The request was not for all gates to be opened.
   The request was for the gates to be opened at Leppings Lane,
   and the order that went out was for the gates to be opened at
   Leppings. There was never an ’’all", and that is may be a
   mistake, but there was never a request went out for all gates
   to be opened. But it was our perception or my perception that
                                                B.D. MURRAY


the gates, all the gates at Leppings Lane would be opened when
Mr. Duckenfield gave the authority.

I am sorry. It was your perception    that they would? - A. My
perception that they would be.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   You expected   they would? - A. I
expected them all to be opened.

     MR. GLASGOW:    I won’t push it further.     Thank you.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Mr. Woodward, I want to be as
helpful as possible. I had rather assumed this Officer might
wish to complete his evidence today if that is possible rather
than come back. Is that going to put you in difficulties?

     MR. WOODWARD:   It won’t put me in difficulty.      I don’t
know about everybody else.
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    How long do you expect to be?

     MR. WOODWARD:    Aboutquarter-of-an-hour, sir, if that.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Am I right in thinking you would
rather finish today and come back? - A. I don't mind coming
back tomorrow, my Lord.

It is entirely up to y o u . I would have thought it would be
better to finish it. The other possibility is you have been
in there a long time. Would you rather stop now? - A. Yes, my
Lord. I would rather stop. Thank you.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Very well, we will do that. So be
 it. Tomorrow morning there will be a different arrangement.
 The members of the Inquiry are going to see the Police box and
 have a look at the communications. I have had a look at them
 some time ago but not since the evidence has been given.
 Because the control room as has been said in evidence is very
 small it is not possible to do what I have been trying to do
 all the time which is that if we see everything everybody sees
 it together. So only the members of the Inquiry will go
 tomorrow morning. We are going at quarter-to-9 and we will
 sit at 10.30 tomorrow rather than 10. But if any other
 counsel want to see the box it will be available at the same
 time or even earlier at 8.30 on Friday morning if they would
 like to go and have a look then, and the same facilities will
 be offered.

      So it is 10.30 tomorrow.
         (The Inouirv was adjourned until 10.30 a.m.
                   the following morning)
               TWELFTH PAY’S PROCEED IKGS

               THURSDAY. 1ST JUKE. 1989

                   (HORNIMG SESSIOK)

      SUPERIKTEKDEKT BERKARD PEAK HURRAY Recalled

           Cross-examined by HR. WOOPWARP?

Hr. Hurray, you were involved in the 1988 semi-final? - A.
Yes, sir.
And in not only what happened then, but also in the review
of how it had gone? - A. Yes, sir.

And were also concerned and involved in the planning and
preparation for the 1989 semi-final? — A. Yes, sir.

It may be a very difficult line to draw, but is it a
question, when you are planning for events, to have to
make judgments about what you expect to occur? - A. Yes,
sir, that is correct.
And is there a policy to avoid heavy and oppressive
policing? - A. We try and provide the Police that we feel
is necessary for the event, sir.

You were asked yesterday about the making of judgments and
assessments of numbers in crowds, time required, the
ability of the system to cope. Po you follow? - A. Yes,
sir.
 jjay i asjj you a little about that? Were you, in fact,
 making mathematical, scientific assessments or were you
 exercising your judgment in' the light of experience? - A.
  It was judgment and experience, sir.

 And you were, of course, acquainted with the Leppings Lane
 end? - A. Yes, sir.
 With the ordinary, expected functioning of the turnstiles?
 - A. Yes, sir.
 With the reliability of your men? - A. Yes, sir.

 Were they reliable men? - A. Yes, sir.

 Were they conscientious Policemen? - A. Yes, sir.

  Pid you expect your Policemen to exercise oppressive
' forcJ? - a . Ko, sir. The briefing is that   they shouldbe
  fair; they should.be firm when necessary;     and they
  should allow people to enjoy themselves.
                      2                         I . I>. HURRAY




You were aaked about the crowd situation on Leppings Lane
and you may recall Hr. Marshall’s request for Leppings
Lane to be closed? — A. Yes, sir.
Do you follow? In your Control Room you had the various
monitors, the various video monitors? - A. Yes, sir.

When Mr. Marshall asked you at the time that he has
described for Leppings Line to be closed, did you look out
on the monitor and see what was being shown along there at
about 2.17? - A. Yes, si.r.
Is that an instance there of relying on people’s judgment?
— A Yes, sir.    I relied on Hr. Marshall’s judgment.

And you did not query nhat he was asking for?      A. No,
sir.
Or countermand it. Whilst i n th% Co“*ro*
only concerned with Leppings Lane? - A. Mo, sir. I was
concerned with everything that is going on in and around
the vicinity of the ground and also the other monitors
showing pictures from different parts.

 So if we are to have, as close as one can get it, a
 flavour of what you are doing, you are not just watchiang
 Leppings Lane monitors or cameras? - A. No, sir.

 You are not just looking at Leppings Lane terrace? -       A.
 No, sir.
 The West End terrace. Why are you looking at other areas?
 It may be obvious, but why?
       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I think it is.  I »ea“ * h®.
 ©o-t a. responsibility all round the ground. I accept that.
 We know something awful happened at Leppings Lane, but he
 has got to look at the whole picture.

      MR. WOODWARD:    Thank you, sir.
                                                                 •->
      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I understand that.                 0f

       HR WOODWARD:    During your surveillance, your
' observation of what was going on at this venue, did you
  from time to time look down to the West End terrace? - A.
  Well, yes, sir.
I Your view, of course, from the Control Box is an
U lill along that terrace? - A. Yes, sir, just slightly set
  off from the fence..
1. And may it be misleading to guess what your view happens
                               3                         B. 3>. HURRAY



        to be from visiting the ground when there is no *atch on,
        compared with what is happening on a match day? - A . I
        think everything is different when the terraces are full
        of people obviously, sir.
Q. Mould you have a look, please, at the Composite 2? That
   is the South Yorkshire Police bundle of photographs ^
   showing the terraces at 2.46. Photographs 1629, 1630 and
   1631. Do you have them, Hr. Hurray? ~ A. Yes, sir.

Q       Of course, that is not the view that you had. That is the
        view of the camera looking at the terrace almost from the
        front? - A. Yes, sir, that is correct.

0   . But that view, taken at 2.46, does that indicate to you
      that there is room for more people to come on to those
      terraces? - A. The terraces look pretty full at that stage
      to me, sir.
0       Mould you look doun at the front, down at Gate Mo. 4?      Do
         you see the gentle.an holding the Scottish fl a g n p to the
         railings? ~ A. Yes, sir.
A. And do you see there the people to his left and right and
   behind him? ~ A. Yes, sir.
o Of course I suppose it depends which particular spot on
Q'     ?e” « e one’looks at? - A. Well, they look fairly
   comfortable at the front.
              LORD JUSTICE TAYL0S*.   Do I understand the question
    Q. ttia-t Counsel put to you was, "Does it look as though there
       is r o o m for »ore?" aid your ans.er was, -The terraces ook
       pretty full to »e." Is that right? - A. From that angle,
       sir, the terrances do look full to me.
    O    Does that mean that it is pretty full, but you would not
         ■ttiinlc it desirable that there should be more or, at any
         till veryna ny i or e put in? Is that about right or you
         te 11 *»e ho« you see li? - A. Looking at the picture, fro,
         \IV. angle it is taken, sir, there is so.e roo. at the
         front, but it looks quite full at the back.

    Q. So if you were looking at that terrace from       theposition
       of the photographer? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. And so*ebody «as querying uh' ^ "
          n-r not what would your view be? - A. ny view w o u m oc,
       sir if there was movement down towards   the        there
       would probably be room for some more at the back.

     o         HR. WOODWARD:   If one looks at DB1631, you can see a
          view of the Police Officer standing looking at the fence.
          5^ you see the rear of the Officer? - A. Yes.
                                4
                                                          B. D. HtJiSAY




0       And the people in his immediate front, one can see almost
        down to their waists, some of them. People standing,
        turning, looking around, lighting cigarettes? - A. I feel
        there is some room at the front, but it looks full at the
        back
n        Whilst you were up in the Control Box before the incident
         happened, did you have any worry or concern over the state
         of those people in the terraces? - A. No, sir, I had no
         concern.
0        In 1988 we know that the same game had been played - the
         same venue, same teams, supporters, similar allegiance -
         and in 1988, to the best of your recollection, how had the
         terraces been? - A. The terraces were similar to what they
         were in 1989.
Q. May I ask you about another matter - the question of
   delaying the match? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. And it was being put to you that you had the discussion
   uith Hr. Duckenfield? ~ A. Yes, sir.

Q. About the circumstances in which the game would be
   delayed? - A. Yes, sir.
    Q. And the point was being made about people coming along
       late? - A. Yes, sir.
    0     How do you know when to draw the line? - A. I think that
          is perhaps one of the most difficult decisions thatthere
          is -to make as to when you decide that you are going to
          delav ?hekick-off.    I think if you are in a situation
          where you know that there is something definite that is
          preventing people getting to the venue, then the decision
          is very easy, but if it is just that people are a r n v m g ^
          and you are wondering whether they are going to get in in
          time, the decision is very difficult.

    o     nf course. I suppose it might be said that even one
          clr-lold i f angry, frustrated and late supporters might
          cause some problem if they are rushing into the ground and
          the game is not delayed for their benefit. Do you follow?
          That would be an extreme proposition, but it might be
          foreseen or foreseeable that those individuals, in *he*f
          rush to *et in, might cause problems for others?. - A. That
           is possible, sir, but my experience is that there are some
          people who come to games late anyway rather than be in
          before kick-off.
        Q. And is it very much a matter of judgment? - A. Very much
           so.
                           5

                                                    B. 3>. MUKKAY



Q    And is this the situation, that that judgment, whilst it
     is more easily to >e exercised in obvious situations like
     where there has been a motor accident blocking a motorway
     or something serious on the Pennines, is a judgment that,
     has to take into account all matters? - A. Yes, sir.

Q    And it is not a judgment in respect of which there is any
     hard and fast rule according to which you will or will not
     delay the game? - A. I do not think there can be a hard
     and fast rule.
Q.    And has it ever been the practice to have such a rule? -
     A. Ho, I have never been to a match where the kick-off has
     been delayed.
0     Areyou aware of any rule which says, "Never mind. He do
     not stop it because they are late"? - A. There are not any
     rules, no, sir.




                                   /Q. Did the thought occur.
                                   B.D. MURRAY


Did the thought occur to you that the game should be delayed?
- A. The thought did not occur to me. I think I was probably
preoccupied with other events.

Of course with hindsight we can achieve miracles? - A. Kith
hindsight, yes.

May I now move on to ask you about the communication facilities,
just a little because there may be detailed evidence as to
its complexity, but first of all was a consequence of the
radio difficulties that wete being experienced, that the
Control Room switched to using the hand-held portable
radios? - A. Yes sir.

Die that mean that the Control Room by adopting that course
was in just the same position, in effect, as anybody else
equipped with a hand-held radio? - A. Yes sir. When we
use the main set we can override anyone who is sending a
message into control, but by using personal radios every­
one is on the same circuits and everyone is competing for
the same signals.

In order to achieve the communication, because of the circum­
stances which one understood to obtain., did it mean that •
you in effect no longer had the control with the substantial
radio system? - A. Yes sir, we no longer had the facility
to be able to cut people off and override them and pass
messages from control.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: You could not go on to non-
talk-through? - A. No sir, that was my impression on the
day and we did operate our personal radios after the
radio breakdown, my Lord.

      1-lR. WOODWARD: Of course there was a radio link that
you had with the ground, the Club's Operations Room? - A.
Yes, we did have a personal radio on their system.

That was a personal system which was possessed by the
ground which provided you the facility to link in? - A.
Yes sir.
That is a separate radio system from the Police radio system?
- A. It is a separate personal radio system run by the Club.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: That is the one the Club use
 to contact their Stewards? - A. Contact their Stewards and
 their Officials, yes sir.

       MR. WOODWARD: You can contact them and they could
 contact you using it? - A. Yes sir.

 Did you also have a telephone link with the Club? - A. Yes
 sir, on the Club's private network.
                                                             tt.D. MURRAY


so you had the radio and the Club's telephone, private line?
- A. Yes sir.
The Police had down in the Club's room a Mr. Guest, I think?
- A. P.O. Guest, yes sir.
He was able to communicate with you and if                                            Ji*
C 1"                 o   ^   a
                            r ^  X ^ n S^ ? I r f - ° M could
 h   a   b e e n
         v   e   a s k e d for by radio or telephone but I have never
    known it requested.
    If they wanted it they could have asked for it? - A. Yes.
           man          TAYLOR: As I understand it from the
     Visit this morning they can switch^a button which will show
     what the Police video is producing.
           MR. WOODWARD: That shows what the P°lice are m                                fact
     videoing but not everything that is coning in.
                                   ,. . .l .j. nn arid thev can ask for the camera
. They can                                         t o 3 - I. They could have asked for
     “           £       r e c o r d a particular camera which they could monitor,

     yes.
. Of course again that would d e p e n d ^ ^ ^ “                             LSn/because
  were able to S e e the* that facility                                    unknOTn to the
     C l u b ^ ° c o n c e n t r a t e d o n s o m e   thing apparently utterly innocuous
         and utterly irrelevant?- A. Yes.

b                    •                                        rariStroTLfss;.,
         fa d fo i                                           switched* t h ^ r a d i o L f S S
         him two or three ti       *      ly switched it off and then
         to make sure.it:.       anain and called another two or three
         ^ e ^ ^ I ^ w a s i n a fairly short space, my Lord, perhaps
         over the period of a minute.

Q.               “V t S " i n a b i l i t ^ t o ^ c o m m u n i c a t e wither.“w c k
         ^ f t ^ c h S c a l T a t t e r or s L e other matter? - A. I don-t
   know why sir.
            , ^ j             i-arlio on and used it and broadcast, as
Q. S°                Y<tl
                 b u t
   you thought, b u t r e
                          received no response? - A. The radio was
                                       timeSf received no response and
   o n * i            t h a t it actual ly ias on, which it was,
             tu rn ed i f o f f a n d    on a g a in a n d V i e d a g a in .

                   *»>
             about was peopl            actoriiy? - A- Very much so, my Lord.
                                                             •»     contact is
                                  8

                                              B.D. MURRAY


          Mr. Lock. We have a very    od relationship. If he has
          problems with a Police Officar,or a Steward does/then they
          will go to Mr. Lock and we will try to sort it out together,
          sir.
 Iq .           hr. 'WOODWARD: Have you ever known Mr. Lock fail to
          raise some matter with which he was concerned or have any
B|        reluctance to raise a matter? - A. No, we get in touch with
          each other.
 |Q. Mr. Lock I think is fairly forthright, isn't he? - A. Oh
     yes sir.
     Q. The turnstile figures you were asked about. Of course the
        Club is monitoring those constantly in the room? - A. Yes,
Cl         is*
     Q. It has a video, a VDU screen showing the cascade cf figures
        and the performances of the various turnstiles? -.A. It does
        It is able to tell us how many people are in each end of
        the ground.
           If there was a situation developing according to the computer
     Q-
           understanding of the turnstile throughput does, so far as.,
D!         you know, the computer if capacity is about to be reached
           or they are getting to an amber stage, give any communication?
           - A. I do know that when each end of the ground has reached
           15%*off being full there is some flashing indication. I
           don't know whether the counters show individual turnstiles
           or total.
           It is probably not important Mr. Murray that you should
E Q-       know how it is done, but you know that the facility exists
           for the computer to give a warning some time before capacity,
           according to the turnstiles, is reached? - A. Yes sir.

     Q. And upon such a level being reached would you expect to be
           told? - A. Normally sir.

 f   q    . No such communication came through that day? - A. No sir. .

     Q. When the incident occurred you went down to see? - A. Yes
        sir.

     IQ. You put your hat on and went down? - A. Yes sir.
               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Just before you move away to
      Q- that. If there had been information come through to you
         that the turnstile section for the terraces on the west
         end had reached their amber level, put it that way, the
         15% less than capacity, if you had had that message what
         would you have done? - A. Well all it would have occurred
         to me was that we had reached 15%. It would have been an
         indication of how many people were to come in and how
         many people were outside.

 H
                        9

                                      B . D . MURRAY


Well would it require any action? - A. It depends, mv Lord.
If we knew that there were 1,500 people to come in and there
were 5 , 0 0 0 outside, it would have indicated we had an
enormous problem.

I mean it occurs to me one of the things you might want to
do if you knew you were getting towards capacity on the
terraces and you still had a lot of people coming in, would
be to have someone, if not before now, certainly now,
monitoring the state of the pens and perhaps closing off
one part and directing to -the less occupied part? - A. If
we knew of the exact number that were to come in it may
well have triggered that thought, yes my Lord.

In fact what you had instead was completely bypassing the turn
stile system and lettinc in a large number through the
gate? - A. That is correct, yes, my Lord.

So that could produce the same result, couldn't it? - A. Yes,
it could.




                 Q.   MR. WOODWARD:    The Club .
                                              10


                                                                   B.   D.    HURRAY


     0               MR. WOODWARD:                The Club has its communications with
                its turnstiles, does it?                 Do you know?   A.   I don t
                know what c o m m u n i c a t i o n s it has with the turnstiles.
        n           v n u know what arrangements the Club has with its
                 stewards?     T    W e l l , I think that the steward - the head
6
                 steward for each stand and the Chief Steward - have radios.
        n  ir, the oast have you ever known a failure of communication
           ^ t h Hr Lock to occur?         A.   Well, I have known occasions
           Hhen 1 have called him and he has not answered, for whatever
           reason.
           ~           i           ho was at that time, what he was doing,
        Q. Do you now                 don't know where he was.   My impression
           °r that he has a fairly, sort of, roving brief and I was
            s u rp ris e d that he spent most of his time in the Control
            Room.
        Q        Your impression was that he had a roving brief?                             A.      Yes,
                 I see him at ell different parts of the ground.
            n  Was it vour impression that the Club was well aware, from;
               your past experience, of what was going on in its 9 ™ u n d
               and how the crowds were coming in?     A.    *es. Yes,
               is usual
            Q. Did you have, ever in the past, a n y reason to doubt that
               they did not know what was going on?      A.   Not real y,
               sir.
            Q. May-I come to when it happened?                     A.     Yes, sir.
            o     There had been Mr. Marshall asking for gates to be opened
                  Ind vou have d e s c r i b e d in evidence what happened in the
                          T o ll t h e r e ; Mr Duckenfield being present and
                  how the decision was made.            A. Yes, sir.
    F | Q. The situation occurred did it, of you seeing Hr. Greenwood
           standing behind the goal?  A.    Yes, sir.

                Q. What was the                    d i f f i " l t i e r o r ° I h a t e v e r i n 9the
                   embarrassment,                                       coming through the
                   gates.
                Q. Coming through the perimeter gates?                     A.      Through the
                   perimeter gate, yes, sir.
                o v    l .o p j   t    think, Mr. Goddard say, "Stop the game.    Stop
                Q- X U g a ^ i         i    res.   This was a little while after.

                   Mr.   G reenw ood    was waving his arms.             A.       Yes, sir.


    H
                                              B.   D.   HURRAY


 Did you look down at the terraces at that stage to try
 and see what it was?   A.   The first thing I did was I
 looked towards the tunnel.
 What did you see?   A.   I didn't see ---     When I say
 "the tunnel", I *ean the players' tunnel, my Lord.     I
 looked for the Track Sergeant or Inspector to go and
 approach the linesman. . We were intent on stopping the
 game.   There was no movement from the --
     In that direction.   A.   From the tunnel, from the
     players' tunnel, which was not unusual because the noise
     level would be very high at that stage.
     Did you look down towards the terraces?   A.   I would
     have looked towards --    I had obviously been looking at
     Mr. Greenwood and then I looked towards the tunnel*
     Yes "the tunnel" being the players' tunnel.    A.   The
     players' tunnel and I could see that there was no movement
     at all.
     When you looked at the terrace at that time, were you
     able to see or comprehend the cause of these people coming
     out?   A.   No, sir.
          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Was an attempt made at that
     stage to speak to Hr. Greenwood on the radio?    A.    I
     think Sergeant Goddard had received a message from Hr.
     Greenwood saying, "Stop the game" besides   the visual signal.
     So it was not just the signals?   A.   What I saw was the
     visual signal.   I didn't hear any radio message but
     Sergeant Goddard informed me afterwards that through his
     personal radio he had heard Mr. Greenwood asking for the
     game to be stopped.
Q. But not giving any other information or not so that it
   could be —     A.   No, sir.   I think it was just, "Stop
   the game."
           MR. WOODWARD:   I think yoaheard from Mr. Goddard at
      that time the words, "Stop the game.   Stop the game."
      A.   I heard him say, "Stop the game.   Stop the game.
Q.     So you, I think, »ade h a s t e and got down there.       A.   Yes,
      to try and stop the game, sir.
Q.     Having got down there, were you beaten, as it were, to the
      stopping of the game?    Mr. Greenwood ran on to the pitch
      and got hold of the referee.     A.   Yes, he did.
Q. You had tried to cause it to be stopped by the method of
   communicating with the linesman.   A.   By the South Stand
   linesman, yes.
Q. And that was the prescribed method, was it?   A,   That is
   what had been agreed with the referee and the officials.
                                                  12


                                                             B.   D.   MURRAY



                 Yes, in the event of emergency you w e r e t e stop the game
                 by communicating with the linesman on the South Stand
                 side.   A.   Any emergency would have been communicated
                 through the linesman.
           Mr. Greenwood had run on to the pitch, so what did Y°u
        Q. do then - linger or come back?   A.   I went straight back
B          to the Control Room, sir.

        Q- When  you got back to the Control Room, what did you do
           then?    A    I got back to the Control Room and I think
           immediately after I arrived there Mr. Jackson arrived
           behind me.
                 So the Police were already taking action?   A.   Yes,
c l     Q-       Mr. Jackson was trying to find out obviously what was
                 happening.
           Mr Greenwood doing things down on the pitch, in that area;
        Q. Hr! Jackson had come to the too.i you were back up in the
           Control Room.   A.   Yes, sir.
                 Did Mr. Duckenfield send you down again?                  A.   Yes, sir..
dI      q-
           What did you go down for?   A.   Mr. Jackson said to Mr.
        Q. Duckenfield, "What is happening?" and he said, I am not
           quite sure yet."
                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I think you told us yesterday
         Q- to move people out to the wings- A.    Yes, sir.   He
            then turned to me and said would I go down and move people
            off the pitch towards the wings.
         q                 MR. WOODWARD:   Did you thereafter become occupied in
                     activity, in organising people, and it is not necessary
                     g o through the detail of it?   A.   Yes, sir.
         Q. But were you busy organising, arranging, assisting?
            A.   Yes, sir.
             q. And were there Policemen acting and co-operating in
                accordance with your directions?   A.   Yes, sir.
             Q. You say that there came a point when you went to the
                tunnel.   A.   Yes, sir.
             Q       Now that is the access tunnel.   A.               That is the tunnel
                     that leads to the two centre pens.
             Q. You went to that by going round the back, did you?
                A.   Yes, sir.
             n        in'eviHpnce vesterday you described going to the tunnel
             Q   -    a   n   dyou got to IhS tunnel there were Police Officers
                                  w   h   e   n


                      there and an Inspector.      A. Yes, sir.
    H        Q. What were they doing?                  A.   I saw the Inspector and 1
                                        13



                                                        8.   D.   MURRAY



                said, "We will get these people out of the tunnel."
                I estimated there were 50 but I didn't know.   They were
                certainly just hanging around and just sort of standing
                about.
    Q. People?            A.   Yes.
6
    Q. You see, yesterday you said you went to the back of the
       tunnel, there were people there, an Inspector and ■t heY
       just hung about.        What were the Police doing?    A.   Well,
       thev were clearing them out.        The Inspector said to me,
       " W e h a v e got rid of then. all.  We have got then, all out.”

        n       <in bv the time you got to the tunnel there were Police
                there who were not only doing things but had been obviously
                doing things, organising.    A.   Yes, sir.
        Q. Helping, evacuating.   A.   I gained the impression that
           they had moved people - however many I don t know - f r o m
           that area.
        Q       So when you are talking about just hanging about, who were
                y o u intending to describe? A.   I was talking about
D               the spectators.
        Q.       Not the Police.   A.   No,not the Police Officers.
        0         Are you able to say how many Police Officers you observed
                 at that time or not?     A.   Not many.   An Inspector and
                 several P.C.s but I cannot recall how many, sir.
        Q        Did yai go down the tunnel   or not?   A.   I think I went
                 to the end of the tunnel,    yes, where people were still
                 standing.
            Q. And I think your activity and involvement continued.
               A.   Yes, it did, sir.
            O Oroanisinq people to do things.    Did you seize a radio
               from an Officer to use?  A.    That was initially, when
               I first went down to the field, sir.
            Q. And you requested the cutting equipment?           A.   Yes, sir.

            Q. And did what you could.        A.   Yes, sir.

                 Did other Officers appear to be organising apart from you?
            Q    S    l * e y were not --- It was difficult to see how
                 many Officers there were.    By that time people were
                 spilling more and more on to the field.    It was difficul
                 S see what was happening.     The gates were just jammed
                 with Police Officers.

            Q. nIfo t itgetting
                          is said that the Police were just hanging about,
                                themselves involved and barely contributing,
    H           if at all, to the rescue situation, what do you say about
                that7       What was your impression of what was being done.
                A?       No, sir.   I saw Police Officers clustered round the
                                       B.   D.   MURRAY


    gates of the perimeter fence.   I saw Police Officers
    giving mouth-to-mouth resuscitation, trying to revive
    people who were obviously injured.   The only Police
    Officers who appeared, perhaps, to be inactive were the
    ones who were on the perimeter of the Kop and the North
    Stand, and they were there for a different purpose.
    I think there was the apprehension of crowd trouble
    and violence and disorder.   A.   There was certainly a
    feeling in the air that there could have been a serious
    problem.
    Indeed I think, whether it is to be associated with the
    ground or not, that there was trouble outside or trouble
    threatened outside the ground as well as inside.   A.
    At that stage.
    Well, in the events following the disaster.   A.    There
    were several incidents outside after the ground had
    cleared.
|. For example, if one looks at the Incident Log, page 9,
   I think, one can see that at 2.28 - this is before the
   game, in fact - there were youths outside arming themselves
   with wooden sticks.   A.   Yes, sir.   I was aware of
   that at about 2.30.
|. Was the problem of aggression, the problem of uncontrolled
   and aggressive fans, something which the Police did have
   to keep in mind?   A.   There was very much a potential
   for it.   I saw people making threatening gestures towards
   the Notts Forest supporters.    It was obvious to me that
   we had to keep the factions apart, we couldn't afford to
   get tied ipwith public disorder and outbreaks of disorder in
   the ground.
Q. May I just, in conclusion, go right back to the beginning,
   the planning stage.   A.   Yes, sir.
Q    And the suggestion that it might have been alright to have
     changed the ends for this match, to allow Liverpool to go
     to the Kop end and Forest to come to the West end; do
     you follow?   A.   Yes, sir.
Q    A complete reversal.   Was the fact that in 1988 the same
     ends as were, in fact, used in 1989 important?   A.    To
     me, that was the most important factor.   I was of the
     opinion that if people who came last year came this year
     they would have found the parking spaces, found the pubs,
     found the areas that they were going to resort to and they
     would stick with that, no matter which side of the ground
     and we would have a problem of fans crossing all through
     the'afternoon.
                       15


                                        B.   P.   MURRAY


So the point is two-fold, is it, that even if this was the
first Semi-Final between Liverpool and Forest at Hillsborough
one for geographical reasons would have made the selection
of ends that was in fact made but, additional to that, was
the fact that because in 1988 you had had that selection
there was a contemplated problem of, if you changed the
ends for 1989, that t h o s e people who had come in 1988 being
counfounded and confused and an aggravation of the problems.
A.   To a certain extent, I think they would have resorted
to the same places they did the previous year and it would
have caused us massive problems with them crossing.
     MR. HYTNER:   Sir, may I make one thing absolutely
clear arising out of what Mr. Woodward has just put?
It must be plain by now that many of my clients think that
purely on the grounds of fairness to the Club they ought
to have been allocated the Kop end but it has not been
part of my case - and I have not put it - that it would
necessarily have been any safer to have the allocation
the other way round.




                            /LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:          It might...
                           16


                                                B-.JD. HURRAY


        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    It Bight have been a different lot
   of supporters.

        MR. HYTNER:   A different lot of supporters, yes.

                      By LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

Q. There are one or two things I would like to ask you, Mr.
   Murray. First of all, can you help about this, because you
   were in the control room from time to time, indeed most of the
   time. - A. Yes, my Lord.

Q. Was there a stage - the time I am talking about is between
   about lO-to-3 and 3 o'clock - when there were any senior
   Officers standing at the top of the steps leading into the
   control box? We have heard some evidence about two senior
   Officers that were standing there, one at the top and one a
   couple of steps down. Can you help about who they night have
   been? - A. Not that I was aware of, but I do know from time to
   time the Inspectors in charge of different areas of the ground
   would use the control room steps as a vantage point to have a
   look around.

Q. They would not have braid on their caps, would they? - A;
   Well, no, sir, the only people with braid on.their caps were
   the Superintendents.  It has been known for someone from the
   control room to stand on the top of the steps, again perhaps
   to get a better view. I can't recall myself or Mr.
   Duckenfield doing that on the day. If we had we certainly
   would not have been wearing caps unless we were actually going
   elsewhere, my Lord, because we don’t wear caps in the control
   room environment.

Q. So if we are talking of Officers with braid on their caps, and
   we leave you and Mr. Duckenfield out, who else might it have
   been? - A. Are we talking about gold braid or silver braid
   or....?

Q. Well, we actually had a suggestion of gold braid and black
   braid for these two Officers? - A. Well, black braid would be
   Inspectors or Chief Inspectors.

Q. Inspectors would have black braid, would they? - A. Inspectors
   and Chief Inspectors have black braid.

Q. Chief Inspectors? - A. Inspectors and Chief Inspectors, my
   Lord. Superintendents or above have silver or gold. The only
   other Officers apart from Mr. Duckenfield and myself would be
   the other three Superintendents.

Q. That is Mr. Greenwood.... - A. Mr. Marshall, Mr. Greenwood and
   Mr. Chapman.

Q. Mr. Marshall would not have been up there? - A. No, sir.

Q. Mr. Greenwood and    ? - A. Mr. Chapman, who was looking after
   the Nottingham Forest end.
                                     17

                                                          B. D. MURRAY



0   . He was at the other end? - A. Yes.

0. I think one of them was   identifiedas being possibly wearing a
   kind of light coloured anorak over     his uniform. Does that
   ring any bells? Was there any Officer would have been wearing
   a light coloured anorak over his uniform? - A. I would not
   like to see any Officer wearing an     anorak over his uniformat
   an event like that, my Lord, and as far as I know there was no
   Officer had an anorak other than the proper Police black
   anoraks.
q           jf i can just give you the one other identifying feature, the
            Officer who was two steps down was said to be fair stocky and
            to be wearing a cap with black braid? - A. That could be any
            of the Inspectors.
                 MR. WOODWARD:   I do apologise. The witness said there
            may be silver or gold braid. That ought to be clarified, sir.

                    LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   If you want to clarify it, do.

                 MR. WOODWARD:   Sir, we are not aware of anybody in our
            Force wearing gold braid on their hat.

    q   .           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Are you? - A. My apologies, my
            Lord.
    Q       Are you aware of anybody with that? - A. I can t recall
            whether the ACPO ranks wear gold oak leaves or silver oak
            leaves, but the only ACPO rank there was Mr. Jackson who was
            not in uniform anyway, sir.
    Q. Thank you. The other thing I wanted to ask you particularly
       as to the facts was you referred yesterday to an individual
       getting on top of the goal posts who you said was drunk and
       was fetched down but didn't please the crowd, and you said he
       was to be allowed to go. Is that right? - A. Yes.

    Q. I think there was a stage, was not there, at which a decision
       was made by somebody to remove the netting from the goal
       posts'* - A. The netting was removed. I don’t whether it was
       removed deliberately by Police Officers.

    Q. I may be wrong but my understanding was it made it easier to
       cooe with the situation behind the goal from the pitch. - A.
       would think it probably did. It would certainly make **
       easier for perhaps an ambulance to approach it if the netting
       was down.
        Q     All I am asking you is, it seems a strange thing for a”ybody
            * even if drunk to want to do, to get up on the goal posts. Was
              it anything to do with trying to get the netting down, do you
              know? - A - N o , »y Lord, it was Just one individual who was
              hopelessly, drunk and my impression, I am almost sure the
              netting was down at that stage.
                                                 B.D. MURRAY


. The netting was already down? - A. The netting was already
  down. He just wanted to get up and....

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Can I just say generally round
    the room, I don’t find it helpful for people to be shaking
    their heads in disagreement or nodding in agreement.    It does
    not contribute anything to the Inquiry from whateverquarter
    it comes and I hope it will stop:

. Yes. Sorry. - A. Yes, he was climbing      up   on the goalposts
  and it was my opinion he Was going to wave towards the crowd.
  The two Officers pulled him down before he could stand. He
  had actually got on the crossbar but before he could stand the
  Officers pulled him down.

. Thank you. I want to ask you, and this is not a       personal
  criticism at all. but I want   to ask you the mode of
  controlling the numbers on the terrace. You told the Inquiry
  yesterday that you accepted, although you did not
  particularly remember it yourself, but there may have been a
  conversation between you and Mr. Creaser at an earlyish stage
  when he questioned whether you were going to fill first one
  pen and then move on to another one, and you said that you
  would leave the fans to find their own levels. Is that right?
  - A. Yes, my Lord.   I can’t recall the conversation, but Mr.
  Creaser did approach me a couple of days after and said, "Do
  you recall me seeing you before earlier?", and I said, "No",
  and he said to me, "I did see you and asked if the fans were
  to find their own level".   I said, "No, I don’t recall, but if
  you had of asked me....’’.

). That is what you would have said? - A. I would have said
   "Yes".
). That is the point I want to start from. It must follow from
   that at some matches, league matches as I understand it, you
   may adopt a policy of putting people into one pen and when
   that has got sufficient in moving on to another one. Is that
   right? - A. That is not normally policy, my Lord. We try and
   assess how supporters there will be on the terraces before the
   event takes place. If there were say to be 1,000 then we
   would confine them to the centre two pens. If there were
   going to be 3,000 we would open as a matter of course the
   centre two pens and the one under the Police control. If it
   was going to be a large crowd we would open all four pens and
   the very last one would be the raised section. If we have got
   some idea of the numbers that were coming we make the
   arrangements beforehand.

Q. Yes, but what I had in mind was this, if that conversation
   took place Mr. Creaser must have thought of it as at any rate
   a possible strategy to fill one pen and then move on to
   another? - A. He may have, yes.
Q    Is that something that is sometimes done? - A. What happens is
     if we underestimate, if I think it is going to be 1,000 away
     fans come we will confine them to the two centre pens. If we
                           19

                                                 B.D. MURRAY


     find those two centre pens are getting full and there are
     still other supporters to come then we will extend it to
     another pen, »y Lord.

Q. So that involves, whether you do it by design at the beginning
   or because the situation develops, it involves a judgment
   about at what stage you have got enough in the area you have
   allotted and have to open another one? - A. Yes, my Lord.

Q. So some kind of judgment has to be made? - A. Yes, it does.

Q. But if you adopt a policy of letting the fans find their own
   level across the whole of the terrace does there not still
   have to be some surveillance about whether they are doing it
   effectively or not? -A. I am sure there has to be some
   surveillance, but it is just one of those things that by
   experience has not caused a problem in the past, my Lord.

Q. I see. Can you help as to why - would you look at the bundle
   of photographs, the thick one, West Midlands 2, and open at
   the same time photographs 21 and 32. They show the mouth of
   the tunnel looking out of it and looking into it? - A. Yes.

0. Can you help me as to why there are those two projections of
   brickwork out on to the terrace? - A. No, I have no idea, my
   Lord.
                                                         /


Q. Because do you agree, you were talking about people using the
   gates between pens which are right up against the front of the
   West Stand, in order to level themselves out, but those bits
   of brickwork actually act like blinkers, don’t they, to shield
   off to anybody coming through the possibility of doing that? -
   A. I have never noticed that before, but it is perfectly
   true, it tends to throw people down the terrace rather than to
   the right or the left.
Q    The only reason I can think of for it, having been there again
     this morning, is that if you look at 32 the terracing actually
     rises higher at either side of that brickwork than it does
     where you emerge on to the terrace from the tunnel? - A. .
     Yes, to stop people falling.

Q.    They may be like book ends to stop people falling off the ends
     of those highest terraces. - A. I would think that is
     perfectly right, my Lord.
Q.    But it does have that blinkering effect? - A. I agree.

 0    And makes it the more optimistic, might I suggest to you, that
      people will actually be able to even themselves out between
      pens? - A. Yes, my Lord.
 Q. Without some supervision? - A. Yes, my Lord.
           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you. If anybody wants to
      ask anything further please say, arising out of what I have
      asked. No. Thank you very much. Do you want to re-examine?
                BERNARD DEAN MORRAY Sworn

                      By THE CORONER

Q. Good afternoon. I know you were in Court so you will
   have heard that what I intend to do,       B
         is to trv and complete what I want to asK y
   before we break for today and then we will carry on on
   Monday. - A. Yes, sir.
Q. You are Bernard Dean Murray, I believe, is that right?
   - A. Yes, sir.
Q. You are a Superintendent in the South Yorkshire Police?
   - A. Yes, I am.
n In fact I think you were posted as   a  Superintendent,
Q ‘ was it in 1988? - A. In Maich 1988 to Hammerton Road,
    yes.
0   It was as a result of that posting that you became
    involved as Controller at Hillsborough, is that right
    - A. That is correct, yes.



                                            «
                                            B. D. MURRAY


Of course, the semi-final in 1988 followed very soon
after your appointaent? - A. It did indeed. I think I
attended two football matches before the semi-final.

Were you then in fact the Controller in 1988? - A. Yes,
I was.

Not '89, we are talking about '88? - A. Yes, I was.

You had nothing to do with the '87 match, just so that
we can get that cleared up? - A. No, I did not.

In 1988 of course Chief Superintendent Mole was the
overall Commander, that is right, isn't it? - A. Yes,
he was.

But you were supported in 1988, as indeed I think in
1989, by the three regular Control Room staff, is that
right? - A. Yes, that is correct, the same staff,
Sergeant Goddard, P.C. Ryan, P.C. Bishop.

Is it right that Mr. Mole in 1988 followed his normal
practice which he described to us, namely that he
roamed and that he left you in the Control Room? - A.
He did. I also had an Inspector with me who was
familiar with the proceedings, Inspector Calvert.

So you had additional back-up? - A. Yes, I did, sir.

In the shape of that gentleman? - A. Yes.

I am not criticising Mr. Mole in any way, or indeed
anybody else, I was just trying to establish the
situation.

As far as you were concerned with regard to 1988 have
you any recollection of any major problems pre kick-
off? - A. Before the kick-off - I think the problems
have been mentioned - there were one or two that I
noticed such as the problems that we had with the
Liverpool supporters in the Kop and keeping them
isolated from the Nottingham Forest Supporters. There
were also a few minor problems with the radio, that we
had interference from outside, but I was not aware of
any major problems apart from those.

I think there was some sort of pitch invasion at the
end of 1988 but it was from the Police point of view
contained and did not present an insuperable problem to
you? - A. It was not a particular problem. It was well
controlled. The problem with a pitch invasion is if
the two sets of supporters get together, and it was a
question of preventing the Liverpool supporters
reaching the Notts. Forest supporters, or in fact the
                                                            ,58
                                                   . *       *   •

                                                 B.D. MURRAY


     Notts. Forest supporters coining over their end, and
     having a melee in the middle, that was the problem.

Q. 1988 is quite a few years ago now, but in the course of
   your duties you would have been looking round the
   Ground, 1 take it? - A. Yes.

Q. Have you any recollection of anything unusual in any
   way about the terracing at Leppings Lane, in 1988? - A.
   No. I didn't see anything peculiar about it at all.
   There was some climbing from the terracing at half
   time, into the West Stand, from both the terraces in
   front of the stand and the terraces at the side of the
   stand, but I noticed nothing unusual about it. It was
   the first time I had seen a capacity match for some
   years and it seemed to go very well indeed.

Q. You were not either aware at the time or laterthat
   there were some people who felt uncomfortable within
   the centre pens at Leppings Lane - 1988 I am talking
   about? - A. I received no information on that from
   either people who had attended the matches or any of
   the Officers who were there for that particular event.

Q. We have heard evidence from quite a lot of people - it
   differs in slight detail but the substance of it is -
   that in 1988 the tunnel was for shorter or longer
   periods closed off pre-match, with the presumed
   intention of diverting the fans. First of all, did you
   know anything at all about that? - A. No, sir. ^

Q. The second question, of course, follows: you therefore
   did not give the order for that to be done? - A. No,
   sir.

Q.   Was it reported back to you by anybody? - A. No,    I only
     learnt about it after the 1989 semi-final.

Q. So that is the first you knew about that? - A. That is
   the first I knew that the tunnel had ever been closed.
   I obviously made enquiries after that event.

Q. That brings me to the second aspect of the matter.
   Leaving aside the semi-final, thinking just of league
   matches, were you aware or had you ever seen anybody
   close the tunnel off? - A. I had no knowledge of the
   tunnel ever being closed. No one had ever told me it
   had been closed; no one had ever told me it had been
   used as any sort of measure to prevent people going
   down.

Q. So what you are saying - I am not talking about semi­
   finals, I am just talking about ordinary matches .... -
   A. I am talking about every match I attended, sir, yes.
                                                             59

                                              B.‘D. MURRAY


Q. May I ask you this, when you took the job on I assume
   Mr. Mole or somebody must have had some conversation
   with you as to what would be expected? - A. I took over
   from Superintendent Freeman who had left the Police
   Force sometime before I was appointed to Hammerton
   Road. I had no opportunity to speak to him. I spoke
   to Mr. Mole about football and he told me that the
   matches would be commanded by the Divisional Commander,
   which was himself, or in his absence his Deputy, and
   that I would operate as the Superintendent from FI Sub-
   Division, operating from the vicinity of the Control
   Room, which was normal. I accepted that. I had a
   Chief Inspector there who had been there for some
   considerable time and obviously asked his advice on
   different topics about football.

Q. From what you have said I take it that the occasion
   never arose where you were faced with the question, "We
   have got too many fans in this area, we have got to
   send them somewhere else", or did that happen? - A. I
   never had that occasion personally and I did not know
   whether anybody had ever taken any independent action.
   If that was the case it had never come back to me and
   the people I had spoken to had never told me, "We do
   close the tunnel, we do deflect fans from the tunnel".

Q. So what you are telling me then is that was news to you
   after the 1989 event? - A. Absolutely.

Q. It became news? - A. Absolutely, yes. It came    to my
   attention that someone had said the tunnel was   closed
   in 1988. I disputed that but if people say it    was
   closed then it was closed. It was never drawn    to my
   attention in any way.

Q. I would be right in thinking then from what you say
   that apart from the hiccups of pitch invasion and a few
   other matters which may have arisen in 1988, you were
   satisfied that everything had gone satisfactorily? - A.
   Yes, I was. The Order was prepared by my Chief
   Inspector and another Inspector. It was based very
   much on what had happened the year before, which I had
   not had the privilege of attending, and it seemed to go
   very well.
Q. Then of course after that semi-final you continued to
   do Control Room duties, I take it, for other matches? -
   A. Yes, I did.

Q. Throughout the season until some point when you were
   told that the next semi-final was going to be played at
   Hillsborough again? - A. At the beginning of January
   Mr. Mole came and discussed football with me again, and
   said that he was satisfied now that certain matches he
                                                        *°
                                               B.'D. MURRAY


   would take command of, and there were some that I would
   take command of, and I actually took command of one or
   two matches prior to the semi-final.

Q. In other words, what you are saying is that initially
   he was taking command of even relatively smaller
   matches? - A. All category matches, yes.

Q. It was only in January ’89 when he felt, shall we say
   confident enough to feel that hie could leave you? - A.
   Probably. He picked some matches out that he felt he
   would like to be present at and some that he felt he
   should leave in my hands.

Q. I understand. When it became clear that the semi-final
   would be occurring in Sheffield again in 1989, I think
   you and your Chief Inspectors or Inspectors set about
   revamping the Operational Order, is that right? - A.
   Yes, sir. The first information I had was when Mr.
   Mole told me we would be having the semi-final either
   on the Saturday or the Sunday, he was not sure which,
   because of the television. Later that day he came back
   and said it would be on the Saturday, the traditional 3
   o'clock kick-off, we would go ahead as before, and so
   together with my Chief Inspector and the Ground Liaison
   Inspector, we saw Mr. Mole, he presented us with the
   senior Officers he had chosen to do the various tasks,
   and I delegated by Chief Inspector and Inspector to set
   about the task of preparing the Order, which I would
   oversee.

Q. Would I be right in thinking that it substantially
   followed the 1987 Order? - A. Very much so.

Q. But there were several amendments which you made to it
   including, I think, the call sign which was changed for
   senior Officers, and matters of that nature? - A. There
   was no change to the general strategy of the Order.
   Like I said, I had noticed personally a number of
   problems which seemed minor compared to the main Order
   itself, one of which was the call signs. The Chief
   Inspectors used different call signs, and at the '88
   match I had noticed that one or two of them had
   reverted away from the one that they had been given in
   the Order to the call sign that they used back at their
   normal place of duty. I felt this was confusing.
   There were no Chief Inspectors and Superintendents with
   similar names, so I arranged that they would use their
   names and then the Officers under their command, who
   were probably listening in, would know exactly who we
   were talking to.
   There were several other things that I wrote into the
   Order as well. We did slightly increase the track
                                          B. D. MURRAY


serial. I did arrange for additional serials to come
onto the track at the end of the match to prevent
problems with a pitch invasion. I also had arranged —
- the year before I had found that a lot of Officers
who were situated down at the Claywheels Lane standby
point were too far away when we needed them, so I
arranged for two coaches to be available outside the
two ends of the Ground, with 50 Officers on board, so
that we could get them at very short notice, but
unfortunately that was not going to take place until
phase 2, which was after the kick-off.




       /Q.   We have heard from
                                                      62


                                     B.D. MURRAY



Q. We have heard from one witness who says at about 2.35
   I think it was, wasn't it, he was coming along Leppings
   Lane towards the ground and he noticed a coach with
   about, in fact he said 50 Officers in it, parked partly
   on the pavement and partly on the road.

        Now before I ask you about the time, is that in
  fact the location where you would have wanted the coach
  to be between sort of on the roundabout and the stadium,
  somewhere along Leppings Lane? - A. I would have liked
  it to be right outside the turnstiles, opposite the
  turnstiles, because by that time there should not have
  been a particular problem there. I would like the other
  one to be outside the Penistone Road end.

        I did hear a Sergeant from *D' Division speaking
  the other day. The 'D' Division Officers were not
  part of our order. They had their own order and their
  arrangements were that they were to come down as escorts
  on the buses from the Railway Station at Midland Station
  with the Notts. Forest fans and then when they had dropped
  them off they were to go back and collect some more. If
  they arrived at the ground after quarter-to-3 then they
  stood by in the gymnasium as reserve Serials.

Q. This is Sergeant Swift and his crew so to speak? - A.
   Possibly sir. I don't know them all by name. It may
   well have been that if all the coaches were down from
   the Station several Officers - I don't know as many
   as 50 - but several Officers may have come down on
   one coach. That is the only explanation I can offer,
   but the coach I had arranged should not have been full
   of Police Officers until we got into Phase 2.

Q. Can I put it another way, this is with hindsight.
   I realise it may not have been in the forefront of
   people's minds but was any report made to you that the
   coach, the one you had in mind, was in that location
   prior to kick-off? - A. No, the coach may have been
   there.
Q. I meant with Officers in it? - A. Not with Officers in
   it, no, it would have been there I would have hoped
   with just a driver.

Q. So you are not in a position to explain that witnesses's
   evidence, certainly not in relatjoa to that time, unless
   you say it was the people who were coming from the
   Midland Station who for some reason were in that position?
   - A. It should not have been the coaches that I arranged.
                                                          63


                                     B.D. MURRAY



Q. That was an aside, forgive me. And the other thing I
   think you organised was that you arranged for I think
   a radio engineer to be on site, is that right, in case
   you had further problems? - A. I did. We had had a
   problem with breakthrough, it was music that was
   breaking through the year before and not only I noticed
   it one of the Serials on the debrief sheet noticed it.
   I arranged for a radio engineer to be there.

Q. And the final point on this is we have heard from
   various people that the total number of Officers was
   reduced by I don't know how many, about 70 in the
   Leppings Lane, I don't mean in the immediate area of
   Leppings Lane but in the Liverpool sector? - A. Yes.

Q. Were these reductions made in the Middlewood Road area,
   not all of them but were some of them made up there?
   - A. They were certainly made right across the board
   with a reduction in what we call the public order
   serials of two Officers, reducing them to a Sergeant
   and eight. I think we may have chopped one off what
   we call the Tango units which are the mobile Serials
   and put them down to a Sergeant and four or a Sergeant
   and five instead of a Sergeant and six. Certainly one
   Serial in the Middlewood Road area was taken out
   completely and one of the reserve Serials I think was
   also removed.

Q. One final question on this aspect of the matter and this
   is really relating to 1988. Have you got any recollection
   of any arrangements which were made for people to be
   checked at either Catchbar Lane, Leppings Lane, Penistone
   Road roundabout or indeed nearer to the ground to try
   and weed out ticketless fans? - A. I don't know of any
   specific arrangements. I certainly did not make any
   arrangenents but I would think that Serial Sergeants would
   brief their men as to what they wanted to do and if the
   numbers were controllable, amenable, that is a tack they
   may well have taken, but there were no specific arrange­
   ments made for them.

Q. Now I want to go on to 1989 and the Order had been
   drafted, it had been eventually signed and you were
   on the day now on the 15th April 1989? - A. Yes.

Q. We have already heard that Mr. Duckenfield gave a briefing?
   - A. He did sir, yes.

Q. And you were there I take it? - A. Yes, I was.

Q. Did you yourself on that day also give a briefing or
   not? - A. Yes, I did. Mr. Duckenfield gave an opening
   briefing. I followed him with my briefing and I think
   I was followed by the Divisional Intelligence Officer
   and also Inspector Sewell on some administrative
   arrangements.
                                  B.D. MURRAY



Did you also brief Inspectors and above on the Friday?
- A. I did indeed.
So you did two briefings? - A. I did one to the Inspectors
and above on the Friday and one to the whole assembly
on Saturday.
Did the briefings which you gave, were these designed,
if I can use the word, this might be an incriminating
question so if you don't want to answer it.

      perhaps I had better give you a proper explanation
the first time I say this and then I will shorten it.

      THE WITNESS:   Fine sir.
      THE CORONER: From time to time I or others may
ask you questions which may tend to incriminate you.
Because of the Rules in Coroners' Courts you do not
have to answer any such question.
      As far as I am able I will try and warn you when
I perceive that a question might have this tendency.
It is a privilege which you may exercise or not as you
wish.
      THE WITNESS:   I understand fully sir.

      THE CORONER: And if you choose to answer that is
fine and if you choose not to answer it that is also
fine, is that clear, but to save time I won't give all
this detail everytime, just say "possible incriminating
question" and you will know what I mean.

      THE WITNESS:   Yes, it is not necessary.

      THE CORONER: What I was going to ask you with
this warning was was your briefing, I am not talking
about anybody else's, designed by you, did you sit down
and write it out and decide what you needed to do?
- A. Yes, I did.
What was its - again it is an incriminating question -
what was its main thrust? - A. The Chief Superintendent
had shown me what he was going to say in his briefing,
he had had it typed out. I prepared a briefing touching
on those matters that I thought it was important be
made aware to the Inspectors and above who were at the
Friday briefing. I also examined it for the Saturday
briefing because I was concerned that it was too long
and that Officers would not concentrate through too
 lengthy a briefing and cut some items out that I considered
 the Inspectors could well brief their own men on.
                                                             65

                                     B.D. MURRAY



Q. So can you sort of just give me headings if you remember?
   - a . The main thrust of the briefing would be the emergency
   evacuation procedure; the knowledge about communications;
   about call signs; about problem areas that we foresaw.
   That is about it without looking at my notes.

Q. That will do as far as I am concerned. This having taken
   place, this all happened during the morning of course?
   - A. Yes sir.

Q. You eventually I think made your way to the Control Box?
   - A. Yes, I did.

Q. I think initially you were there on your own with your
   three support staff, so to speak, but without Mr. Duckenfielc
   That is what I am saying? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. I think you had one or two visitors, people who were
   looking in to see how things ____   A.We always do have
   visitors in the Control Box.

Q. But of course initially things are relatively quiet,
   aren't they, as far as the ground is concerned, but I
   am right in thinking that your job as Controller is not
   just restricted to the area, the pitch, you are controlling
   the whole of the match in effect? - A. No, we have the
   stadium, we have the immediate surrounds of the stadium
   and then we have the far away points such as the motorway
   checkpoints and the Grenoside checkpoints. We also try
   and keep liaison with Force Control and everyone else.

Q. Force Control communications are tape recorded. That
   is right, isn't it? - A. Yes, they are sir, yes.

Q. But Control Room communications are not, is that right?
   - A. There is no tape recording facility.

Q. But you in fact attempted to keep a handwritten log
   as part and parcel on this particular year? - A. I did.
   Mr. Duckenfield asked especially for a handwritten log.

Q. And you would have liked to have had somebody there but
   there was not room? - A. There was not room in the Control
   Box.
Q. So you decided you would do your best? - A. Yes, we did.

Q. We don't need to go into any details but between 12
   and half-past-1 you received calls from various outlying
   places with regard to the sort of law and order problems
   which one would have to deal with when a lot of people
   come along? - A. Yes sir, they were the usual problems
   that you associated with a big event.
                                                             66

                                     B.D. MURRAY



Q. And these were dealt with routinely and without any
   particular difficulty? - A. Yes sir.
Q. I think is it right that at about 10-to-2 Chief Superintender
   Duckenfield actually came into the Control Box? - A. Yes,
   he did.
Q. You at that point said you were satisfied with the
   situation as it was? - A. Yes, he asked what was happening
   and was told that everything seemed okay.

Q. I think both of you then left the Control Room to go and
   find the referee and discuss with him the usual procedures
   about evacuation procedures and things of that nature?
   - A. That is correct, yes.
Q. I think you then returned at just after 2 o'clock? - A.
   Yes, it was a bit longer than I expected because the
   referee was not available. He was not in his office.
   He was on the pitch with the linesmen and by the time
   he came back we had to wait for him and then spoke to
   him.
Q. On that occasion you had another visitor, namely Mr. Jackson.
   Is that right? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. But he didn't stay very long, is that right? - A. He
   stayed and had a look what was going on. I don't know
   how long he stayed but he asked what was happening and
   then he went.
Q. Mr. Duckenfield stayed in the Control Room with you? - A.
   Yes he did sir.
Q. We have been to the Control Room, we know there is not
   very much room in it. Did he stand or sit? - A. I have
   difficulty in recalling but I know certainly at one
   stage he was behind me on the raised area standing next
   to the Video Operator. I don't know whether he spent
   most of the time there but that was certainly where I
   expected him to be. He told me before the event that
   he would be spending most of his .time in the Control
   Room environment.




                     Q. Say that again .
                                                              67
                                                 B, -D. MURRAY


Q. Say that again? - A. Before the event Mr. Duckenfield had
   said he intended to spend most of the time in the Control
   Room where he could oversee the events.

Q. So it wasn't a surprise to you he was there? - A. No,
   sir.

Q. It was different to what Mr. Mole would have done? - A.
   Yes.

Q. But you   knew it was going to happen and thatwas that? -
   A. Yes.I think Mr. Duckenfield's    was the textbook
   position.

Q. I think   you looked round the ground at about quarter
   past, or thereabouts?    I am not holding youto the
   minute, but around that time.    Is it right that at the
   point you noticed there appeared to be more Nottingham
   people in than Liverpool? - A. Yes, there is no doubt
   there were.

Q. However, as far as you were concerned at that stage you
   weren't too concerned? - A. I wasn't particularly
   concerned.

Q. At some point you received a message from
   Superintendent Marshall that he wanted Leppings Lane
   closed? - A. Yes, I did.l

Q. Now I know there is a bit of dispute as to the timings
   because you have given much earlier timings than
   Superintendent Marshall seems to recollect? - A. Yes.

Q. I think your handwritten note was 14.17? - A. Yes,
   seventeen minutes past two I wrote.

Q. I know you have probably thought about this many times,
   but are you able to add anything to that now as to what
   time you think it was? - A. I can't.   My own perception
   is that was later, but the fact that I have put something
   else in the log after that time, and timed it at 2.21, I
   feel that that 2.17 is correct as far as I am concerned.

Q. Though perceptually you feel that it was later? - A. Yes,
   although times did tend to get very blurred.

Q. In any event some time between quarter past and, say,
   half past two - 14.17 - a request was made for that road
   to be closed? - A. Yes.

Q. That was the correct procedure, that he could come
   through to you and ask? - A. Superintendent Marshall was
   on the ground.   He wanted some action taking at another
   part and so he came through to Control and asked for it.
                                                             68   v

                                                B, D. MURRAY


Q. The appropriate order was given? - A. When I say "me",
   the radio operator carries out my instructions.   I very
   quickly identified the Serial at the bottom of Leppings
   Lane, that is the roundabout end.   I asked the radio
   operator to contact them and tell them to close Leppings
   Lane, which he did.   I then identified the one which was
   at the other end, Catchbar Lane, tried to get him on the
   radio and could not get him on the radio.   Tried two or
   three times and could not get him.   I then went back to
   Mr. Marshall and asked him, again through the radio
   operator, if he could despatch somebody from where he was
   up to Catchbar Lane to close Leppings Lane.

Q. I think there were one or two other calls because the
   buses were still coming through and you had to intervene?
   - A. Yes, there was.    It is very difficult.   The
   instruction to close Leppings Lane, it may well be that
   this Serial at the bottom had decided that they would let
   a bus, or a couple of buses through, but keep everything
   else out.    The fact there was a bus actually coming up
   the lane did not mean that the orders had not been
   carried out.

Q. You could not physically do it, all you could do was give
   the instructions? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. We now come to about 2.30.   At 2.30 did you have another
   look round the ground, as far as you remember? - A. Yes.
   I would be looking round the ground all the time, from
   time to time, but yes at 2.30 I had a look round.

Q. What was your perception at that point? - A. Again, there
   were more Nottingham Forest fans in than there were
   Liverpool fans.   I thought that probably the North Stand
   looked about half full and the West Stand itself was
   filling up.   The Leppings Lane end, there was plenty of
   room at that stage.   The North West terrace and the
   centre pens were filling, but there was plenty of room in
   the rest of the ground.

Q. You, of course, can't see the outside except by looking
   at the TV screens? - A. I can see certain views outside
   the ground from the TV monitors.

Q. Were you at that point - presumably you were looking all
   the time, but what I mean is, did anything strike you? -
   A. At 2.30 I would be looking around.   I am sat in a
   similar situation with the TV monitors above me and I
   have got the ground in front of me and the radio operator
   and telephone operators on the right hand side of me.

  I could see there was a good crowd of people outside the
  Leppings Lane turnstiles but when I say the Leppings Lane
  turnstiles I mean the whole turnstile conclave.   I was
                                             B; ‘D. HURRAY


satisfied at that time that we would get tho3e people in
for three o'clock.
In fact that is what you told Mr. Duckenfield? - A. I did
indeed.   I said, "There is a good crowd there but we
will get them in for three o'clock."

What happened after that? - A. As far as I can remember
the crowd sort of stayed about the same for the next five
minutes, ten minutes or so, and then we got a call from
the mounted Inspector on the radio asking for more
horses.   It was about that time that PC Bichard focused
in on a mounted Officer.   PC Bichard, his job is to
bring my attention to things that perhaps concern him, or
if I want something particular showing he will try and
pick it up.   I saw that the crowd was a lot denser than
my perception of it had been before.   Obviously the fact
that there had been a request for mounted Officers meant
that they needed some assistance.

Sergeant Goddard, who is very reactive, picked it up
straight away and radioed to Sergeant Sorsby, who was in
charge of the mounted Officers in Penistone Road and
said, "Send as many horses as you can spare round to the
Leppings Lane end."    As I looked this crowd seemed to be
getting quite compact.    I knew that I had one spare
Serial to deploy, which was in the gymnasium; the other
one having been deployed to the Penistone Road end some
time earlier.   I deployed that Serial down to the
Leppings Lane end to give what assistance they could.

Do you know which one that was?   Can you remember? - A.
That would be Inspector Delaney and Sergeant Higgins. It
was the C&V Serial, and continued to watch the situation
that was developing.
Having done that, what was your next event in the Control
Room? - A. Again I asked Sergeant Goddard to pass a radio
message, which he did.   It was about that time that a
reply came in which was extremely distorted.
Sergeant Goddard said, "Would you repeat your message?
We can't understand what you are saying," or words to
that effect. Someone else came on the radio and said,
"It's not him, it's you, we can't hear you."   I could
see there was a situation developing in Leppings Lane.
I asked PC Ryan to get in touch with the sound engineer,
the radio engineer, the communications officer, but
before he could ring through to the gymnasium, or before
he could speak to anybody at the gymnasium, the guy
appeared at the door.   He said he had been monitoring
our messages.   He realised there was a problem and he
had come to have a look at it.   He said the messages
were breaking up.   They were breaking up quite badly and
we could not be understood.
                                              B; “P. MURRAY


We have two radios.   We have one that we use normally
and one that is used as a standby set.   I am not quite
sure what he did.   My perception was that we operated
with a tulip microphone, which may or may not still be
there.   He undid the tulip mike and he attached some
other microphone or telephone handset. Sergeant Goddard
then started to try and pass messages out.   All the time
messages were coming in that we could not respond to, we
could not acknowledge, and some of them we could not
understand.   It was about this time
Superintendent Marshall was asking for some PA
announcement at Leppings Lane.

We obviously picked that bit up and PC Bichard tried to
get in touch with Force Operations to send a traffic car^
PC Buxton obviously heard that over the air, because we
were on talk-through and everyone could hear what
everyone else was saying, and I heard him because I
recognised his voice - he had worked with me - saying, "I
am on my way round to Leppings Lane."   He had a Land
Rover which had been specially fitted out with four loud
speakers for this very situation.

The radio that Sergeant Goddard had, the handset he had
did not work.   He tried to send the message out and the
replies came in that were terrible.   He actually threw
it down on the table and said, "That's no good."   The
engineer then tried to get to the relief set which was
under the desk.   This meant total disruption. Everybody
had to move out of their places while he got underneath
and fiddled about with the radios.

I do not know how long it took him, but it was
devastating.    It did destroy trains of thought, control
of what was going on.    During this time as well I had
noticed there was something wrong with the turnstiles.
I could see that people were not coming through the
turnstiles as they should have been.    The crowd - I
don't know whether it was getting any denser but it
certain did not seem to be moving.    I was then concerned
that there was something wrong, that they could not get
through the turnstiles.    I tried to get in touch with
the club.    I tried to get in touch with the Safety
Officer by the club's radio.

That is a different radio? - A. This is a different radio
system to our own.   This is a radio that we have.    I
tried several times and I could not get a reply.    I
tried to get Mr. Lock who was really the only one on the
staff I know and he is my point of contact and whom I had
done business with before.

As I say, all the time things were getting worse and we
still had no communication.
                                             B; D, MURRAY


Eventually the radio did start again and it was obvious
that we were getting through.   By that time we were
operating from the hand held radio sets which everyone
had.   I had one and Sergeant Goddard had one.   I
remember using mine at that stage and Sergeant Goddard
was using his.   We had totally given up the mains radio,
which would give us override and we were then in a
situation where everyone was on personal radios, on the
same channel, on talk-through. We were always on talk-
through, but it meant we were in the same position as
everyone else.
That is, in fact, the major disadvantage, that you have
no override on those radios? - A. The normal situation at
football matches, at that particular ground, is that the
talk-through facility is used.   That means that everyone
can hear every message, whether it is going out or coming
in.   However, with the mains set we are able to override
a signal that is coming in from someone else so if we
urgently wanted to contact a unit, we could drive them
out.




     Q. Sometime prior to this
                                                  B . P . ML^RAY


Some time prior to this you actually had a conversation
I think about possibly postponing the kick-off, is that
right? - A. About half past two. About half past two
Mr. Duckenfield did ask me to remind him of what we had
said about delaying kick-off. All I knew it was what I
had discussed with Hr. Mole and it was the sort of
agreement that he would come to in the circumstances
that kick-off would be delayed. Be gave the example to
me. I had never been to a match where a kick-off had
been delayed except once as a spectator and wanted to
know what it was about. Be said, "If we get a
situation whereby we have got traffic, the people don't
get there for some reason such as delay on the
motorway, a serious accident" or as in 1987 where the
Police actually carried out checks on the motorway and
prevented the Leeds United supporters from getting
there in time, then you would normally delay the kick-
off.

This was at some point before a real crisis had arisen,
is it not? - A. It was round about half past two.

I will just stick with the kick-off point though I am
taking it slightly out of sequence, and when I say you
I mean the Control Room at this stage, did you receive
any message from either PC Buxton or possibly Inspector
Ellis to the effect that they would like kick-off
delayed? - A. I do recall a message from someone and I
think it was probably PC Buxton. It was about the same
time as the players had come out and Sergeant Goddard
who, as I say, is extremely reactive said, "It is too
late now, the players are out". I agreed with that.
If I hadn't agreed with that I would have told him
different.

What you are saying is that he made the response, you
heard it, and you did not countermand it? - A. Sergeant
Goddard would often make responses, sir.

I am not complaining about that in any way. - A. Be
would respond very, very quickly to any sort o£ call
for help or assistance that was made. If I agreed with
it, fine. If I didn't agree with it I would tell him,
no, we would do something else. There were very, very
few occasions when I had to, but there were times when
I had said, "No, we will not send them. We will send
someone else".

You are saying that the players had   just come out and
this would be at about five minutes   to three or
thereabouts? - A. It would be, yes,   sir. I recall it
was after the gates had been opened   and people were
already coming into the stadium.
                                                E? pT HWRAY


Can we then retrace a fraction? You are taking me
through the problems with the radio. You had re­
established some form of communication? - A. Yes.

I think you were receiving messages from Superintendent
Marshall at that time? - A. Yes, we were.

In fact, he was not quite sure whether it was three or
four. Can you remember how many actually got
through? - A. I seem to think there were two. I like
to call them two sets of two. He had had information
from Superintendent Marshall that he wanted the public
address system. I had instructed PC Ryan to pass a
message just to tell people to stop pushing outside the
Leppings Lane terraces and to keep on passing it and to
continue to pass it until such time as...

Is this across the tannoy you mean? - A. This is over
the Club's tannoy, yes, sir. Then we had the request
from Superintendent Marshall to the effect that we are
going to have to open the gates at Leppings Lane. "We
have got a problem out here. People are being
crushed". About that time, I can't say whether it was
immediately before or immediately after, an Inspector
came through on the radio, Inspector Bennett, and said
he wanted assistance down at Leppings Lane. Before we
could ring the gymnasium Inspector Sewell rang and said
that some of the D Division serials who had come up
with the buses had arrived at the gym and were on
standby. Be said that he had got ten serials. I asked
him to dispatch 5 and 50 down to Leppings Lane. They
were eight man serials and so he actually sent 6 and
48. Be sent them down to Leppings Lane. They were on
the way. I didn't know how long it would take them to
get there.

    Before there was any improvement in the situation
Superintendent Marshall came through again on the radio
and said that the gates required opening, people were
going to be hurt, people were going to be killed, and
within a short space of time he followed that by, as
far as I was concerned, he just said "Open the gates,
open the gates". I was satisfied at that point that we
had no more time. Be was an extremely experienced
Officer. Be was out there. Be knew exactly what was
happening. We had bought a bit of time, if you like,
but there had been obviously no improvement in the
situation. My own decision was that we couldn't wait
any longer. I said to Mr. Duckenfield, "Are we going
to open the gates?” and he said, "Yes, open the gates".
                                                             74
                                                    B, P. MURRAY

Q. How did Mr. Duckenfield know that these messages were
   coming through? - A. He was with us, sir. He was with
   us in the Control Room.

Q. Could he hear? Were the messages being broadcast? - A.
   The messages at that stage, I don't know whether they
   were being broadcast on the loudspeaker or whether they
   were just coming through the personal radio. My
   impression was that everyone in the Control Room could
   hear those particular messages and I do not think — I
   can't remember whether I was sitting down or standing
   up at that stage, whether I had sat down after the
   radio engineer had been in or not.

Q. Your view of the Leppings Lane turnstiles was limited,
   was it not, because one camera was not working, the one
   that looked at B gate, is that right? - A. I don't
   think we can see B gate. We have already identified a
   problem with that.

Q. Which bit of the turnstile area could you see? How
   much of it could you see on your monitors I mean? - A.
   The monitor would only pick up obviously what it was
   pointing it. It could point at the whole area of
   Leppings Lane. We could see probably, I don't know,
   150 yards down Leppings Lane to the right, towards the
   round about. We couldn't see anything to the left. We
   could see the turnstile enclave but not right up to the
   wall because the camera was set back. We could
   certainly see some of the concourse and C gate but not
   B gate on that particular camera.

Q. When Mr. Duckenfield said, "Open the gates", how did
   you communicate that? You did not run out and do it
   personally, did you? - A. Ho, it went by radio.
   Sergeant Goddard, as I say, is very reactive and he
   just said on the radio, "Open the gates, open the
   gates".

Q. Pid he identify which gates? I do not mean by name or
   number but which part of the ground? - A. I seem to
   think he said "Leppings Lane, open the gates, open the
   gates". I cannot recall anything other than that. He
   certainly didn't say, "Open B gate, open C gate, open
   whatever".

Q. Po you know who received that message? - A. I don't
   sir. I had a mental picture. Between the requests
   from Mr. Marshall, I ought to add this, which I put in
   two sets, C gate as I know it did open. PC Bichard
   drew my attention to it. He said, "C gate has gone" or
   "C gate has burst", I cannot remember which. I looked
   up at the monitor and I could see that people were
                                                          75




   coming in through that particular gate. I cannot
   remember how many I estimated but it wasn't a
   tremendous number* Possibly 200 came through, I don't
   know.
Q. This was before Mr. Duckenfield had given the order? -
   A. This was before the gates were officially opened,
    yes. That situation was recovered and the monitor or
   the camera stayed on that gate, and I have this vision
   of two people crouching behind the gate, two or more,
   and I can only say I think they were Police Officers
   because of what they appeared to be wearing, and then
   the gate being opened.
Q. So you can't actually tell us -- somebody must have
   received the message if it went over the radio? - A.
   Yes.
Q. And somebody activated it? - A. That is right. I can't
   say who but of course we work off the presumption that
   when we are working on talk-through everybody with a
   radio can hear the messages.

Q. I am going to stop. I haven't quite finished - I am
   taking a bit longer than I expected - but it is
   quarter**to**2, it is an hour and that is enough, so we
   are going to stop for today and carry on on Monday. I
   don't know how much longer I will be but I should not
   be that long and then we will just proceed, okay? - A.
   Yes, sir.
        THE CORONER:   On Monday we will stick to our
   10.30 start:
Q. Superintendent Murray, I say this to all the witnesses
   who break, you are on oath and you are technically in
   that witness box, so you must take it that you are not
   to discuss the evidence until we have finished? - A.
   Yes.
       (In the absence of the Jury and the Witness)

        MR. ISAACS:    Sir, it seems unlikely that Mr.
   Murray will have finished his evidence by Monday
   evening, by close of play* If he does then the
   likelihood is that it will only leave a relatively
   short time. I would ask you to say now that you do not
   propose to call Mr. Duckenfield until Tuesday morning.

        THE CORONER:   I think that is fair enough, yes, I
   agree. Can I just ask something? Mr. Maxwell
   suggested written comments with regard to legal
   submissions, and I said it did not sound unreasonable.
   Is there anybody who wants to adversely comment on
                                                       76




that suggestion? (No response) So I take it you would
be entirely content if i agreed to that, very well.
You have your answer, Mr. Maxwell, and I agree with it
as well.

     MR. PAYNE:   I certainly agree that it is an
excellent idea. Our submissions are quite well
advanced and they are, in fact, already in writing, but
we will be asking for a ruling from you about how far
the submissions may go, because we are conscious of the
rule about not being allowed to address you on the
facts, and it is difficult really to draw the line
between where the submission moves from being a
submission of law to becoming a submission of fact,so
we will be asking you for a ruling about that and we .
will be putting it in such a way that it will be
comprehensible, we hope. We will need a ruling about
that before we put our submission in, that is point 1.

     Point 2 is that depending upon what your ruling is
we would certainly then, I think, probably want to
amplify our written submission by having the
opportunity to address you.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I am more than happy for you
to do it viva vocet and in fact there there is a lot to
be said for that because I hear it and so does
everybody else. What I was trying to do was to make it
easier for those people who may find that difficult.

     I am glad you mentioned the point about addressing
me on the facts because I was going to add that as a
qualifier to what I had said. When you are addressing
me in Court, and supposing you were to stray into an
area where I thought, hang on,   we have now moved from a
legal submission to something different, I can stop
you. If you have written it down it is very much more
difficult because it is in black and white. I may
ignore it, that is true, but in that sense I think the
legal submissions, if they are going to be written you
have to be even tighter than you would otherwise be,
and you have to take the view,   this is the rule,I know
what it says, and if I am doing this because it is
convenient and easier for me then I must stick by the
rule and draft what I am drafting in such a way that it
does not stray onto facts.

     I have thought a little bit about this myself and
it is exceedingly difficult because some aspects of
possible legal submissions may well have a factual
basis.

     MR. PAYNE:   It might be helpful, I am not asking
you, sir, to embark on a ruling or even think of one at
                                                        77




this stage, but it might be helpful if I indicated that
the area which we think might, not cause difficulty but
need to be addressed, is that what we have in mind is
to address you about which verdicts it will be
appropriate on the evidence you have heard to leave to
the Jury, and with regard to particular verdicts we
have it in mind that it will probably be appropriate to
submit to you that there is not sufficient evidence on
which a Jury properly directed would be able on the
evidence to reach that verdict, and accordingly that
verdict ought not to be left.

     That being the shape of the submission we
anticipate that in order to make the decision of law
about whether the verdict should be left as an option,
to the Jury, it is necessary for you to look at the
evidence to decide whether there is sufficient evidence
on which a Jury properly directed would be able to
reach that verdict, so we think at that point really it
does become necessary to have a look at the evidence.

     Now, that is a question which we will be
addressing to you, as to how far it is permissible for
us to go into the evidence in support of that
submission of law. Our argument will be - it will be
helpful for us to mention it - that it is permissible
for us to address the evidence, in order to decide the
question whether the evidence is sufficient for the
verdict to be left.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you.

     MR. KING:   Do I assume that if any of us wishes
to make purely oral submissions you have no objection
to that?

     THE CORONER:   Not at all, in fact, I prefer it.
I don't want you to think that I want you to give me
written submissions. We have done everything orally,
in public, where everybody has been able to hear, and I
would much prefer that, but I do see the difficulty.

     MR. KING:   I was not objecting at all to that
course, sir, I was wishing clarification as to the fact
one still had the option to do oral submissions.

     THE CORONER:   It is my preference that that is
the way it should be done. All I am trying to do is to
make it easier, as far as I can.

     I think, Mr. Catchpole, you raised the question of
whether we were going to have a breather so to speak,
so that one could think it out. The answer to that is
                                                       78




yes, provided we have time, and if we do have a
breather it won't be very long.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   I think we are all conscious of
the time, sir, and indeed I have been the one on my
feet bleating about it recently. It is just that even
half a day, just to collect the thoughts, may well
prove productive in being able to shorten it and
tighten matters.

     THE CORONER:   What I am hoping - my hopes have
been dashed many times, I am afraid, already - is that
we will complete Mr. Murray either Monday or early
Tuesday at the very latest. We will then start Mr.
Duckenfield and allow maybe the same length of time in
planning, which means that by Wednesday we should be in
a position to read P.C. Smith's statement, which is the
one we need to read, and possibly deal with a few
little bits of tidying up, and on Thursday we should be
able to complete the matters which concern your clients
in particular. I don't anticipate that should take
more than half a day at the very most because they are
specific points which are not controversial, from the
rest of your points of view, but very important to the
bereaved.  If that is right that means it may be
Friday, Saturday, Sunday would be available for
preparation, legal submissions the following Monday,
and I will start my summing-up sometime that week. The
Jury would then go out ....

     MR. CATCHPOLE:     That points to the Monday before
Easter.

     THE CORONER:   That is my intention, that the Jury
should go out on that Monday.

       MR. CATCHPOLE:   That is very helpful, thank you,
sir.

     THE CORONER:   I think if we all aim for that
hopefully we will be able to make it. Mr. Isaacs were
you objecting to any of that as an outline?




         /MR. ISAACS:   Objection is the wrong
                                                     79




      MR. ISAACS: "Objection" is the wrong word sir.
Not knowing, as we all do not know, how this Inquest
was going to proceed in the future, I am afraid I have
a commitment on Monday which means I will not be here
and I was hoping ....     •.
     THE CORONER:   Which Monday is that?

      MR. ISAACS: The Monday that you are intending
on your present timetable to start submissions sir and
I was hoping, and who knows what will happen, but when
I heard you say that you were going to start submissions
on Monday I knew that the world was going to collapse
and I just hope that I will be able to persuade you,
if that is the case, to actually start them on Tuesday.
It perhaps will not make a great deal of difference and
perhaps the Monday could be the day that Mr. Catchpole
was referring to when we could have the breather. I
know it will be coming after a weekend when we will have
had a breather, but it would ....
      THE CORONER: Perhaps you could help me on this,
with regard to the legal submissions. How long do you
think you are going to take?
      MR. ISAACS: I anticipate that my learned friend
Mr. Payne may be a good deal longer than everybody else.
No disrespect, but I have had some conversations with him
as to the approach he is going t o •take and he is bound
to be, if I may say so. I think that two days is probably
the sort of time it will take.
      THE CORONER: You see this is the difficulty.
I have got to allow for the summing-up at least two days,
absolute minimum, sorry about that, I mean perhaps I will
do it in less but I don’t think so, so really the latest
that I can start is some time on Wednesday if we are
going to let the jury out on the Monday. Perhaps I could
start on the Thursday and spill over into a little bit
longer on the Monday.
      MR. CATCHPOLE: As a matter of practical thinking
this through, it might be sensible sir to ask the jury
if they would be prepared to sit a normal Friday just
on that once in the anticipation that you could finish
your summing-up that week so we have got a full day on
Friday.
      THE CORONER: No, that is the difficulty. The
problem is Mr. Isaacs. The summing-up has got to come
after the legal submissions, not before.

       MR. CATCHPOLE: Sir certainly but it would create
 extra time at the end of that week which may assist with
 thp problem my learned friend is raising.
                                                       80




      MR. ISAACS: I think Mr. Manning has it. I mention
it now. Who knows what the situation will be, but it
would perhaps be foolish to spend extra time now discussing
it when we just do not know but I have put everybody on
notice and I would ask you to be mindful of the problems,
especially after so many days, and whilst I understand
my learned friend Mr. Maxwell will provide written
submissions, I think I would be failing in my duty to
my client if I was not here to hear the submissions that
are going to be made by other people.

      THE CORONER: I think that is probably right, but as
I say I would very much like to bring the Inquest to a
close this month, not just because of the length of time
but there are other reasons as well.

      Very well, have a nice weekend.


             (The Inquests were adjourned until
           Monday, 11th March 1991 at 10.30 a.m.)
                                                               4


              SIXTY SEVENTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                 MONDAY, 11th MARCH, 1991


                BERNARD DEAN MURRAY Recalled

                       By THE CORONER

Q. Now, Mr. Murray, you remember that I did not quite finish
   on Friday.   I think we had got to the stage where you
   had described Mr. Marshall's requests which came, I think
   you said, in two bursts, so to speak, two of two? - A.
   Yes, sir, that is the way I would describe it.

Q. I think you had just described that a decision was taken
   that the gates should be opened, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. I was asking you if you knew who actually implemented it
   and you explained that to me? -A. Yes.

Q. Are you back where we were, so to speak? - A. Yes, I am.

Q. I want to remind you again before we carry on that a lot
   of the questions which I may ask and, indeed, which
   others may ask, may well tend to incriminate youand you
   therefore have the privilege not to answer them if that
   be the case? - A. Yes.

Q. Although I normally try and warn you of the question, it
   is possible I may miss one.   If you were to think that
   one was of that nature you can say you don't want to
   answer it and we will sort it out from there. - A. I
   understand, sir.

Q. I think I am right in saying that the best view of the
   respective gates which you had from the Control Room was
   the view of Gate C? - A. Yes, that was the best view we
   could get on the cameras.

Q. The first two requests which came through, they weren't
   actioned, is that right, in the sense they weren't
   authorised?   The openings were not authorised at that
   stage? - A. That is correct.

Q. One of the things that puzzles me a little bit and
   perhaps you could just explain this to me and to the
   jury, when those requests came through you, of course,
   were in the Control Room, Mr. Duckenfield also was in the
   Control Room at the time? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. What actually happened?   Did you hear them and turn to
   him and say, "We have had a request"?   Or did both of
   you hear them?   Was there any discussion about them at
6:
                                                               D. B. MURRAY

                  that point.   The first two?   I am not talking the
                  second.•• - A. I am sure that everybody in the Control
                  Room heard them.   They came through clearly and it was a
                  question of doing whatever we were doing.   I was trying
         B        to raise more Serials from the gymnasium.
             Q.   Are you saying by that that when that request first came
                  through your primary reaction was to see whether one
                  could contain the situation by putting more manpower... -
                  A. I just think it was an extremely important action to
                  take.   It was one which would destroy the whole plan
                  that we had.   It was unprecedented and it was a very
                  serious step to take.   One always hopes in a situation
                  like that that it may be retrievable.

             Q. Would it be right to say that if your Commander is
                standing next to you that was the sort of decision which
                you would want him to take rather than you? - A. I think
                that is fair, yes.

             Q. Obviously you would not expect   him to takeevery decision
                which you were dealing with? -   A. Absolutely, no.

             Q. Was that the reason why you turned to him subsequently
                and asked him what his decision would be? - A. Yes, I
                think it was Mr. Duckenfield's decision to authorise
                Mr. Marshall's request.

             Q. Having done it, and said the gates are open, what
                happened next? - A. It was a question of seeing if it was
                going to ease the situation.    We could not see what was
                happening outside.    We could see over the tops of the
                turnstiles through the monitor and the people towards the
                back.    We could not see the front of the turnstiles, the
                wf. *,ai*d of course we could see that people were
                climbing over the turnstiles at that stage.    It was just
                £     requests were coming in, that people were going to
                be killed and injured.    It was a question of trying to
                save that situation.    I had got to a stage where it was
                not retrievable.    As far as I was concerned it was not
                retrievable.    Something had to be done.   The gates had
                got to be opened.    We were acting on information of
                others.    We could not see it ourselves.   It was then a
                question of seeing whether it was going to relieve those
                injuries outside.

         Q. I think you did have some sort of view of the people
            coming into the concourse because there were cameras? -
            A. Yes.

         Q. Having opened the gates, by definition that ought to have
            relieved the situation? - A. It should have relieved the
            pressure outside, yes.




     H
                                               D. B. MURRAY

, What was the next thing that happened in the Control
  Room?   Did you turn your attention to something else at
  that point or did you leave your attention on the gates?
  -A. I seemed to hope and wait for the people to be
  relieved outside.   I seemed to think that the next thing
  we were overcome with a request for Gate A to be opened.

 Did you know what that request came from? - A. I
 recognised Sergeant Higgins' voice, the request for
 Gate A.

Did it surprise you that that request came through from
him at that point? - A. I was a bit surprised.    I think
I said I was a bit surprised.   I expected the gates to
be opened on to the concourse, which I think were
probably B and C. I did not know the lettering of the
gates.   I knew there were three main gates at that end
of Leppings Lane.   I didn't know whether there were any
smaller ones because around the stadium there are small
gates and large gates.   I was a bit surprised.    I
actually asked Sergeant Goddard which was Gate A and he
said the North Stand.

Who authorised the opening of that gate?    Was that you
or... - A. Mr. Duckenfield.    Mr. Duckenfield said
almost straight away, "Open the gate,” and Sergeant
Goddard passed a radio message to open the gate.    I was
concerned about that gate because I knew that that led
only to the seating area in the North Stand and I had
this vision of people getting into the North Stand who
did not have tickets for that area and chaos in that
particular stand.

I think you took some remedial steps with regard to that.
Was it you... - A. It was not me, sir.   I cannot
recall...   I have heard that Serials were sent down but
it was not me who asked for them.

You at the time did not know who did it.    You may have
found out since.   What I am trying to find out is: did
you know at the time that that was happening? - A. No. I
did not, sir.

It is very difficult to keep apart what you knew at the
time from what you and everybody else knows now.   So
that was the second thing that happened? - A. Yes.

There was another request for another gate to be opened?
- A. Yes, indeed.

Your recollection is that it was authorised and you heard
no more about it? - A. No.   The camera then moved to A
Gate.   I think PC Bichard must have reacted immediately
    request came in and taken the camera across from
                                                        A
                                                        •*
                                              D. B. MURRAY

C Gate to A Gate and I could see Officers behind that
gate.

      THE CORONER:   Can I just interrupt one minute and
say something to the jury?    I know you have asked about
this.    We are trying to find the clip, if that is the
right word, of what there is of this A Gate.    If we can
find it, but hopefully we will.    There is not much on
the clip anyway.    That is the problem.

What was the time interval between the request from
Sergeant Higgins and the earlier authorisation to open
the gates?   Can you recollect that? - A. I seemed to
think it came very quickly afterwards. At the time they
seemed to be on top of one another.   The gates were
opened and it seemed almost straight afterwards, the
request from Sergeant Higgins.

It was not logged, or tape recorded, or recorded, that
request? - A. No, sir.

One of the problems is that these radio messages between
the Control Box and yourselves, there is no hard copy of
those? - A. None at all.

Apart from the ones that went through Snigg Hill or one
of the main police stations? - A. I think the only things
they would pick up is when we were operating on VHF.
They might have heard what was happening in the Control
Box in the background.




   Q. In the meantime what was
                                                            5

                                                  B, P. MURRAY

. In the meantime what was happening within the
  stadium? - A. I don't recall anything particular
  happening within the stadium. There was nothing that I
  really noticed except shortly after the request for A
  Gate, I think that probably focussed my attention on
  the North Stand. The next thing I became aware of was
  something happening behind the goals on the pitch. It
  looked to me, I noticed that one of the Officers so far
  as I can recall opened one of the gates and a handful
  of people came out, not very many, and they were just
  stood there. They were just stood on the track. I
  formed the opinion that it was a bit crowded in there.
  It must have been crowded in there and they were taking
 people out of those gates to relocate them which seemed
  to make sense because there was room at the front of
  the wing pen. I was anxious that these people walked
  along the track and got into the pen in front of the
  Control Box.

     There was a Policewoman down by that gate, by Gate
 2 I think, and she could not see what was happening
 even though she was stood on the track. She seemed to
 be looking along the line of the touchline towards the
 South Stand. We tried calling her several times on
 radio and then realised that she was not one of the
 normal track Officers. She was one of the
 reinforcements who did not have a radio but there was
 an Officer in civilian clothes who was in the Control
 Room and he said he would go down and tell her and help
 her and he went down and she did in fact open the gate
 and those people started to be relocated in that
 particular pen.

 Po you know when this happened in your recollection,
 never mind about what we can see on videos, was the
 match in play by then already or not? - A. I can't
 recall, sir. I can't recall the match kicking off. I
 didn't, and didn't notice anything on the field at all
 until it was actually stopped.

You are saying in fact that the first time you became
aware of the match was when it was coming to an end? -
A. That was the first time. I realised that the match
was taking place. I realised obviously that it had
started but my own impression was that it had only been
playing for about two minutes when it stopped. I did
not take any notice of it at all.

From what you have said it sounds, and perhaps if I
have got this wrong correct me, would you, that your
attention was first attracted after the opening of the
gates to the centre pens when you noticed people coming
         out through the little gates in the front, is that
         right? - A. Yes, sir.

    BjQ. When you were looking at that scene at that point in
         time, whatever time that may have been, did you notice
         anything else about the centre pens at that stage - and
         this is clearly a question which may tend to
         incriminate you? - A. I didn't. I didn't notice but I
         knew it was not unusual at matches sometimes to
         relocate people who might be in some discomfort.

     |Q. Did you see Superintendent Greenwood? - A. It was when
         the activity was taking place behind the goal that Mr.
         Duckenfield said, "Get Mr. Greenwood to go round there
         and have a look". Sergeant Goddard actually called him
         on the radio and when I looked he was walking from the
         tunnel. I assumed at the time that Sergeant Goddard
         had got hold of him and told him to goround.

      Q. So far as you know that call was not acknowledged? - A.
         I didn't hear it acknowledged, no, sir.

      Q. Not every acknowledgement would be reported to you, of
         course, would it? - A. No, but I would normally hear
         them. I would normally hear the messages.

      Q. I understand. Did you yourself then go down to have a
         look at what was happening? - A. I did. I went down
         first of all to try and stopthe game.

      Q. At what point was that? - A. I saw____

      Q. Let us just get this right. You saw the gate open and
         people coming and standing around? - A. Yes, I did.

      Q. On the perimeter track? - A. On the perimeter track,
         yes.

      Q. You noticed the lady Police Officer who appeared to
         need some help? - A. Not to know what was going on,
         yes.

      Q. You sent the Officer who was definitely in civilian
         clothes, is that right? - A. Yes, he was.

      Q. Down to go and sort her out? - A. To give her a hand
         and to draw attention to what was happening.

      Q. You then heard a message passed to Mr. Greenwood and in
         any event saw him walking towards the Leppings Lane
         end? - A. Yes, I did.




H
                                                    B. P. MURRAY

Q. You were still in the Control Box at this point? - A.
   Yes, I was.

Q- How long after that did you go down? What happened to
   make you decide to go and stop the match? - A. By this
   time more and more people were coming on to the track,
   were climbing over the fence, and the track was
   becoming quite thick with people. They were actually
   encroaching on to   the grass and up to the touchline. I
   saw Mr. Greenwood and I saw him stood head and
   shoulders above the people that were there and he
   clearly waved to the Control Box, a signal which to me
   meant, stop the game. I said, "Mr. Greenwood wants the
   game stopping" and I heard Sergeant Goddard, again who
   is very reactive, pass a message over the radio saying,
   "Stop the game, stop the game". I looked immediately
   towards the players' tunnel which is where there is
   always an Inspector or Sergeant standing for such a
   situation. I could see no movement from there at all.
   It was clear that whoever was there was not receiving
   our message and I wanted the match stopping at that
   stage and I wanted the players off the field and out of
   the way.

Q. At that point had you already seen any casualties as
   far as you can remember? - A. No, sir. It was just the
   number of people that were going on to the grass and
   actually on to the pitch.

Q. At that point the only people left in the Control Room,
   would it be right, would be you, Mr. Puckenfield,
   Sergeant Goddard, Ryan and Bichard? - A. That is right,
   yes.

Q. Because everybody else had been cleared out, so to
   speak, for various reasons? - A. Yes.

Q. In any event did you go of your own volition to stop
   the gate? - A. I started to put my coat on and grab my
   hat and Mr. Puckenfield suggested "Go down and stop it"
   and I went down. It is not very far from the Control
   Room to the pitch. I went down there and the linesman
   was running towards me as I got on to the track and I
   actually got hold of him and he just ran, he sort of
   shrugged me off. He was a big chap and ran straight
   passed me. I think he must have been intent on his
   duties. He obviously didn't realise who had got hold
   of him and as I turned round to follow him and did for
   a few paces I then saw Mr. Greenwood going on to the
   pitch and he actually went up to the referee and I went
   straight back to the Control Box.
                                                               8
                                                   il


Q. So what you are saying is that you realised that your
   objective was being achieved? - A. Yes, it was.

Q. By Superintendent Greenwood and you turned round and
   decided to go back to the Control Box. Did you mean
   anybody en route so far as you remember? - A. Not that
   I can remember, no, sir.

Q. Back up the stairs? - A. I went back up the stairs.     I
   hadn't got undressed.

Q. I am sorry? - A. I didn't take my coat off or my hat
   off. I went up. I cannot recall whether Hr. Jackson
   came in immediately behind me or whether he was in
   front of me but he was certainly there. I was only
   there for a few seconds and Hr. Duckenfield said - by
   this time people were up to the edge of the penalty
   area and a bit further - "Go down there and see if you
   can clear the people to the wings and let us find out
   what is happening".

Q. You went? - A. I went back down.

Q. Did you on the way down pause on the steps at all? - A.
   I don't know, sir, but I wouldn't have thought so. I
   just went straight back down and went on to the pitch.

Q. Where did youplace yourself? - A. I went on to the
   pitch and I started looking for Officers. As Z was
   walking I was   telling people to sort of go downto the
   wings. As it    got further on to the pitchI realised
   that a lot of people were stunned and appeared dazed.
   They obviously were not out there to spoil the match or
   anything like that. They just were standing around and
   appeared shocked. I made my way closer towards the
   goals and as I approached the fence I could then see, I
   got the full realisation, that we had a serious
   problem. I could see that the gate was covered in
   Police Officers around the gates but I could see that
   away from the gates that some people were trapped and
   they were jammed hard against the fence. It appeared
   to me that it was pressure behind them that was holding
   them there.

      As I had left the Control Room I had heard PC
  Bichard on VHF asking for an ambulance to be pot on
  standby and I realised that we had a very serious
  situation and possibly a lot of casualties. I hadn't
  got my radio. I had taken it out of my pocket to set
  when the radio went down. I wanted a radio. I wanted
  to get back to the Control R o m to tell them what was
  happening, to tell them that we wanted some ambulances.
  I saw a couple of PCs. Neither of them had radios. I
                                                           •9

                                                 B. D. MURRAY

then saw a Sergeant and went to him. I don't know who
he was. I took his radio off him. I asked Control.
They acknowledged. Sergeant Goddard acknowledged my
message. I asked him for a fleet of ambulances down to
the ground. I could also see that the people at the
back of the Leppings Lane terrace were just standing
looking out on to the field. They obviously had no
idea of what was happening. It was my impression if we
could get them to move back it might take the pressure
off the front because I thought it was just crowd
pressure that was causing these people to be jammed
against the fence. I asked for tannoy messages to be
passed on to Leppings Lane to ask the people to move
back.

    I also asked for sane bolt croppers because the
fact that the people were hard against the fence I
thought that if we had bolt croppers we might have had
a chance to cut the fence. I think that the Sergeant
whose radio I had taken said, "We have already asked
for croppers" but I can't be sure. I know I asked for
bolt croppers but afterwards I found out that someone
else had made the request as well.




                            /I sort of stood..
                                                           10
                                               B. D. MURRAY'


   I stood there for a few moments and watched. I saw
   that people were being treated on the pitch. I gave
   what help I could to one or two, made sure that
   everyone I could see was getting some help from either
   Police Officers or the fans themselves who were also
   doing what they could for the people who were injured.

   I could see that there was no movement at all still at
   Leppings Lane. I asked again on the radio, "Will you
   pass tannoy messages to the rear of Leppings Lane?
   Tell people to move back up the terrace and just
   keeping passing them". Again, I did what I could on
   the pitch and I realised that people were not moving
   back and no one was taking any notice, so I decided
   that I would have to go round the back and see if we
   could get them to move from the back of the terrace
   itself.

Q. You have told me you asked for the tannoy messages.
   Can you recollect actually hearing them yourself? - A.
   I can't, sir. I can't recollect that.

Q. You decided to go round the back? - A. Yes, I did.

Q. Which way did you go round the back? Which route did
   you use? - A. I went up the steps by the Control Box,
   on the South Stand.

Q. So you came back and then went round by the south side?
   - A. Yes, and round the south side.

Q. That takes you, of course, into the concourse area in
   the first instance? - A. Yes.

Q. When you got into the concourse area, at that point,
   anything happening in there as far as you can remember?
   - A. I don't recall seeing anything in the concourse
   area, apart from a few people. Nothing at all stuck in
   my mind. I made sty way into the tunnel and there was
   an Inspector and one or two Officers there and a number
   of people in the tunnel, just standing there. I spoke
   to the Inspector and he said, "We've got them all out".
   I don't know what he meant but he said, ''We've got them
   all out", but together we cleared the remaining people
   who were in the tunnel out of the way and I then got to
   the terraces and I have this picture that I looked
   down, although I have been a bit confused on this
   because of the video I have seen, I looked down and I
   could see that Officers were working, a lot of Officers
   were inside the pen and were working and it was clear
   at the front. I then realised that there was no
   pressure; if there had been pressure it had been
   removed, and there was no necessity to try and get that
   terrace to empty.
                                                             11

                                                 B. D. MURRAY ‘


Q. Have you been able to identify the Inspector you spoke
   to, can you remember that? - A. No, sir.

Q. We have heard of at least two Inspectors who toldus
   they were in the tunnel and if I name them to you can
   you just tell me whether you would know them, never
   mind whether these were the ones that you saw? - A.
   Yes.
Q. Do you know Inspector Sykes? - A. Yes, I know Inspector
   Sykes.
Q. You would recognise him if you saw him? - A. Yes, I
   know him very well.
Q. What about Inspector Bullas? - A. I did not know
   Inspector Bullas. When I say I don*t know which
   Inspector it was, I don*t mean it was an Inspector I
   did not know, I just cannot recall which Inspector it
   was.
Q. The purpose of my enquiry is to try and establish
   approximately what time that might have been because
   sometimes you can link it up, but you are saying there
   is no way in which you can say which Inspector it was
   that you saw? - A. I don*t know which Inspector it was.

Q. Have I understood you correctly to say that by the time
   you actually got onto the terracing, whatever might
   have been happening in the tunnel, your recollection
   seems to be that there was already space in the front?
   - A. There was.
Q. Are we talking about pen 3 or pen 4? - A. I don't know
   which pen it was. The picture I had was of people hard
   against the fence. There was no realisation in my mind
   at that time of the terrible consequences in pen 3. I
   had a picture of people trapped, and trapped because
   there was something behind that was holding them
   against the fence. As soon as I saw that the fence
   itself was reasonably clear and that there were
   Officers behind it, I then ....
Q.    When you say behind it, you mean on thepitch   side?   -
     A. No, I mean on the terrace side.
Q. This is when you were viewing itfrom the tunnel end,
   you are talking about? - A. Yes.
Q. So this is really the point I am trying to get at: are
   you saying that by the time you got to the tunnel exit,
   when you were looking at the pen from the back, that
   however they had got there, and whoever had taken them
   in, there were Officers already within .... - A.
                                                       '*

                                                              12
                                                               •   •



                                                     B. D. MURRAY'


     Officers were already on the terrace within the pen and
     were working on the pen side of the fence.

Q. So it is right that what you are saying is that you
   were definitely not the first Officer at the back
   there? - A. No, sir.

Q. Having seen that you   then retraced your steps, I
   believe? - A. Yes, I did.

Q. Did you then go back to the Control Room? - A.
   Eventually I went back.  I went onto the pitch first       of
   all; I eventually went back to the Control Room.

Q. What did you do on the pitch? - A. I wanted to make
   some contact points for the Chief Superintendent
   upstairs and I established someone at the Kop end,the
   North Stand end, and   actually sent a serial overto the
   South Stand end.

Q. When you were standing looking at the terraces from the
   rear do you remember whether you could see the
   ambulance on the track? - A. I don't think so.

Q. When you got back onto the pitch, was it there by then
   or not? - A. I don't recall seeing the ambulance until
   I was back in the Control Room.

Q. In fact, you then did go   back to the Control Room.
   What time did you get back to the Control Room, as far
   as you know? - A. I would think it would be after half-
   pas t-3.

Q. After half-past-3? - A. After half-past-3, yes.

Q. So it is right then, isn't it, that from the moment
   when you left the Control Box to stop the match, apart
   from a very short interval, you were not in it at all?
   - A. No, sir.

Q.   That is right, isn't it?    -A.   Yes, it is.

Q.    Until after half-past-3?   -A.   Until after      I went back,
     yes.




                   Q. If you could just help
                                                                      13

                                                          B.   D. MURRAY


       tha?     Sk    ^USt         Jp ®e * there 1 8 one final point on
       that. When you got back at about half-past 3 or
       whatever it was, apart from yourself who else was
       S , i J?       C o n t r o 1 Box at that time? - A. Mr.
       Duckenfield was there with the three regular Control
       operators. I think Mr. Jackson was there. Almost
       immediately I got in Mr. Duckenfield said he was going
       to see the Directors and I took over in there, and Mr
       Jackson went out shortly afterwards. I do not think *
       n e o n ? f any°ne else in there at that time, although
       people did come in from time to time after.

 Q.    Can you j u s t have a look at t h i s .   Can we put uo the
       BoxT^Thii 1 ? *1 1 5hlnk. has been Prepared of the Control
       Box? This is not a photograph. I will pass you my
       copy because it will be easier for you to look at
       Can you j u s t look a t i t .   Take your tim*?   I do not
       know whether you have ever seen this, have you? - A
       No, I have not.

Q.    All it is supposed to be is a drawing of the Control
      Box, as opposed to a photograph of it. Does that more
      or less represent it? - A. Yes, it looks about right.

            THE CORONER: We will give it a C number then.

            MR. BEECHEY:      The C number, sir, is C532.

      r^AA T? B WIT??SS:,The m a P is in front of Sergeant
      Goddard usually and not where it is shown there.

Q.         THE CORONER: Where is the map? You have got my
                a7 e?e* are not 8°od enough to read the word
      elevation           shown on the top left of the plan

           THE CORONER: Hand these out. We will give you a
      copy of these.                                  7
Q.    On the drawing it is shown opposite you? - A. It is
      normally in front of the Sergeant because he actually
      uses little indicators for the serials and pushes them
      about on the map in front of him as he deploys them.
Q.    The TV screens are above you, are they not? - A. Yes
      they are, sir.

Q.
               ar*
                 arethere? ' A * record.
                                 There are flve monitors and
      then there      two which

      .,   THE CORONER: Mr. Payne, this is just simply so
      that we have a drawing as opposed to a photograph.
      Just leave it by you in case we need it.
                                              B. D. MURRAY

              Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE;

 Superintendent Murray, the Jury last week asked a
 question about the de-briefing following the 1988
 semi-final, and I would like to start lust by
 following up that point a little, please. Following
 that event, which took place on 9th April 1988. did
 you liaise with those who were responsible for the
 various aspects of the event? - A. Yes.

 Did you obtain reports from a large number of sources?
 * A« Yes sir*

You read all those reports and eventually did you
prepare yourself a summary of the main points that
came out of it for you to deliver to Chief
Superintendent Mole? - A. Yes sir. There was very
little on the briefing sheets. The main observations
were my own.

I would like you to look at the document, please, then
in which you made that report.  (Handed) Can vou
identify your signature? - A. Yes“ sfr.

        a “®“°randuiB from yourself to Mr. Mole dated
14th May 1988? - A. Yes it is, sir.

Summarising the results of the various de-briefing
exercises? - A. Yes it is.

     ??• P^YNE: 1 wonder if copies of this can be
distributed, please. (Handed)

       MR* BEECHEY:   The C number for this document is
C 53 3 •

     MR. PApfE: Mr. Murray, I am just going to ask
you to go through this, so that the Jury have the
picture, but can I just preface it by asking you these
two questions. Of course, this document was prepared
before you had any idea of the disaster which was
going to take place the following year? - A. Of
course.

Obviously and the second obvious point is that it was
prepared for Chief Superintendent Mole as a report
certainly not with any view to it being used in
subsequent proceedings? - A. No sir. I think these
are points which were relevant to other Departments
outside the Division.

So it was not intended for publication beyond Mr.
Mole? - A. No sir.
                                           B. D. MURRAY


* thl?k Perh«P» 1C would be more convenient if I read
it. Did you say:

      I refer to the enclosed correspondence regarding
     the above event"?

If necessary, we have got the enclosed correspondence
here and it consists of a batch of memoranda passing
between various Officers, summarising their
observations on the event? - A. Yes.

That is what you were referring to? - A. Yes.
Did you say:

     I have liaised with the Officers concerned with
    the preparation, control and supervision of the
    above event and we have noted locally the lessons
    that were learned and the improvements that can
    be made for any similar future event"?

           at tha? tlme» interposing, you did not know
that there was going to be another event next year? -
A. No sir.                                    J

     Generally I was well satisfied with the event
    and I will confine this report to matters which
    affect the Force Operations Room and Road Traffic
    Department.

    COMMUNICATIONS

    On the day more use than normal was made of the
    radio link between ground control at Hillsborough
    and the Operations Room in attempting to contact
    t™2Se Unlts e<JulPPed wlth both ground control and
    UHF radio. This was entirely due to difficulties
    in personal radio transmissions which were
    affected for most of the event by breakthrough
    from local radio. The Superintendent
    (Communications) is aware of this and an
    immediate survey of the equipment was made after
    the event, but the fault could not be traced.
    TRAFFIC FLOW AND CONTROL

    Transmissions in relation to problems with
    traffic, from mobile units and the spotter plane
    were being received at Operations Room and were
    not monitored at ground control. It seems
    sensible to me that for future 'semis' all
    m®tters relating to the control and movement of
    traffic should be supervised by Operations Room,
    with the exception of the local arrangements made
                                                       16

                                           B. D. MURRAY

     Immediately outside the ground when the final
     whistle is blown.

     FOOTBALL TRAFFIC SIGNS

     Purpose made signs have been requested in the
     past, but for financial reasons have not been
     approved. Such signs are extremely beneficial
     and it is pleasing to note that Superintendent
     Brougham is looking into this aspect.

     SEARCHING OF COACHES FOR ALCOHOL ABUSE ETC.

     The effect of alcohol on football supporters i s
     well known and I would not wish to see any
     relaxation of enforcement of the laws relating to
     the carriage of alcohol on coaches etc. It is
     appreciated that this can cause some traffic
     congestion, but surveys are being carried out on
     the major roads approaching the city to establish
     where this can be carried out to cause minimum
     inconvenience to traffic flows.

     CLOSE CIRCUIT TV LINK WITH WADSLEY BRIDGE STATION

     A TV monitor was sited in the control room giving
     pictures from Wadsley Bridge Railway Station.
     This monitor took up valuable room in the control
     area and was of little use and I would not wish
     such a system to be implemented in the future."

That is your signature, is it, Mr. Murray, at the
bottom? - A. Yes sir.




                               /Q. Are those the ...
                                                             I7
                                                              •   •



                                                  B. D.MURRAY '


Q. Are those the matters which you felt worthy of recording
   after the event and after the briefings which you had
   received from other Officers? - A* They were the matters
   that really affected other departments, other than the
   sub-division.   I think I have already said there that
   apart from the local lessons, there were also these we
   should address our minds to.

Q. I want to ask you a series of questions.   First as to
   the state of mind of yourself before the disaster.   Do
   you follow?   We are going back now to put yourself in
   the frame of mind you were immediately before the
   terrible event took place. Did you believe at that time
   that the ground was safe to be used for its full
   certified capacity? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you believe that in the event of an emergency on the
   Leppings Lane terrace, that terrace could be safely
   evacuated? - A. Yes, I did.

Q. Following the 1987 semi-final and the 1988 semi-final,
   were you aware of any report having been made by anyone,
   meaning from the Officer Working Party or the ground
   safety engineer, or either of the football clubs who
   attended, or their management, were you aware of any
   report from those people to warn you of the risk of
   serious overcrowding on the Leppings Lane terraces? - A.
   No, sir.

Q. Did anyone from that group of people or the Football
   Association or anyone else, make any adverse comment
   about the system of policing which was used in 1987 and
   1988? - A. Not that I am aware of, sir.

Q. Likewise, after those semi-finals or at any time before
   the disaster were you aware of any criticism being made
   by any of those people to the effect that the layout of
   the ground was not safe? - A. No, sir.

Q. Did you yourself believe that the policing system which
   had been used in 1987 and 1988 had produced a successful
   result? - A. I had certainly seen it in 1988 and yes, it
   was successful.

Q. Did you believe it wassafe to follow the same system in
   1989? - A. I think it was obvious tofollow the same
   system because of the authors of it.

Q. Now come to the event itself please.    At the time of the
   first order of the opening of the gates, which included
   the opening of Gate C, at that time was it obvious to you
   there was a risk of injury by crushing to people in pens
   3 and 4? - A. I think what I had to do was rely on the
   experience of the Officers who were out there.   There
                                                            18
                                                            •    «



                                                  B.' D.MURRAY '


  was Superintendent Marshall.   There were also Officers
  who policed that area of Leppings Lane every week, every
  match.   I could not see what was happening.   I had to
  take heed of their demands, their advice and their
  requirements and that is what I did.

Q. From your position in the Control Room, with the view you
   had from the Control Room, and the television screens you
   had within the room, was it obvious to you there was a
   risk of injury to people in those pens at that time? - A.
   In pens 3 and 4?

Q. Yes, at the time of the opening of the gates? - A. No.

Q. Here is a question which I have to ask you:  were you
   indifferent to the risk of injury to people in pens 3 and
   4? - A. Absolutely not, sir, no.

Q. One last matter of fact, please.   Within the Control Box
   one of the screens showed you a view of the Leppings Lane
   approach and Leppings Lane turnstiles? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You have been asked about whether you saw certain
   Inspectors at a later stage when, after the disaster had
   taken place, you went round to the back of the stand to
   try and help relieve the pressure from the back.   I want
   to ask you about those Inspectors at a slightly earlier
   stage, at a time before the gates were ordered to be
   opened.   Did you see at that time outside the ground a
   number of Inspectors who were attempting to deal with the
   congestion that had built up? -A. I do not think I saw
   any particular Officer who I could identify outside the
   ground.

       MR. ISAACS:     Do you want to pause now, sir, before
  I start?

       THE CORONER:     Yes, very well.

                      (Short adjournment)

               Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:

Q. Mr. Murray, I would like to ask you questions and split
   up the questions I am going to ask you into a number of
   sections in the way that Mr. Payne has been doing
   throughout the course of these Inquests.   If I could
   start off with your experience, please, and particularly
   your experience of controlling football games at
   Hillsborough.   You told us you started a few weeks
   before the 1988 semi-final? -A. That is correct.

Q. You started there in the Control Box? - A. Yes, I did.
                                                             19
                                                              *   •


                                                    B.' P.MURRAY


Q. You did not have many games before the 1988 final? - A.
   Two*

Q. Was anybody in the Control Box with you on those
   occasions? - A. Apart from the regular Control Room staff
   I don't think so,» sir.             j*


Q. For the semi-final itself you tell us that Mr. Calvert
   was there? - A. Yes, he was.

Q. Why was that? - A. I presume Mr. Mole had asked Inspector
   Calvert to work with me because he knew the ground and
   the system and had been there many years.

Q. So to give you some assistance, recognising that you were
   perhaps at that stage somewhat short on experience? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Was Mr. Calvert on that occasion of some assistance to
   you? - A. As far as I can recall, yes.

Q. We know that was an all-ticket game? - A. Yes.

Q. Between then and the 1989 semi-final were there other
   all-ticket games, as far as you can recall? - A. There
   were none.

Q. However, there were, I assume, a number of large capacity
   games? - A. There were games, I think, with 30,000-plus.

Q. Could you help us approximately how many games there may
   have been with 30,000-plus that you were in the Control
   Room for? - A. It is purely a guess but I would think
   perhaps three or four.

Q. On every game that you were in the Control Room for,
   between 1988 and 1989 semi-finals, it would be unlikely
   that Mr. Mole would be in the Control Room on those
   occasions when he was in fact overall Commander? - A. He
   did not take up a position permanently.   He always came
   up from time to time.

Q. But not in the textbook position as you have described
   Mr. Duckenfield's position in 1989? - A. No, sir.

Q. We know there were a number of games when he did not
   attend the match at all?   He left it entirely to you? -
   A. I think there were about three or four, perhaps.

Q. So far as the role you were playing was concerned,
   according to Mr. Mole it did not change even when he was
   there because you would still have the responsibility for
   making various operational decisions? - A. Yes, that is
   correct. -      v                        ......
                                                               20

                                                        p-   mm y
Q. As long as your decisions were within your operational
   responsibility you would not need, even i£ he was
   there, to 9 0 back to him to ask his permission to do
   something? - A. Ho.

Q. One of the things that you would have responsibility
   for doing and the ability to do without asking his
   permission was to move men from one place to another as
   you felt fit? - A. Yes.

Q. I think Mr. Mole in his evidence, in answer to the
   Coroner, described what he took to be your relative
   responsibilities in the context of a major decision
   which if he was there you would not be able to make
   yourself and which you would have to defer to him, for
   example, an evacuation on a bomb scare? - A. Yes.

Q. Were you here when he gave that evidence? - A. I can't
   recall it.

Q. Let me try and remind you of it. What he said
   effectively was this; "I, Mr. Mole, would    be   theone to
   make the decision as to whether to evacuate, the major
   decision, but then I would leave it up to Mr. Murray or
   whoever was taking Mr. Murray's job at that time who
   would then take consequential decisions". Do you
   follow what I mean? - A. Yes, I do.

Q. Do you agree with that? - A. Yes, I do.

Q. That is something that he would expect to be able   to
   do? - A. Yes.

Q. Come 1989 you were involved in the Operational Order
   and the preparation of it? - A. Yes.

Q. We have seen today the memo that was produced C.533? -
   A. Yes.

Q. The one that Mr. Payne has just put to you. Can you
   help me, Mr. Murray, why was it you who prepared this
   memo to Mr. Mole? - A. I don't recall preparing it
   actually but I did. It has obviously got my signature
   on. It was just problems that I had identified in this
   particular memo that were not addressed to Officers of
   my Subdivision working the match but were addressed to
   other agencies such as the Road Traffic Division, the
   Operations Room, the Communications Officer.

Q. I am sorry, the question was a poor one. I did not
   really mean what was the purpose of the memo but why
   was it you who was the Officer who was actually sending
   this memo? Why you as opposed to one of the other
                                                          •     ‘ 21

                                                      B. P. MURRAY

     Officers, for example, Mr. Greenwood, Mr. Marshall, or
     Mr. Chapman, or whoever other Officer was on duty as a
     Superintendent on the day in 1988? - A. The ground was
     on my Subdivision. The Liaison Officer was one of my
     Officers.. The debrief sheets and the information would
     come into our central office.

Q. So you had this role which was, as it were, directly
   responsible to Mr. Mole, would that be fair, for these
   matters? - A. For ordinary matches, yes. For ordinary
   matches I would look on myself as Mr. Mole's deputy.
   For a Semi Final I think it was somewhat different.

Q. You say I think in this memo that you were satisfied:

         "Generally I was well satisfied with the
         event."

     and you go on under traffic flow and control:

         "It seemed sensible to me."

     Here you were giving advice to Mr. Mole as to your
     findings following the observations that had been made
     to you and your view of the event? - A. Yes, that is
     fair.

Q. Superintendent, when Mr. Mole effectively agreed to the
   carrying out of the 1989 game, he asked you to liaise
   once again with the planning team? - A. Yes.

Q. Why was that? - A. When I say he asked us, he saw us
   altogether. Be saw us altogether and said, "We will go
   ahead as last year".

Q.    So what part did you play in the planning of the event?
     - A. I overlooked the order. I sort    ofexamined it
     when it had been prepared.

Q. You examined it in the light of your experience of
   1988, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. And your experience of controlling football games at
   Hillsborough from 1988 through to 1989? - A. Yes.

Q. Both those where Mr. Mole had been on the scene and
   those where you had been controlling the game
   completely by yourself? - A. Yes.

Q.   You were happy with it? - A. Yes.
                                                             22
                                                    B. D. MURRAY

Q. You were aware, I assume, or you became aware that Mr.
   Duckenfield was going to take Mr. Mole's job on the
   Division? - A. Yes, I did.

Q. One of the consequences of that meant that he would be
   the Chief Superintendent in overall control on the date
   of the Semi Final? - A. Yes.

Q. It is important not to forget that, of course, being
   the Chief Superintendent for the Division it means a
   lot more than merely being in control for a football
   game? - A. Very much so, yes.

Q. You were also aware at that time that unlike Mr. Mole
   he did not have years of experience of policing
   Hillsborough? - A. He certainly didn't have the recent
   experience that Mr. Mole had.

Q. And certainly not as an overall Commander? - A. No.

Q. You were aware that the expertise of yourself, Mr.
   Greenwood, Mr. Marshall, Mr. Chapman, and indeed the
   Inspectors under you were so far as Mr. Mole were
   concerned, a very important part of the operational
   plan. That is right, is it not? - A. Yes, I am sure.
   It is very much a team effort.

Q. Anything that Mr. Duckenfield lacked in experience
   could hopefully be made up for by the exceptional
   experience in the team that he had working with him? -
   A. Yes.

Q. In 1989 you were the Control Room Commander, if I can
   put it that way? - A. Yes.

Q. How would you describe your role so far as your
   relationship with Mr. Duckenfield was concerned then? -
   A. I saw my role as being sort of monitoring the event
   as a whole, being responsible for the reception and the
   transmission of all radio communications and saw myself
   as adviser to Mr. Duckenfield.

Q. Because there would from time to time no doubt be
   decisions that he might have to make which would
   require your advice based on your experience? - A. I
   feel that is fair, yes.

Q. Just as with Mr. Mole you would and could make
   decisions which were within your responsibility without
   referring them to Mr. Duckenfield, if there came a
   decision that Mr. Duckenfield had to make which was not
   within your responsibility you, once again, would be
   able to make consequential decisions. Do you follow
                                                               23

                                                      B*-P« MURRAY

   what I mean by that? - A. Yes, from time to time.
   Decisions are being made all of the time. Some of them
   it would be necessary perhaps to refer afterwards to
   the match Commander for his information. Occasionally
   a decision would be necessary to refer to before it was
   made to the match Commander.

Q. Those sort of decisions, for example, would be a
   decision to delay the kick-off? - A. I think so.

Q. One where you would expect to have considerable input?
   - A. Yes.

Q. You would expect your view to be listened to very
   carefully indeed? - A. Yes.

Q. Similarly any other decision which went outside the
   terms of the Operational Order? - A. I think those
   decisions and those that obviously were coming from a
   Sector Commander, if a Superintendent on the ground,
   all of whom were senior to me and were more experienced
   than I was probably, were to ask for a particular
   course of action to be taken, I don't think it would be
   my decision to overrule them or to agree with them.

Q. Save for this; let us just take the closure of
   Leppings Lane to traffic? - A. Yes.

Q. That was one that was   taken effectively by Mr.
   Marshall. Be was not    asking for permission to do that,
   as I understand it? -   A. No, he was saying, "We have
   got to close Leppings   Lane".

Q. As a result he puts the message through to Control and
   you take the necessary steps? - A. That is right.

Q. Because that was something that was within his sphere
   of operational responsibility? - A. Yes.

Q. Can I ask you about the event? We have heard you tell
   us where Mr. Duckenfield was. From your recollection,
   and if we look at the plan that was produced, 532, the
   only sensible available space to him would be where you
   said that you recall him being which was alongside
   Police Constable Bichard? - A. Yes, I cannot recall
   where he was for different times, I have no idea, but
   it would be reasonable for him to be, if I can look at
   this plan, from time to time where it says "bins and
   buckets", where it says "a fire extinguisher" and
   actually behind that standing next to PC Bichard.
Q. Around that area? - A. Yes.
                                                                24

                                                     if p»m a
Q* At half past two, Mr. Murray, there was conversation
   between the two of you as to whether you would oet the
   crowd in? - A. Yes.

Q.    Would it   be fair to say that that was a     conversation
     that was very largely one of routine? - A. I think so.

Q.    The sort   of thing that would be said at     most games,
     "Well, Bernard" - and I do not know whether he called
     you Bernard - A. Yes.

Q. Perhaps in front of the other men he called you
   Superintendent Murray, I do not know? - A. No, he would
   call me by my Christian name.

Q. "Do you think we are going to get them in?" - A. Yes.

Q. That sort of question would not suggest to you, would
   it, that there was Mr. Duckenfield concerned at that
   time as to whether he would get them in but it would be
   a routine sort of matter that would be discussed? - A.
   Yes, I think I was looking at the crowd and I could see
   the size of the crowd. I think I said to him as a
   matter of course, "There is a good crowd out there but
   we will get them in for three o'clock".

Q. In fairness, Mr. Murray, as between the two of you, you
   were the man who had the experience over a year or so
   of the likelihood or the speed at which you would get a
   crowd in for three o'clock? - A. Yes.

Q. In those circumstances Mr. Duckenfield would have been
   very foolish, would he not, to be saying to you,
   "Despite your experience I think you are wrong"? - A.
   Possibly.

Q. In any event, you certainly did not see any reason to
   be concerned at about the time that conversation took
   place? - A. No, I didn't.

Q. Similarly there was a conversation about delaying the
   kick-off? - A. Yes.




                                     /Q. Again the sort of...
                                                        B. D. MURRAY*


Again, the so r t of conversation as between C ontroller
and o v e r a ll Commander which may w e ll be regarded as
routine? - A. Yes.
E specially in circumstances where the o v era ll Commander
has not been doing the job very long? - A. Yes.
"Just remind me, Bernard, of the way we do th ese so rt
of things"? - A. That i s r ig h t .
I t was not a c a se , was i t , o f there being any r e a l
consideration a t that time towards delaying the kick-
o f f at about h a lf-p a s t-2 ? I t j u s t wasn t a risin g ? - A.
I don't think the question had a risen then. I think i t
was probably a mind c r o ssin g e x e r c ise o f g e ttin g i t
rig h t in h is mind as to what we had sa id .
What you were saying was no d if f e r e n t from what you
understood the p o s itio n would be under Mr. Mole? - A.
I t was the c r i t e r i a , i f you l i k e , that I had in h erited
from Mr. Mole or asked Mr. Mole about.
But there was no doubt between the two of you that i f
those c r i t e r i a required s a fe ty to be taken in to
account, the sa fety o f people e ith e r within or outwith
the Ground, then that would play a very important part
in any d e c isio n that was going to be made? - A. There
were not any r u le s . There was nothing w ritten down, or
nothing that had to be adhered to; i t was j u s t what we
had discussed and what we had agreed.
Just so that there i s no misunderstanding about t h i s ,
so that no one thinks there was any r ig id r u le , what
you seemed to have been d isc u ssin g a t that sta g e was a
situ a tio n where, fo r g e ttin g any questions of s a f e t y ,
the only matter was whether people would be able to get
in on time to see the game, and in those circumstances,
i f i t was th e ir own f a u l t , then in a way tough luck.
I f i t wasn't then other con sid eration s may apply
towards delaying the k ic k - o f f , but considerations of
sa fety weren t entering in to that particu lar balance,
were they, a t that stage? - A. Not a t that s ta g e . I t
seemed s e n s ib le that i f people could not get to the
event the k ic k -o ff would be delayed.
Certainly a t that sta g e there was nothing that was
being reported to you, and th erefore to Mr.
Duckenfield, from o u tsid e which suggested that there
would be any r is k to any fan or member of the p u b lic ,
so far as s a fe ty was concerned? - A. No.
I t became very clea r i f I may say so , Mr. Murray,
during the course of your evidence, that the c r i s i s
                                                                          26
                                                                           • «

                                                             B. D. MURRAY *


   s itu a tio n came upon the Control Box very suddenly.                Now
   would th at be right? - A. I am sure i t was, y e s .
Q. Had Mr. Marshall, before he made the request for
   reinforcem ents, so to speak, made c le a r to you what
   d i f f i c u l t i e s he was ex p erien cin g, or did that come out
   of the blue? - A. We could se e obviously from the
   Control Room that there was a large crowd o f people in
   the Leppings Lane.
Q. Yes, but that i s what you would expect? - A. But the
   fa ct th at people were in great d is t r e s s did come as a
   surp rise.
Q. Yes. There i s a l l the d iffe r e n c e in the world between,
   l e t us c a l l i t a p u blic order s it u a t io n where you
   expect the Commander o u tsid e to be dealing with i t , and
   a s it u a t io n where he i s t e l l i n g you, "People are going
   to die out here". Would you agree with that? - A.
   A bsolutely.
Q. Between h is f i r s t request for reinforcements and the
   f i r s t request that the g a te s be opened, there was t h i s ,
   I was going to say d i f f i c u l t y , more than d i f f i c u l t y - I
   am not sure how you described i t f i r s t o f a l l , but the
   problem with the radios? - A. Yes, the problem with the
   radio, I think I described i t as d ev a sta tin g , which i t
   was.
Q. That was the word I was looking fo r . Could we j u s t go
   through why i t was devastating? F ir s t of a l l , radio
   t r a f f i c was disrupted for a period? - A. Yes, i t was.
Q. That meant that people who j u s t had normal messages to
   pass to you, never mind emergency messages, could not
   get through? - A. Well, c e r t a in ly we couldn’ t answer
   anybody. The main one was that we could not answer
   anyone and anyone who c a lle d up would get no
   acknowledgments, and so would probably c a l l again and
   again, and the a ir would very quickly become congested.
Q. And what was happening when the a ir became congested -
   so f iv e or s ix O fficers were sending messages through
   at the same time? - A. Yes.
Q. What s o r t of n o ise would that crea te w ithin the Control
   Room? - A. I t i s not so much the n o is e , i t i s the
   d is t o r t io n . I t i s b i t s o f a message would get through
   and b it s o f another message would g et through.
Q. That i s what you meant, so you are g e ttin g b it s and
   pieces which make no sense a t a l l? - A. Yes.
                                                       B. D. MURRAY'


T his, of course, i s d is t r a c t in g to those in s id e the
Control Room, but in add ition there was a disruption in
the f a c i l i t y to a c tu a lly send messages out once the
thing had been halfway f ix e d , as I understand it? - A.
Yes. I t was f ix e d , was the id e a , but i t w asn't. I t
s t i l l d id n 't work a f t e r i t had been fix e d the f i r s t
time.
So we then move from being a b le to use the proper
equipment. You have got the standby equipment and then
that has to be r e je c te d , and you are on a hand held
radio, the same as any o f the ordinary PCs who may have
had one? - A. That i s c o r r e c t. I think one cannot
under-estimate the a ctu a l p h y sic a l e f f e c t in the
Control Room when everyone has to move, and the radio
operator has to g et under the desk. In f a c t , I think
that Sergeant Goddard fin is h e d up in my chair and I
fin ish ed up standing behind P.C. Ryan, as a r e s u lt o f
the d isru ption.
What i s the disadvantage - i t may be obvious- o f the
Control Box only being able to use the same hand held
radio as the ordinary s e r ia l? - A. When we have the
proper powered s e t , we can o v e r r id e , in theory, anyone
e l s e who i s transm itting a message, so i f we want to
send an urgent message out and someone e l s e i s
transm itting in , our sig n a l w i l l overrid e th e ir sig n a l
to the person th at we want to r e c e iv e i t . I f we are in
the s itu a tio n o f using the hand held r a d io s, then
everyone i s competing for the same s ig n a l; we may lo s e
out to other s t a t io n s .
We then, as I understand i t , g e t a message coming
through from Mr. Marshall, the f i r s t s e t , for the gates
to be opened? - A. Yes.
You to ld the Coroner, a lb e it that i t was out of
sequence, that a t that time Mr. Bichard saw that the
gate had, in f a c t , been opened. L e t's not worry about
how i t was opened for the moment, but j u s t at the time
when Mr. M arshall's message - request - was coming
through, he saw on the video, on the screen , the gate
opening? - A. I t was a f t e r . I t must have been a f t e r .
I can only assume, and I don 't want to assume, but for
some reason P.C. Bichard zeroed in , i f you l i k e , on
that p a rticu la r g a te . I t was a f t e r the f i r s t request
had come in and I heard him say, "The g a t e ' s gone", or
"The g a t e 's burst".
I think that was i t , "The g a t e ' s burst". So what we
have i s t h i s , there i s a request from Mr. Marshall
asking for the gate to open which came out o f the blue?
- A. Yes.
                                                                         28

                                                            B. D. MURRAY '


Q. Because that was a request which was wholly contrary to
   the p o licy or the p r a c tic e o f p o lic in g a f o o t b a ll game?
   - A. I t was a unique re q u e st. We had made tannoy
   messages and s e n t resources round and extra h o rses, but
   the request fo r the gate to be opened was unheard o f .
Q. I t had changed from a p u b lic order s it u a t io n o u tsid e to
   something com pletely d if f e r e n t ? - A. I t had changed to
   a l i f e or death s it u a t io n o u tsid e .
Q. A short time t h e r e a f t e r , and i t would appear to be a
   matter of seconds more than anything e l s e from what you
   are saying, P.C. Bichard se e s the gates burst open? -
   A. I honestly d o n 't know the tim escale, s i r , but a f t e r
   the f i r s t request had come in .
Q. Up to the time when the gate i s seen to burst open no
   d ecisio n has been made, that i s q u ite r ig h t , that i s
   co rrect, i s n ' t i t ? - A. That i s c o r r e c t, y e s.
Q. After the gate burst open the           s itu a tio n seems to be
   retrieved in t h a t , as we have       seen on the video, a
   mounted P o lice O ffic e r comes,      c lo se s o f f the in flow of
   people, and the gate i s shut?          - A. Yes, that i s
   co rrect.
Q. May I ask you t h i s , at that stage did i t go through
   your mind, "Well, a t l e a s t we don't have to make the
   d ecision as to whether to open the gate or not now,
   because i t i s q u ite c le a r that the gate d oesn't need
   opening, otherw ise the s it u a t io n would not have been
   retrieved in the way i t has. Mr. Marshall wouldn't
   have organised the c lo su r e o f the gate". Did anything
   lik e that go through your mind? - A. I don't know, s i r .
Q. Certainly that may w e ll have appeared to be the c a s e ,
   may i t not? Request to open the g a te, gate opens, but
   O fficer on the spot a c tu a lly causes the gate to be
   clo sed , suggesting that whatever had required the gate
   to be opened in the f i r s t p la ce had passed? - A. That
   is a p o s s ib ility .
Q. But then in the midst o f the mayhem that you have been
   describing in the Control Room with the radio, Mr.
   Marshall's request comes again? - A. Yes.
Q. Would i t be f a i r to say that on th is occasion i t wasn't
   so much o f a req u est as an order? - A. To me the f i n a l
   one was a demand.
Q. And i t sounded desperate? - A. There was no
   a lte r n a tiv e .
                                                                       29

                                                         B. D. MURRAY ‘


Q. Did you f e e l that you had any time to delay? - A. Not
   a f t e r that l a s t req uest. I f e l t We had to do something
   there and then.
Q. That was because people, he s a id , were going to be
   k i l l e d u n less i t was done? - A. Yes.
Q. You said to the Coroner, I think on Friday, "My own
   d ecisio n was that we had no more time”? - A. Yes.
Q. But again you were aware th at i t was a d ecisio n which
   was unprecedented so fa r as p o lic in g a fo o tb a ll game
   was concerned? - A. Yes, i t was.
Q. Mr. Duckenfield did not make a d e c isio n immediately,
   did he? A matter o f a number of seconds passed - I say
   seconds, as opposed to m inutes. - A. Yes, as far as I
   can r e c a l l .
Q. Do you r e c a l l t h i s , that you asked him on two, perhaps
   th ree, o cca sio n s, "Mr. Duckenfield, are we going to
   open the gates?" - something l i k e that? - A. I
   c e r ta in ly asked him, y e s .
Q. And on the third occasion , I suggest, he then agreed
   and sa id , "We must open the gates", or words to that
   e f f e c t ? - A. I don’ t r e c a l l asking him several times.
Q. Are you saying only once or are you saying i t could be
   two or three times? - A. I f e e l i t was only once.




             Q. Very w e ll.   Had he not
                                                                           30
                                                                 D» B. MURRAY


    Q* htl7 W6i 1 \ ?ad he not “ade that d e c is io n , you would
       have made it? - A. I don't know, I can only apeculate.
             a wa^*    was fo rtu n a te that i t was not Mr. Mole
          who was in command on that day because Mr. Mole could
          have been anywhere? - A. I f the match Ground Commander
          had not been in the Control Room, I would have asked
          him to attend there*
    Q.    And with the radio d i f f i c u l t i e s ? - A. I t i s very
          l i k e ly that we co u ld n 't have got hold o f him.
Q.       Superintendent Murray, I c e r t a in ly am not going to be
         c r i t i c i s i n g anybody for the d e c isio n to open the
         gates. Mr. Duckenfield was the one who gave the order
         and, apart from Mrs. McBrien, I have not heard anybody
         a c tu a lly at t h is Inquest c r i t i c i s e the opening o f the
         g a te s. Had you, being there l i s t e n i n g to the d ecisio n
         being made to open the g a t e s , considered - and we know
         you did not consider i t because you have answered Mr.
         Payne a question - that there was any serio u s r isk to
         the fans on the Leppings Lane terrace as a r e s u lt o f
         the d e c is io n to open the g a te s, would you have done
         something about i t ? - A. I am sorry, I l o s t you h a lf­
         way through the q u e stio n .
Q.       Let me try and exp lain i t again. You told Mr. Payne
         that you did not con sid er that there was any r is k of
         injury to those in the c e n tr a l pens as a r e s u lt o f
         opening the gates? - A. Yes, I d id n 't think about that
         at a ll*

Q.       You to ld him, and I accept i t unequivocally, that you
         were not in d iffe r e n t to any r is k o f injury to those
         people. What I am asking you i s t h i s . Had you
         considered that there was a r is k to the people on the
         Leppings Lane terrace in Pens 3 and 4 as a r e s u lt o f
         the d e c isio n to open the g a te s , what would you have
         done? - A. Of course I hadn't considered i t .
Q.       You would have done something about i t , would you not’
         - A. One moment, s i r .
               THE CORONER: Take your time.
               THE WITNESS:      Of course.
Q*                ISAACS: Of course you would have done
         something about i t . - A. Yes.
Q        Are you a l l right? - A.      Yes
                                                                         31
                                                             D. B. MURRAY

            MR. ISAACS: I should have said all these
           :ions Mr. Murray Is not obliged to -----
       does do and I am grateful for doing so.

       You would have had, would you n o t, f u l l au th ority to
       do whatever you considered necessary at that stage to
             anL r ls k to anYbody 1° the ground as a r e s u lt o f
       opening the gates? - A. Yes.                                ox
 Q.    In the same way as Mr. Mole was t e l l i n g us had he made
       the d e c is io n there should be an evacuation as a r e s u lt
       o f a bomb scare and you would have taken consequential
       d e c is io n s , in t h i s s it u a t io n you had the authority to
       do what you considered to be necessary? - A. Yes I
       would have.                                                     * A

 Q.    You would not have needed Mr. Duckenfield to t e l l you
       what to do? - A. No, I wouldn't.
Q.    Is t h i s the p o s it io n , Mr. Murray? In the c r i s i s that
       aced the Control Room at that time, everybody was
                    ! r Yes
      with i t ? - A.   5s you s i r .could s e e » th e lr best to deal

Q*                      w*th hindsight one can put forward things
      i 3            *u?r should» or ®ight have been done, but
      had those th in gs occurred to you at the time in the
      c r i s i s you would have done them? - A. Of course.
      -4 . J®* JSAACS: Thank you very much indeed. Perhaps,
      sir, that is a convenient moment to have a break.

      ia         CORONER: I think that w i l l be a very good
      idea.    We w i l l break for 10 minutes.
                          (Short Adjournment)

                    Cross-Examined bv MR. KTNfl?
Q.    Mr. Murray, you were Ground Control? - A. Yes.
Q.    And in o v e r a ll command there was Mr. Duckenfield? - A.
      Xc8 •

Q.    Can I j u s t for the moment deal with the r o le o f
      CommandingOfficers g e n e r a lly , rather than
      « i 8^ ? f UJ?hing*betWeen the two o f y°u for the moment
      the              °f,qUe8ti0n8- * wi11 di* tin g u is h between
      wh** ™         7     ? a moment- I ju s t want to understand
      n S il       are sayin 8 a» to the function o f Command
      Ym,          k* 8 f? otba11 8ame» or indeed a t any event.
      You have beneath you a number o f more junior O ffic e r s,
                                                              D. B. HURRAY

  A ll the way down to people at ground le v e l? - A. Yes.
  Would you accept that the Command has o v era ll
  r e s p o n s ib ilit y on th e ir shoulders for an event which
  they are in charge of? - A. Yes.
 You would not expect Command, i f something goes wrong
 simply to say, -W ell, i t must be down to t h f O f f ic e ? ! '
 at ground l e v e l and nothing to do with me"? That
 would not b e a correct approach in p r in c ip le , would
 it?   A. That would not be my approach.
 I ju st wanted to get that out o f the way. We have
          8 I?1 of ®mPhasis p u t, not only through your
 evidence but through other more senior O ffic e r s, on
 what they could expect o f more junior O ffic e r s. Now
 o f ’ hfS*? a 3unior O fficer know what i s to be expected
 o f him in the o v e r a ll scheme o f a f f a i r s at an event
 such as t h is , p o lic in g t h i s fo o tb a ll match? How does
 he know what i s expected o f him? - A. There i s a
             aa! U2 ! ^ f d e le 8a t io n , a ce r ta in amount o f
           8      d if f e r e n t people on th e ir r o le . As P o lic e
 a l l O fficers       expect a high l e v e l o f i n i t i a t i v e from

But i n i t i a t i v e comes in to play u su a lly when a problem
has already a r is e n , does i t n o t, that i s when
        * * ? comes in to play? - A. I think i t cornea in to
       3 7
play dealing with everything as a P olice O fficer.
But in order to avert problems a r is in g , you have f i r s t
vnn
you not? - A. Slan
              Yes, a!?ead
                   that i sf o rr igphotte
                                         . n tia l problems, have

         h a o L f 0 t
Commanding   O ffic e r ts,0 mthat
                               ake 8 u r e
                                   people  i n  y o u r ow n ®i n d » a s
                                               on   the ground know
where they have to be and what th e ir r o le is ? - A
Yes.                                                                  *

A Commanding O ffic e r , even i f he i s new in the
Command, would ex p e c t, would he n o t, to have to
acquaint him self with what h is junior O fficers were
expected to be doing? He would have to acquaint
him self in advance with what that was, would he not? -
A. I would think so .

B riefin gs in t h is context o f the junior O fficers are
S13S2S:are*heynot?'A-Yes>thebrlefio*s
              ?0?in? OoSe c i f i £a l l y t0 the p o lic in g o f the
semi f in a l in 1989, so f a r , and you may be able to
disabuse u s, we have heard no evidence that any
s p e c if ic b rie fin g was given to any O fficer as regards
                                                              33
                                                     P. B. MURRAY

       a duty to monitor the crowds on the Leppings Lane
       terraces for overcrowding. Can you confirm from your
       knowledge that is the case, is it not? - A. I do l i t
       think a specific briefing was given to anybody from my
       knowledge. I don't know about the briefings that were
       carried on below me.

 Q.    You can only speak, as everybody else can, of your
       knowledge? - A. Yes.

             right, is it not, that you were acquainted with
       the Operational Order? - A. Yes, I was.

 Q.    You would, therefore, know from the Operational Order
       what specifically was required of individual serials,
       that is right, is it not? - A. I would have a good
       idea. I don t know what every serial is doing
       probably without reference to the Order.

Q.    No but you, as I understand it, were part of the
      planning team? - A. Yes, I oversaw the planning team.

Q.    Did you read through the Operational Order? - A. Yes I
      did.

Q.    I have got to find somebody who did. - A. Yes I did.

Q.    Did you assess the duties of the individual serials as
      you went through it, to see if they complied with what
      you would expect of them? - A. I would think so, yes.

Q.    Did Mr. Duckenfield have a copy of the Operational
      Order? - A. As far as I am aware, yes.

Q.    Was Mr. Duckenfield at any of these pre-semi-final
      meetings which we have heard of in 1989? - A. I think
      he was at them all apart from the original one on the
      day that the semi-final was announced.

Q.    That is 20th March? - A. The 20th and the 21st, I
      think.

Q.    I think after the 20th there were a number of meetings
      - tell me if I am wrong? There was a meeting on 22nd
      March at Hammerton Road Police Station? - A. Yes
      there was.                                       *

Q.    There was a meeting on 29th March? - A. Yes.

Q.    A meeting on 5th April? - A. As far as I am aware,
      yes.                                             *

Q.    I think there was a specific one you have a
      recollection of on 10th April with Mr. Duckenfield in
                                                             34
                                                P. B. MURRAY

      particular when there was discussion as to contingency
      arrangements as regards the end of the game and
      supporters possibly coming together and flash points?
      - A. Probably, sir, yes.

Q.    There was another meeting with the Club and Mr.
      Sewell, was there not, on 13th April? - A. I don’t
      think Mr. Duckenfield would be at that meeting.

Q.   All right, but you were at the 13th April meeting? -
     A. Myself and Inspector Sewell was.

Q.   But up to the 13th April meeting, as far as you can
     recall, Mr. Duckenfield would be at all those? - A.
     Yes, apart from the first one.

Q.   It is not a case of the Commanding Officer here being
     in blissful ignorance of what the Operational Order
     contained? - A. No, I feel he knew, or I assume he
     knew what the Order contained.

Q.   Very good. You can confirm this, can you not, that as
     regards the serial concerning the West Stand serial -
     all right? - A. Yes.

Q.   They had written into their Order that they had to be
     particularly vigilant to prevent people climbing up
     into the West Stand from the terrace, did they not? -
     A. Yes, they did.

Q.   I* it helps, by all means turn to it. - A. Yes they
     did, I recall that.

Q.   Have you got it in front of you? - A. Yes, I have it
     in front of me.

Q.   You can be helpful to me because my mind is not
     working properly, what serial is that? - A. That is
     Serial 13, Sub-Section 6.

Q.   I am obliged. If one just looks at the Operational
     Order for a moment - this I think is page 30 to help
     the Jury - this is the serial which would be on the
     West Stand and Inspector Bullas had overall charge of
     them as a serial? - A. That is correct.




                                  /Q. The West Stand ....
                                                           35
                                                           *%
                                                 B. D. MURRAY


Q. The West Stand, of course, looks over down on the
   Leppings Lane terrace? - A. Yes, it does.

Q. Now there is a specific duty directed to that Serial to
   prevent, if I can put it this way, law and order problems
   arising as between the terraces and the West Stand? - A.
   Yes, I think that is fair.

Q. It is preventing missiles being thrown and preventing
   people climbing from the terraces to the Stand.   You can
   confirm, can't you, that it was not any part of the
   specific duties directly imposed upon that Serial to look
   during the build-up to kick-off into the terrace down
   below to see how they were filling up from the point of
   view of distribution? - A. There was nothing in the
   Order, no, sir.

Q. You know of no specific briefing to that effect, do you?
   -A. No, I do not.

Q. Obviously you would expect any Officer if he happens to
   see a sign of distress, as you put it the equivalent of a
   fire in a crowd, to do something about it on his own
   initiative.   I accept that.   However, as regards
   planning ahead specific duties, there was no specific
   role for that West Stand terrace, to keep an eye on the
   terrace itself down below as regards the filling of it? -
   A. There was nothing in the Order to that effect and
   nothing in my briefings.

Q. Indeed, we can go further?   There was no specific duty
   imposed even on the track officers to look at the
   Leppings Lane terrace during the build-up to kick-off as
   regards the filling of it and the distribution of it? -
   A. There was nothing in the Order to that effect, no,
   sir.

Q. Just to confirm that, because it is important to look at
   these Orders, which you knew about.   It is Serial 1
   which would be the... - A. Yes, they would.

Q. In the context of Serial 1, and we can see it.   I am
   sorry I have not got the page for the jury but I hope
   everyone has got it in front of them.   We can see that a
   number of matters are drawn to the attention of the
   perimeter track officers, but one thing is certain.
   Keeping an eye on the filling and distribution of the
   pens just does not appear, does it? - A. Not in the
   Order, sir.

Q. Again you can confirm that as far as you know that was
   not part of any specific briefing? - A. It was not part
   of my briefing, no.
                                       ■5   '
                                                          36
                                                          *    \



                                                B. D. MURRAY


Therefore, you can confirm that the effect of the
planning was that there really was no Officer, be it at
ground level, on the perimeter track, or up in the West
Stand, or anywhere else, who had a specific duty to be
concerned to keep a watch on the fillings of pens 3 and
4?   Is that right? -A. Nothing in the Order which gives
Officers every little duty they have to carry out
throughout the event.

Is it just a little duty to be concerned with the filling
of the terraces? - A. I am sorry - every duty.

No, I can*t be sorry, I want to know whether you regard
that as a little duty? - A. I don't.   I regard it as
something that Officers do as a matter of course.

Uhy, as a matter of course, in the context of the penned
terrace, should junior Officers know what they planning
was and the system was, if any, devised by senior
Officers to prevent overcrowding on the Leppings Lane
terraces?   How would they be privy to that?   How would
they know about it? - A. I think they know that is a
large terrace which is, to me, being treated as an open
terrace because of the fact that gates are opened and
people can pass from pen to pen.

Is that all you would expect them to know from your
planning, therefore? - A. I am sorry, sir?

You may not have done.   Would you expect them to be
alive to the fact that the only way across the terraces
was by the radial gates at the very back? - A. Well, it
is not the only way.   It is one way.    The other way is
going out and going in another entrance.

It is the only way for anybody who is already in a pen
who wants to move across?

     THE CORONER:   I don't want to interrupt Mr. King
every time he asks a question because it is very
disruptive for him and it is very disruptive for you.
It is essential that you should bear in mind that the
whole series of questions which you are being asked all
tend to incriminate you. In respect of each and every
one of those you are entitled to say... - A. I
understand, sir.

     MR. MANNING:   I appreciate that intervention, sir.
I am conscious that I do not want to delay the course of
these Inquests by your stopping on almost each and every
question that Mr. King, and, indeed, that other people
put to Mr. Murray. I think you can see his attitude at
this moment in time is that he is going to do his best to
answer the questions that are put to him.   There may be
                                                            37
                                                          •*
                                                B. D. MURRAY


occasions when you will feel, even having said that and
even with the acknowledgement from Mr. Murray and myself
that we understand the position, that nonetheless you
will feel you want to interject, but I certainly do not
need you, and I do not think Mr. Murray needs you on each
occasion to say, "You may exercise that which the law
proves to you.

     THE CORONER:   I think that is right.   I think you
will understand, Mr. King, that notwithstanding what I
have said, if there is a particular question - and that
is the reason I intervened because I thought we were
getting to a point where I really had to remind him of
that need, and I will do it because it is only right and
proper that it should be done.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I am sure everyone will appreciate
that in a sense I have a difficult role because clearly
most of my questions, and not all of them, will be
incriminating in some way or another; if not of this
Officer himself but of someone else.   It is difficult
sometimes for him to know which way.   I preface,
therefore, everything I say now by inviting you and,
indeed, the witness to take on board that particularly
the witness should think carefully about whether he wants
to answer any of my questions.

     THE CORONER:   I am glad because I think we are all
agreed on this point.   There is no problem.   It is just
that I want you to be fully aware of that and conscious
of it. - A. I fully understand, sir.

And think.   We are more than happy to hear your answers.
1 am not trying to stop you, but I do not want you to
answer in error.

     MR. MANNING:   I simply want to make this point, and
again I hope we are all on common ground, that the
question may possibly be incriminating.   The answer, of
course, may only be possibly incriminating.   One must
not draw the conclusion that because the question itself
is possibly incriminating, that the answer will
necessarily be possibly incriminating.

        THE CORONER:   Indeed, I quite understand that as
well.

     MR. KING:   Let me approach the same question in a
slightly different way in view of the interruption - I am
not complaining - because it is more helpful.   Were you
give your position as, in fact, second in command,
almost, at the semi-final? - A. I do not see it as second
in command at the semi-final.
                                                           38
                                                            •%
                                                  B. D. MURRAY


Q. Overall you had Mr. Duckenfield? - A. I see
   Mr. Duckenfield being in command of the event and the
   four Superintendents having their own individual spheres
   of responsibility.

Q. So be it.   I accept that for the moment.   Were you
   aware of the existence of something called a Green Guide?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Did you have a copy of it? - A. I did not have a copy of
   it, no.

Q. Have you ever been provided with a copy of it? - A. I
   have not been provided with a copy of it but I have read
   it.

Q. This is nothing to do with these Inquests because I am
   looking to the future for the moment, but just very
   quickly, since the disaster have you still been involved
   in policing football matches? - A. I policed three
   football matches following.

Q. You have not even been supplied with a Green Guide since
   then?

          MR. MANNING:   I do not know whether that is a
     question that is going to help us.

          MR. KING:     So be its

Q. Did you nonetheless consider it important before taking
   part even in the planning meetings to acquaint yourself
   with the Green Guide? - A. I read the Green Guide about
   twelve or eighteen months before that semi-final.

Q. And not again? - A. I do not think so, sir.

Q. Did Mr. Duckenfield, to your knowledge, have a copy of
   the Green Guide? -A. I do not know.

Q. Nonetheless let me show you a copy of the Green Guide for
   the moment to see if I can jog your memory about its
   contents.

         MR. BEECHEY:     That is C.382, sir.

Q.        MR. KING:   Just out of interest, how was it you
     came into possession of the Green Guide when you did look
     at it some twelve months or so before 1989? - A. I read
     it when I was at Barnsley as Chief Inspector.

Q. It was March, 1988 when you came into your senior
   position, if I can put it that way, with regard to the
                                                           39

                                                B. D. MURRAY


  footballing at Hillsborough.   Who was it who appointed
  you to that? - A. The Chief Constable.

Q. Then you would no doubt meet up with Superintendent Mole
   and others? - A. Yes.
Q. Did no-one on that occasion invite you to look at the
   Green Guide, given your important role in policing
   football matches? - A. Not that I can recall.

Q. So be it.    Let me go to a page I want to direct your
   attention to which is Chapter 8, page 31 of the Green
   Guide.    Mr. Murray, that is the chapter headed "Terraces
   and Viewing Slopes. ' - A. Yes.

Q. You are not reading this page for the first time today,
   are you? -A. No.
Q. You certainly had read it before the 1989 semi-final? -A.
   Yes, certainly.
Q. You did not regard the Green Guide as something you could
   just read once and put it out of your mind after that,
   put it in a cupboard and lock it away?   It was an
   important document, wasn't it? - A. When I read the Green
   Guide I formed the opinion that the vast majority was
   aimed at football management rather than Police Officers.

Q. Here we may have the root of the approach to this game, I
   don't know.   Are you saying that the matters as regards
   controlling crowds at a football match, and a lot of this
   is directed to the control of crowds at football matches
   in various parts of the ground, was simply a matter for
   the club management? - A. No, I am not saying that.    I
   am saying having read the Green Guide, the contents and
   the way it is set out, to me it seemed to be aimed more
   at club management and engineers than Police Officers.

Q. Isn't the history of the West Terraces, the Leppings Lane
   terraces, and there is a whole body of evidence to this
   effect, Mr. Murray, that as regards the West Terraces,
   whether it be a league game or a semi-final, it was a
   policing matter as regards the crowds going on to that
   West Terrace, not a club matter?   That is the body of
   evidence we have heard. - A. I think the club and the
   Police Officers worked together.

Q. Did you yourself, as this senior Officer, one of four
   immediately below Mr. Duckenfield, consider that the
   Police had a particular role to play in relation to the
   Leppings Lane terrace, as opposed to the other terrace,
   such as the Kop? - A. I do not feel there was a great
   deal of difference in the policing of the Kop and the
   Leppings Lane terraces.
                                                         40

                                                B. D. MURRAY


• I don*t want to take too long over this cross-
  examination, let me just go straight to the point.    Page
 31 •

        "Arrangements should be made to encourage the even
        distribution of the crowd on the terraces to provide
        ease of access and egress, to control and facilitate
        movement, particularly if a local emergency should
        arise during the event and to contain pressures
        before they reach dangerous proportions."

 That is a piece of wisdom which I am sure you agree with?
 - A. Yes.




               Q. And something you agreed
                                                     B. D. MORRAY

Q. Something which you agreed with before the 1989 Semi
   Pinal? - A. Yes.

Q. Help us, therefore, to explain it. What is the
   connection between arranging to encourage even **
   distribution across a terrace and containing pressures
   before they reach dangerous proportions? Explain it to
   us. What is that all about? - A. So far as I was
   concerned I had seen it operate successfully and known
   it operate successfully in the past. When the gates of
   the individual pens were locked in the open position
   the crowd would pass through those pens along from pen
   to pen and distribute.

Q*       Murray, you did not really understand my question
     and I am sorry for that. I am not going to ask you yet
     what arrangements there were, if any, for the 1989 Semi
     Final. I am asking you to help us as the senior
     Officer in charge of policing at Hillsborough in 1989
     to explain your understanding of the wisdom of this
     guide line. In other words, why is it important that
     arrangements be made to encourage even distribution in
     order to contain pressures before they reach dangerous
     proportions? - A. By safety.

Q. On the one hand, you have distribution and you have
   pressure before they reach dangerous proportions. What
   is pressure before they reach dangerous proportions all
   about? What are we talking about? - A. We are talking
   about crushing.

Q. Containing pressures before they reach dangerous
   crushing proportions. Is that what it is meaning? - A.
   That is the way. I suppose that is my interpretation
   of it, yes, sir.

Q. You would say you knew in 1989 before the disaster that
   it was important to have an arrangement on the terrace
   to contain pressures before they reached dangerous
   crushing proportions? - A. I am not saying that. You
   took me through a series of questions based upon
   reading this here and now and you asked me certain
   aspects of it and I said, yes, after listening to you,
   that is the way I look at it.

Q. I am sorry, Mr. Murray, you agreed with me, before I
   asked you any questions, you would in 1989 have agreed
   with the wisdom of the guide line which I have read
   out? - A. I said I had read the guide, yes.

Q. You would agree with the wisdom of that particular
   guide line? - A. Yes.
                                                             4-2
                                                    B. D. MURRAY

Q. I just want you to help everybody, the Jury, the
   Coroner, myself, as to what is the link between
   encouraging even distribution of crowd on terraces and
   seeking to contain pressures before they reach
   dangerous proportions? How does .the one lead to the
   other? - A. I don't know whether it does actually,
   reading this.

       THE CORONER: Mr. King, I can see what you are
  getting at but I can also read the Green Guide and if
  you look at it, you have picked what I would call the
  introduction. The witness has said that when he looked
  at it, it appeared to him that the Green Guide was more
  addressed to others than the Police. I will just flick
  through paragraphs 89 to 109 and unless I have missed
  it, the whole thrust of the chapter is to do with
  structure. I do not want to get into an argument about
  this but if you pick the introduction then I think, and
  he has given you a reason as to how he interpreted the
  Green Guide, then you need to look at the subsections
  which actually deal with the detail.

       MR. CATCHPOLE: With respect, can I agree with
  that? It is not only obvious it is a matter of
  structure but if one looks at even the first three
  paragraphs, paragraph 19, which we can all read for
  ourselves, is actually talking about providing
  spectators with an unobstructed view and is actually
  talking about how you get people on to the terrace. It
  may be that the matters my learned friend is putting
  are important but I think, sir, with respect, you are
  right. I had not risen before but you are right in
  this particular chapter, that it is a matter of
  structure rather them anything else.

       THE CORONER:   I am not arguing about your premise,
  Mr. King.

       MR. KING: Sir, I am only interested in what this
  witness understood and I was asking him if he could
  help us.

       THE CORONER: You are picking a section out of the
  Green Guide which he said he had read X months before
  and discarded because he did not think it was relevant
  to him and then asking him to draw conclusions which
  the chapter itself does not actually draw.

       MR. KING: Sir, that may or may not be right but I
  am entitled to ask the witness from his wisdom,
  knowledge and experience as a senior Officer of
  policing what the connection is in his mind, if
  anything, between encouraging distribution across a
                                                          ••■0

                                                                 43
                                                     B, D. MURRAY

   terrace and seeking to contain crowd pressures before
   they reach dangerous proportions. I am entitled to ask
   that question, sir.

        THE CORONER: I am not sure whether you are
   entitled to ask but you have asked it and I think he
   has given an answer. What I am concerned about is that
   we should not use a document incorrectly.

        MR. KING: So be it, sir. Let me put the Green
   Guide right away. Let me put it to one side.

        THE CORONER:   I think we will do better.   I agree.

        MR. KING:   I may come back to it, sir.

        THE CORONER:   Indeed.

        MR. KING: In the light of this Officer's evidence
   as to the way he regarded it I think it is right I
   should put it to one side.

Q. Let me be absolutely blunt then because I want to know
   how you see the situation. Did you understand that the
   Police in charge of policing the Hillsborough Semi
   Final of 1989 had any role to play as regards the
   distribution of spectators across the Leppings Lane
   West terrace? - A. Yes.

Q. What was that job or responsibility? - A. I think there
   was a general responsibility to make sure it was
   reasonable.

Q. Did any other body apart from the Police at the Semi
   Final of 1989 have any direct responsibility for the
   filling and distribution of the Leppings Lane terraces,
   to your understanding in the 1989 Semi Final? - A. My
   understanding that the Police and the Club work
   together.

Q. What was, to your understanding as the senior Officer,
   the role of the Club in the 1989 Semi Final as regards
   the distribution of spectators across the Leppings Lane
   terrace and the filling of the pens? - A. The Club
   itself?

Q. Yes, what role were they playing on 15th April? - A. I
   didn't know what the role of the Club was.

Q. What did you understand? - A. I understood in different
   parts of the ground, in all parts of the ground, that
   the senior Police Officer in charge of that section of
   the ground would brief his Police Officers and he would
                                                 Bt P. MURRAY

brief the Club Stewards, and they would work together
to ensure that the event went off properly.

We are near the adjournment. I do not want to take too
long on this but I am now very puzzled in the light of
this evidence and the light of all the other evidence
we have heard. Are you saying that you did not in that
Control Box regard you, the Police in the Control Box,
as having a specific responsibility for the
distribution and filling of the West terraces as
opposed to the Kop and the other areas? - A. I am
sorry, I did not know that was the question you asked
me. I thought you asked me about the Police role
generally.

I am asking about the West Terrace? - A. Yes, sir.

     MR. KING:   Sir, that is probably as good a point
to stop.

     THE CORONER:    Do you want me to stop?

    MR. KING:    We are now almost at one o'clock, sir.

                    LUNCHEON ADJOURNMENT
                                           B. D. MURRAY'


     MR. KING:   Mr. Murray, as I understand your last
answer before the adjournment, you accept that there
was a responsibility upon the Police as regards the
policing at the 1989 semi-final, a responsibility in
respect of the distribution and filling of the Leppings
Lane Terrace, am I right? - A. Yes, there was a
responsibility of the Police.

Do you accept that no other body had specifically
accepted that particular responsibility, and I include
in that, for example, the Club management? - A. I think
the Club management accepted their responsibility
towards it as well.

Well, you would know because you knew the Operational
Order, that there was no stewarding by Club stewards,
was there, of the Leppings Lane Terrace as such, that
is right, isn't it? - A. On the terraces I wouldn't
have expected to see stewards.

No, I don't specifically mean on the terrace. There
was no actual stewarding responsibility on the way it
was organised in 1989, on Club stewards in relation to
the West Terraces, was there? - A. I think the stewards
had a responsibility to show people where to go and
which direction to go but I would not have expected to
see them on the terrace itself.

Did you know what the arrangement was between the
Police and the Club as regards stewards and their
responsibilities? - A. I didn't know what the
responsibilities of the stewards in particular areas
were because they were briefed by the senior Police
Officer there.

You knew surely in your senior capacity the importance
of a pre-arranged agreement between the Police and
management as to the duties of stewards and their
distribution, you would know that? - A. There was a
schedule on the Safety Certificate which was presumably
expanded on depending on the number of supporters that
were there.

Let me take it in stages: you would know in 1989
before the disaster, wouldn t you, of the importance of
a detailed, pre-arranged agreement between Police and
management as to the positions of stewards? - A. I knew
there was a pre-arranged schedule that was attached to
the Safety Certificate.

You would know the importance of having a pre-arranged
agreement, wouldn't you? - A. I am not sure what you
mean by the importance of having it. I think it is
                                                            46

                                                   B. D. MURRAY*


     very much down to the Officer who is in charge of that
     area to work the Police and the stewards together.

Q. But haven't the Police in their policing and planning
   got to know what their responsibilities are and what
   the Club management responsibilities are? - A. We tried
   to put Officers familiar with that particular part of
   the Ground in that area, and they worked with the
   stewards and decided upon who did what.

Q. Mr. Murray, it wasn't as casual as that, was it? There
   was in fact pre-arranged agreement between Club and
   management as to where stewards were going, and what
   the responsibility of the Police was, wasn't there? -
   A. The only one I know is the one that was attached to
   the Safety Certificate.

Q. Let's take that one if that is the only one you know.
   You would know from there that no Club stewards were
   responsible for the controlling or directing of fans
   onto the Leppings Lane Terrace. It is obvious by its
   absence if you knew the Safety Certificate? - A. I
   didn't say I knew the Safety Certificate I said there
   would be a schedule on the Safety Certificate.

Q. Had you in your capacity as the senior Officer turned
   your mind at all to the stewarding responsibilities at
   the Leppings Lane Terraces? -

Q.        THE CORONER.     That is one I am going to warn you
     about.

         MR. KING:       Certainly, sir:

Q. That is undoubtedly an incriminating question to you. -
   A. So far as I was concerned the stewards, as I say,
   worked with a senior Police Officer in that particular
   area. The main area of concern with me is that
   stewards manned the exit gates and stayed there
   throughout the event.

Q. You may say yes or no to this: were you aware that as
   regards the Leppings Lane Terraces that the Club - you
   may say no to this - that the Club had taken no
   responsibility as regards the stewarding of the
   Leppings Lane Terraces? Were you aware of thatin 1989
   before the semi-final? - A. I didn't know what
   responsibility the Club had accepted or taken.

Q. Would you not consider it important in your capacity as
   senior Officer that you should know in advance what
   responsibility the Club had taken on? - A. We are
   talking about a very small part of the Ground. My
   responsibility was presumably the whole Ground,
                                                         47
                                                          *•
                                                B. D. MURRAY


   everywhere, all the stewards. I    did not take a
   particular interest in what each   individual steward was
   doing. That is why I say it was    important that the
   senior Officer there briefed the   Police Officers and
   briefed the stewards.

Q. It may have been a small part of the Ground, Mr.
   Murray, but you would know, wouldn't you, that at
   league matches the Police had taken on a specific
   responsibility to control the filling of pens in
   sequential order? - A. Yes.

Q. And I think you were responsible sometimes for carrying
   out those sequential orders? - A. Yes, at league
   matches.

Q. I think you had specific responsibility at the occasion
   of the league match between Liverpool and Sheffield
   Wednesday on 14th January, 1989, which is the C515
   documents which we have already been referred to? - A.
   I was the Superintendent in control on that day, yes.

Q. I don't need to take everybody to it but we all know
   that particular order contained within it a specific
   order to serial 10 to ensure pens were filled in
   accordance with instructions from Control, all right? -
   A. Yes, I will accept that.

Q. As I understand it - tell me if I have got it right or
   wrong - when it came to the semi-finals there was not
   sequential filling of the pens, that is right, isn't
   it, of the Leppings Lane Terraces? - A. There wasn't
   sequential filling of pens at league matches.

Q. There could be sequential filling of the pens at league
   matches? - A. Occasionally, yes.

Q. And at league matches you could have a system whereby
   you start with two then open up a third and open up a
   fourth? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. And that was a responsibility for the filling of the
   pens which fell fairly and squarely upon the Police
   shoulders, didn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. I want to know how you saw it at a semi-final. At a
   semi-final we know that the whole terrace was thrown
   open to the fans? - A. Yes, that is correct, it was a
   system that was accepted.

Q. Are you saying that in view of that the Police
   abandoned, compared with league matches, all
   responsibility for monitoring the distribution and
                                                           48
                                                           •   •



                                                 B. D. MURRAY*


   filling of the pens compared with what they did at a
   league match? - A. I have never said that.

Q. What responsibility did exactly the Police take on
   board at a semi-final, according to you, as regards
   monitoring the distribution and filling of the pens
   across the whole terrace? - A. At a semi-final the
   whole terrace was open.

Q. I know that. - A. The Police, the Control Room, Police
   Officers in general, had a responsibility for
   monitoring and filling the pens.

Q. So you accept that there was a responsibility upon the
   Police at the 1989 semi-final, albeit the whole terrace
   had been thrown wide open, to monitor the build-up, do
   you, and the filling of the pens across the terrace
   before kick-off? - A. I have just said that it is a
   shared responsibility by all the Police Officers
   present and also by the Club.

Q. Do you accept that the Police had that responsibility,
   yes or no?

        THE CORONER:      I think he has said it several
   times, Mr. King.

        MR. KING:      I am sorry*

        THE CORONER:      He has given his reply and we must
   accept it.

       MR. KING:       So be it:

Q. The Club management were not in the Police Control Box,
   were they? - A. No, they weren't.

Q. You in the Police Control Box had access to the
   following, didn't you? First of all you were able to
   look out of the windows to view specifically the state
   of the Leppings Lane Terraces? - A. Yes.




                    /Q. I think everybody
                                                                            49
                                                               B. D. HURRAY


     Q'    J i 2 J nfh!V^
           visit          I b057and
                    the ground    h” ITlsl5ed
                                        need notthe 8r°™<>
                                                  ask      vho needs to
                                                      you auestionA
           w * f Wh!‘ y?u can 8ee because we can o b « « e ?JJL
           is  f i « 8^
           is tive      U » r . t0Hthat
                      monitors,   do you7°U  5aVe
                                          not? - A.access t0 1 l
                                                     Yes. that think’it
           correct in the Control Room.                 '       8
 Q.
                                                                     ti1*
           show*the terraces! ' ** YeS-         °ne of the ">°»itors will

 Q.               ?e sPeclflcally controlled so as to view
           A? Yes   * PartS accordlnS to that ^ i c h you wish? -

 Q.       f!Lha?ia Zooni faclllty» does it not, so that you can
          actually zoom in close on to any particular area of
                             411 the camer®8 have a zoom     *
          facility, which is limited.
 Q.       I do not want to give evidence;          I simply want to put
          lenses
          «««         ii       d° W U hcanth®
                             cameras          200nu
                                           zoom      ' Afar
                                                 in as   * ^ as zoom
          hH?            7 a£e not Perfect» they could be better
          the *cameras^86 *    exPensel*®its the capability of

Q*               could, in fact, zoom in quite close, could you
          Uail       People on the terrace? - A. I don't know which
          get   We certainly
                   CertS?^fy \have
                               and in
                                   J d°S't kn°Wbeen
                                      the past  h°W Cl°8e we can
                                                    able to
          identify people on the Kop.

Q.        Can I put to you simply that there is a facility there
          for zooming in close so that you can actually see
          woul^nni-
          would not v068 Clear}y lf you choose SO to do? - A. I
                    know exactly.

Q'        S r ™ ,^ “ the
          through    f r eroperator,
                             used the sir?
                                       zoon f a c l U t y ’ - A. Do you mean

Q.        Yes. - A. Yes of course I have used it.

Q.     The video cameras enable you to see theLeppinss Lane
      terraces, first of all a frontal view, do they not? -
                     *              8*J a £rontal vlev. We can ge
      slightly oblique view from a camera situated in the
      centre of the South Stand.

Q.     But as best you can looking at the front of the
      terraces? - A. As best we can, yes.
                                            B. D. HURRAY


 But you also have a camera, do you not, which enables
 you to view parallel to the front of the terraces and
 parallel to the back, in other words looking along the
 terrace? - A. I think it is slightly set back to the
 left, if you think of the Control Box.

But it does allow you to look along the terrace, as
opposed to looking towards the front? - A. Yes, it
does.

You also have access to a view of the Leppings Lane
turnstiles? - A. Yes, the outside of the turnstiles.

And there is a view down Leppings   Lane to the extent
you have indicated? - A. Yes.

So you are in a position in the Control Box not only
to see that which you can see with your own eyes of
the terrace, but also, if you so choose, to have the
cameras so operated that you can look at a particular
part of the terrace if you want to do so? - A. Yes, I
can identify, or the operator can identify, a
particular part that we should look at.

Furthermore, in the Control Room you have access to,
via your communications with the Club Control Room, at
any time the numbers of spectators who have already
come through any given set of turnstiles? - A. Yes, I
do believe that is the breakdown.

It is a fact, is it not, that   you do have that access?
- A. I have the ability to go   and ask howmany people
are in the ground, how many people have come through a
particular turnstile, and I think groups of
turnstiles.

You have in the Club Control Room a Police
representative, do you not, at a semi-final? - A. Yes.
there is a Police Officer there.

I think it was PC Guest on this occasion in 1989? - A.
That is correct.

He has a link, does he not, is it by telephone with
your Control Room? ■ A. He has, on the radio network
and the telephone.

So at any time if you want to know numbers of those
coming through a specific set of turnstiles, you can
obtain it through that system through him? - A. Yes, I
can get it through him.

You could, for example, at any given time find out
exactly how many people have come through, for
                                              •£*


                                                          si
                                                 B. D. MURRAY


     example, the bank of turnstiles A to G? - A. I think
     that facility is available, yes.

Q.   Mr. Murray, you say "I think" as if this is a facility
     you are not sure existed? - A. I am sure it will give
     the whole of the Leppings Lane turnstiles, I am sure
     it will give the individual turnstiles, but I am not
     absolutely sure that it will give the particular banks
     of turnstiles.

Q.   It is simply the case, is it not, of keeping a running
     total of A to G and you could within moments get the
     running total, could you not? - A. What I am saying,
     sir, is ve could get the individual totals from
     turnstiles A, B, C, D, £, F and G, and I think, but I
     don't know, we can get the ongoing total. Obviously
     they can be added together to give a total, yes.

Q.   Whichever way you do it, it does not take very long to
     find out, if you wish to know, how many people have
     already come through A to G? - A. No, it does not take
     very long.

Q.   You, as having a responsibility for monitoring the
     build-up of the crowd, would want to know, would you
     not, as you view the monitoring and build-up of the
     crowd, how many people are in and how many people have
     still to come, for example, on the Leppings Lane
     terraces? That would have been an important piece of
     information, would it not? - A. It could be very
     useful, yes.

Q.   It is useful, iB it not, for two reasons? It is
     useful generally so that you can assess how speedily
     people are arriving at the ground? - A. I have not
     used it for that purpose. It would tell me how many
     people were in different sections of the ground at a
     particular time.

Q.   It would be important to you in   the Control Box, would
     it not, as far as your planning   goes, to know whether
     or not the ground is filling up   according to your
     expectations, you would want to   know that, would you
     not? - A. Yes.

Q.   One of the problems which might arise, because you
     have told us about delaying kick-off, is if there is a
     lot of people who are yet to arrive and we are getting
     very close to kick-off, that would be a problem you
     could anticipate? - A. It would be a problem that
     should be looked at, yes.

Q.   You do not simply have to look at the visual
     impression from the Control Box, although that
                                          B. D. HURRAY

obviously helps. You can actually gain specific
information from the Club Control Room? - A. Yes, I
can gain that information from the Control Room.

You vere, again as somebody vho had been involved in
the planning, knowledgeable, I assume, of the
turnstile arrangements for each particular area of the
ground? - A. What do you mean by "knowledgeable", sir?

You would know, would you not, that those who were
entering the Leppings Lane terraces, the west
terraces, their tickets would send them through
turnstiles A to G? - A. Yes.

You would know before the semi-final began in 1989
that, therefore, there were seven turnstiles for about
10,100 spectators for the Leppings Lane terraces? - A.
Yes, there are only seven turnstiles.

Did you, before the game, turn your mind to whether
you were satisfied that that number of turnstiles
could cope with that number of people? - A. Before
that particular event, I do not think it was something
I had particularly considered, no.

Be careful, are you saying you did not consider the
turnstile arrangements with a view to ensuring that
there was a reasonable number of turnstiles for the
number of spectators expected? - A. I don't think that
was anything to do with me, sir. I am sure that was
down to the Club and the people who organised the
event.

You yourself were in the Control Box monitoring the
numbers coming in, were you not, or you could see out
of the window looking at the build-up of the crowd? -
A. Yes, I was in the Control Box.

You would have in your mind that there might come a
time when you had to assess whether you could get all
the people who had yet to come into the ground by
kick-off? That is easily a consideration you might
have to make, is it not, as assessment? - A. It was a
consideration I did assess about 2.30.

So in order to make that assessment sensibly you would
have to have knowledge of the number of turnstiles the
people still to come had to go through? - A. To make
it expertly, yes.

Not simply expertly, to make any assessment you would
need to know it, would you not? - A. To make it
expertly, to break it right down to figures, yes.
                 9

                                                         53
                                                B. D. HURRAY

Q.   In order to make any assessment which would be worth
     anything, you would need to know, would you not, the
     number of turnstiles through which the people still to
     come in a particular area had to go, otherwise you
     could not make an assessment whether you would get
     them all in? - A. Yes, that would be the ideal.

Q.   It sounds as if it is a surprising proposition. You
     have told us - I have not come to the exact events of
     the match itself but I will break into this for the
     moment - there came a time, I think it was at 2.30 on
     the day of the semi-final, that you were able to make
     a judgment as to whether or not you would get the
     people still to come through into the ground? - A.


Q.   In order to make that judgment sensibly you first of
     all have to ask yourself which part of the ground they
     are going to come into? - A. I would have had to look
     at all areas of the Leppings Lane end, all the areas
     of people who were still to come.




                          /Q.   I will come to ....
                                                           54

                                                 B. D. MURRAY

Q. I will come to the particular evidence which you have
   given later, but it is a fact that in order for seven
   turnstiles to be used for some 1.0,000 people, you have
   got to have a flow of people with which the turnstiles
   can cope?   That must be obvious? - A, To get the people
   through the turnstiles, yes.

Q. Had you turned your mind to the numbers of people which
   the turnstiles could reasonably be expected to cope with
   over, say, an hourly period? - A. I only know the figures
   that were given to be, either by the club or Mr. Mole.

Q. This was before the 1989 semi-final? - A. This was before
   1988.

Q. What was the number per turnstile? - A. It was 1,000 per
   turnstile per hour.

Q. I will approach it on that basis.   If it is 1,000 per
   turnstile then you would know that in the last half hour
   at 1,000 per turnstile those seven A to G turnstiles
   could only cope with about 3,500 people? - A. Yes, those
   seven turnstiles could.

Q. That's right? - A. Yes.

Q. In order to make a sensible assessment, shall we say, at
   2.30, as to whether or not you are going to get all the
   people expected on the Leppings Lane terraces through
   those turnstiles, a very easy way of making that
   assessment is simply to find out at 2.30 how many people
   have already come through A to G? -A. Yes, it is.

Q. That is a fairly obvious way of approaching it, isn't it?
   - A. Yes, it is.

Q. Let me go back to the second reason why knowing numbers
   still to come is important.   You have accepted a role,
   on behalf of the Police, to monitor the build-up of the
   crowd on the Leppings Lane terraces?   You have accepted
   that? - A. Yes, the Police have a role in that.

Q. If you know the numbers still to come you can look at the
   terraces, for example, and ask yourself the question: is
   there still room on the terraces themselves for this
   number of people?   You can make a judgment? - A, Well, I
   can try. I am not an expert as to how many people can
   get into how much space.

Q. No, but you can look in the terrace and see where the
   empty spaces are and where the full parts are, can't you?
   - A. I can look at the distribution, yes.
                                                          55
                                                           *•
                                                B. D. MURRAY *


Q. It is important as far as crowd management goes, to look
   at distribution at the same time as knowing how many more
   people are still to come in a particular area? - A. Yes,
   1 think you have got to look at the distribution and look
   at the people to come.

Q. If you know in advance, for example - just take a figure
   for the moment - that there are 2,000 people still to
   come shall we say on the Leppings Lane terraces and you
   can see where the full areas and where the empty areas
   are, the knowledge that there are 2,000 people still to
   come is a very important piece of information, isn't it?
   - A. I am sorry, but to look where the full areas are and
   where the empty areas are does not always follow because
   different parts of the ground do fill up first.

Q. Of course they do.   When you can see the parts you are
   expecting to be filled up have been filled up and you
   know, for example, from the figures that there are about
   2.000 people still to come, you can make an assessment,
   and a sensible assessment, of where you want those other
   2.000 people to go for their own safety, can't you? - A.
   I can try and see whether I consider there is sufficient
   space for the people there.

Q. You would not want, as someone in the Control Box, an
   entry of a large number of people into a particular area
   which was full when there was another area which had
   spaces in it?   You would not want that, would you? - A.
   I would not want that, no.

Q. It would be part of the monitoring of the crowd, and the
   build-up of the crowd, that you would try to ensure that
   did not happen, would not it? - A. I don t know whether I
   can prevent that happening.    Icannot really prevent one
   part of the ground filling up before another.

Q. Were you not aware of the system operated by the Police
   in the past, that is, before 1989, if they so chose, of
   diverting fans from, shall we say, the centre pens to the
   side pens on the terrace? - A. What system was that, sir?

Q. The system whereby in some way closing off the centre
   pens so as to ensure and direct people still to come into
   the side pens?   Were you not aware the Police operated
   that sort of system in the filling of the terraces? - A.
   No, I wasn't.

Q. You weren't? - A. No.

Q. Are you saying that before you started the1989 semi­
   final you did not consider that there might come a time
   when you might need to divert people from the popular
   centre pens to the side pens? - A. I was there in 1988
                                                             56

                                                 3. D. MURRAY ‘

   and I had seen the system work.   I had seen the terrace
   spread.   I had seen the centre pens fill up first and
   the raised area.

Q. I accept that.   What I want to know is whether as part
   of your monitoring, not that there would necessarily come
   this time but there might come the time when you are
   monitoring the terraces, that the centre pens would be
   full and you would want to divert people to the side
   pens? - A. I think there may well have come a time when
   that was necessary, yes.

Q. That is fairly obvious from the fact that the centre pens
   are the popular pens? - A. It is not obvious because it
   happened before.   It would be exactly the same, the
   people had spread right across.

Q. You misunderstand me.   It is obvious that it might
   happen?   Not that it did happen or was going to happen
   definitely, but it might happen? - A. It may have been
   necessary, depending on the amount of people there and
   the way the crowd was spread, to take some action.

Q. Do you know Mr. Lock? - A. Yes, I know Mr. Lock.

Q. Mr. Lock, of course, had carried on your role on an
   earlier occasion some years before? - A. Yes, he had.

Q. When you came in 1988 you were able to speak to him
   because he then had a capacity with the club, did he not?
   - A. I saw him in his capacity as working for Sheffield
   Wednesday Football Club.

Q. Do you accept? therefore, that as regards the monitoring
   of the crowd at a semi-final that it was necessary to
   keep an eye on the pens, and the filling of the pens, so
   that if it were necessary to close off the centre pens
   and feed people into the side pens, that could be
   organised? - A. I think at any event it is necessary to
   keepan eye on what is going on, and if one sees a
   particular problem to do something about it.

Q. I am sorry, I want to ask you whether you had turned your
   mind in advance in 1989 specifically to the Leppings Lane
   terraces to the possible need, before any signs of
   distress, before any pressures had arisen to such
   dangerous proportions there was distress, but at a time
   when the centre pens were, shall I say, comfortably full
   and there was plenty of space in the side pens, did you
   turn your mind to the fact there might come a time, a
   need, to divert people away from the centre pens to the
   side pens? - A. No, I did not consider that at all.
                                             B. D. MURRAY


You are saying that you did not turn your mind at all to
the control of the filling of the pens at the 1989 semi­
final, save if someone drew to your attention a
particular problem, is that right? - A. No, I did not say
that at all.   What I am saying is there was a system
whereby people spread along the whole of the terrace.
Before the 1989 semi-final I had not had any sort of
necessity to consider giving my mind to closing the
centre pens.

That is what I am asking you.   It sounds as if in
advance you had not even thought of the possibility of
the need to close off the full areas in order to make
sure people went into the empty areas? - A. What I am
saying is that I had not seen a need to close the centre
pens.

The only match you had experience of was one match, the
1988 match? - A. Of a capacity crowd, yes.

Are you saying that you did not know of any arrangement,
in advance, to deal with the situation that if the centre
pens, for example, became full, you could speedily take
action to divert people to the side pens? - A. Before the
event started I did not have anything in mind as to
closing the centre pens.   I had been there in 1988 and
1988 was based on a previously successful event.




       Q. Did you know that in 1988
                                                      -.3




                                                               56

                                                      B. P. MURRAY

Q. Did you know in 1988 steps had been taken to divert
   fans from the centre pens by closing off the tunnel? -
   A. No, I didn't know.

Q. It does come down to this then, and I want to
   understand you clearly, that you understood that there
   was no system in advance worked out by those policing
   the game from the Control Box to close off the centre
   pens if they became too full to divert fans to the
   empty pens? - A. I didn't know of any system in advance
   whereby to close off the centre pens.

Q. So, in other words, people were just left to their own
   devices unless there were signs of distress noted? - A.
   I do not know whether the word 'distress' is right but
   there may have come a time when I or someone else would
   have noticed that the centre pens were full and the
   crowd did not appear to be spreading in which case then
   some action would have had to be taken.

Q. Maybe we are not as far away as I thought we were. If
   there came a time when you noticed the centre pens were
   full and the crowd was not spreading by which I assume
   you mean there were spaces, and obvious spaces, in the
   side pens you would take some action? - A. If it was
   brought to my attention and I saw it myself.

Q. It would be important, would it not, to make sure
   somebody was monitoring that situation to make sure
   that if it did arise action could be taken? - A. I do
   not see that - I think that people sure always
   monitoring the situation from the Control Box, from the
   West Stand, from the track, from everywhere.

Q. As far as your position in the Control Box is
   concerned, compared with everybody else, you have told
   us about the view you had from the video cameras, you
   have told us about the view you had from the windows,
   you have told us about your means of access to the
   figures, you in Control also have the means of
   communicating with people on the ground to organise
   action, do you not? - A. Yes, we do.

Q. You in that sense   are - and by you I mean everybody in
   the Control Box -   in a unique position compared with
   everybody else at   the ground because you are the co­
   ordinators of all   the information which I have put to
   you? - A. We have   more information than anyone else,
   yes.

Q. If I can then take you through the events of 1989,
   bearing in mind what you say is the responsibility in
   the Control Box for monitoring, do you accept the
                                                           •   59

                                                      D» MURRAY

   following facts; first of all do you remember
   position round about two o'clock-ish, when Mr. Jackson
   I think visited you as regards the state of the build
   up at the Leppings Lane end? - A. Not particularly, no.

Q. Did you not notice round about two o'clock, perhaps
   2.15, at that stage, that in fact it was obvious that
   the Liverpool end was filling far more slowly than what
   you might have anticipated? - A. I would accept about
   that time there were many more Nottingham Forest
   supporters than Liverpool in the ground.

Q. There were more Liverpool fans than in fact, sorry,
   less Liverpool fans than you would have expected at
   that time? - A. I would have expected some more +h*n
   there were, yes.

Q. At that stage if you had wanted to you could have
   called for the exact numbers who had entered the
   Liverpool turnstiles, could you not? - A. Yes, I could
   have.

Q. Indeed your evidence I think is that at two o'clock-
   ish, perhaps 2.15 we are talking about, the North Stand
   and the West Stand was about quarter full? - A. I think
   that is correct.

Q. As regards the terraces I suspect you would not even go
   that far, would you? - A. I cannot remember. I cannot
   remember what I said.

Q. Certainly a quarter full would be the absolute tops,
   would it not? - A. I do not know what I have said, sir.

Q. Certainly that is my note but I may be wrong on it? -
   A. Probably about a quarter full.

Q. That means there would be some 18,000 people, Liverpool
   fans still to come on that assessment? - a . Those
   figures seem to be about right, yes.

Q. As I understand your evidence this was an assessment at
   about 2.15? - A. I think it would be about 2.15, yes.

Q. Was it not obvious at that time, from that moment
   onwards, that given the limited number of turnstiles
   which were being used at the Liverpool end that from
   then onwards you had to be very much alive to the build
   up of the crowd and what was happening? - A. I was
   watching the build up of the crowd.
                                                                 60

                                                      t* Pt w t o y
Q. You only had 23 turnstiles for the whole 24,000
   Liverpool spectators, did you not? - A. Yes, there were
   23 turnstiles.

Q. You have agreed with me you only had 7 turnstiles for
   the 10,000 odd for the Leppings Lane terrace? - A.
   Initially, yes.

Q. It would be obvious, would it not, that if 18,000
   people were still to come at 2.15 that this was a
   matter to cause you concern at that stage? - A. I think
   18,000 is just about, the turnstiles could probably
   cope with just about that number.

Q. I will not go any further with whether that be a fair
   judgment or not because I have been through figures
   with you already and it would only waste time. You
   then receive a message at 2.17 from Mr. Marshall asking
   for the closure of Leppings Lane? - A. That is correct,
   yes.

Q. This is at a time when you know, because it is only two
   minutes later, that there is a good 18,000 people still
   to come? - A. Certainly a lot of people still to come,
   yes.

Q. If we continue through with just looking at it
   factually, the closure of Leppings Lane itself was an
   unusual request? - A. Yes, it was unusual.

Q. Clearly you would assume it was something to do with
   the large numbers of people who were arriving? - a.
   Yes, it was to do with the number of people in Leppings
   Lane, yes.

Q. Then at 2.30 with only half an hour to go you could see
   clear spaces, could you not, in the wing pens compared
   with the centre pens of the Leppings Lane terrace? - A
   Yes, I could.

Q. What assessment did you make at 2.30 in terms of
   proportion of the numbers still to come for the
   Leppings Lane terraces? - A. I didn't make any
   assessment on proportion.

Q. Did you not think it important given that you only had
   half an hour to come, given that at 2.15 you knew that
   roughly about 18,000 or so people were still to come
   that it was obvious you should make an assessment to
   find out how many people were still to come by finding
   out the numbers? - A. I am sorry, I an not with you on
   that one.
                                                                    61

                                                          ft. P- MURRAy

Q. At 2.30 this was the time that you made the assessment
   that you could get the people in by kick-off? - A. Yes.

Q. Yet this was the time when there was clearly space in
   the wing pens? - A. Yes, I would have expected there to
   be space.

Q. It was only quarter of an hour after you had mentally
   made the note that there would be three quarters of the
   people still to come? - A. Yes.

Q. It was less than quarter of am hour after Mr. Marshall
   had asked for Leppings Lane to be closed? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you not turn your mind at that stage to find out
   the numbers who had come through the turnstiles A to G?
   - A. I think we estimated at that stage that the ground
   was about half full at the Liverpool end, certainly the
   North Stand and the terraces and the West Stand was
   more than half full.

Q. If the Leppings Lane terraces were only half full, how
   could you legitimately expect half the expected numbers
   still to come, that is to say 5,000 people, to get
   through 7 turnstiles in half an hour?

          THE CORONER:   You do not have to answer that
     question.

         THE WITNESS: I didn't mentally draw that
     particular comparison or proportion and I do not accept
     it was only 7 turnstiles right the way through.
     Initially it was 7 turnstiles but it may well have been
     that we could utilise other turnstiles for those
     people.

Q.       MR. KING: Mr. Murray, you were in charge, as I
     understand it, in the Control Box of monitoring the
     numbers coming into the ground. You were the person
     giving the information, when asked, of your assessment
     of whether you could get them all in? - A. Yes, I gave
     him that information.

Q. Are you saying that your information was based on an
   assumption at 2.30 that more than 7 turnstiles were
   being utilised for the Leppings Lane terracing? — a .
   No, I didn't say that at all. What I said was at that
   time 7 turnstiles were being utilised. It may have
   been nearer the kick-off, nearer three o'clock, that if
   the West Stand people were all in we could have
   utilised other turnstiles.
                                                          •    62

                                                   b«-Btmumr
Q. You would have to use other turnstiles to get 5,000
   plus other people in after half past two, would you
   not? - A. On the figures, yes, I would.

Q. Not simply on the figures, just knowing - never mind
   about what the exact figures were - that there were
   half still to come? - A. I am saying on the figures,
   yes.

Q. Did you start planning at 2.30, therefore, as regards
   this obvious matter that you were going to have to
   start thinking how you were going to get them all
   through and which turnstiles to open up to them? - A.
   No, I didn't start planning on that.

Q. You were in a position as indeed were all the people in
   the Control Box at 2.30 to see the position outside the
   turnstiles through the video monitor, were you not? -
   A. On the monitor, yes, we had a view.

Q. On any view you could see that there was a large crowd
   outside those turnstiles? - A. I could see that there
   was a large crowd, yes.

Q. This is a question which you do not have to answer.
   Did you not, when you looked back at that monitor to
   the Leppings Lane terrace, ask yourself the question
   whether there was room in the centre pens for the crowd
   outside? - A. I was looking at a crowd outside which
   was going to several different sections of the ground,
   the North Stand, the West Stand, the Leppings Lane
   terraces.

Q. But you were in a position, specifically because no
   doubt of Nr. Marshall asking that Leppings Lame should
   be shut, to have a specific look, were you not, at the
   turnstiles outside A to G? You could see that area? -
   A. No, I couldn't make any distinction between the
   numbers that were outside turnstiles A to G, 1 to 8, 10
   to 16. They were spread right across the enclave.

Q. Of course, you could not get the exact numbers but one
   thing you could see was that you could see it was
   thickly spread? - A. I did not consider that the crowd
   was any more dense in the areas A to G than it was
   across the whole enclave.

Q. I accept that. That density was a thick density, was
   it not? - A. At 2.30 I do not think it was, no.

Q. Is it not a fact that at 2.30 you could see that the
   crowd was thickly spread, and I use that expression
   advisedly, thickly spread across all the turnstile
                                                             63



  enclave at the Leppings Lane end? - A. I think there
  was a good crowd outside those turnstiles.

Q. Would you dispute the expression "thickly spread"? - A.
   I do not think it is my expression. It is not one I
   would use.

       MR. KING: In the light of that, and I am trying
  to limit as much as I cam the use of the transcript,
  could the witness, sir, look at page 79 of his Taylor
  evidence?

       THE CORONER:   Page 79?

       MR. KING:   Yes, sir.

       THE CORONER: We are going to show you this and I
  am going to explain again the rule about you not having
  to answer because I do not wamt you to be confused
  about this. The fact that you have given evidence
  before Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry does not mean you
  have either got to agree - because these aure all
  incriminating questions - that what is stated is a
  correct record nor need you affirm it, so to speak.
  Both those aspects may tend to incriminate you amd so
  by all means look at the letter.

       MR. KING: Letter H, sir. So that I do not waste
  time, could he just be handed 79, 80 amd 81 because 80
  is very short and 81 is relatively short for my
  purposes.

       THE CORONER:   Yes.   You wamt him to read to?




                               /MR. KING..
                                                                64

                                                    B. D. HURRAY'


             MR. KING:   Sir, if he reads to "C" on page 81.

Q.        THE CORONER:   Have you got that?      Start at the
     bottom of page 79 against "H".

          Is it "people going forward") is that the
     paragraph, Hr. King?

          MR. KING:      Yes, indeed.   Sir, just so I don't
     mislead him:

Q. If you look to letter "E" you can see that we are
   dealing with 2.30 specifically.

          MR. MANNING:   Sir, in looking at that perhaps we
     can look at the question before, because that is where
     the description of the crowd comes, and then "the
     spread of it is over the whole enclave".

Q.        THE CORONER:   Starting reading at "G" then, on
     page 79. - How far do you want me to read?

Q.           MR. KING:   Have you read to page 81C? - A. Yes, I
     have.

Q. Just go back and have a look at page 79H and then I
   will ask you a question. - A. Yes.

Q. I am asking you about your view of the crowd outside
   the Leppings Lane turnstiles at 2.30 on 15th April,
   1989, and what I suggested to you earlier was that what
   you could see was that the crowd was thickly spread
   across all the turnstile enclave? - A. Yes.

Q. And you said to me that isn't a word or expression,
   thickly spread, which you wquld use? - A. It wasn't an
   expression that I thought I would use but I did use it,
   yes.

Q. Do you therefore now accept, to save my going through
   it all, that at 2.30 you could see that there was a
   crowd thickly spread across the whole of the turnstile
   enclave outside the Leppings Lane end? - A. Yes.

Q. So going back then to 2.30, given that at 2.30 you were
   of the view that half the people had still to come -
   that was your evidence to us already at the Leppings
   Lane end? - A. Probably, yes.

Q. Given that you could see this crowd thickly spread
   across the whole of the turnstile enclave, you also
   knew, didn't you, that the centre pens were from
   experience the most popular? - A. Yes, the centre pens
   were more popular than the wing pens.
                                                            65

                                                 B. D. MURRAY'


Q. You also knew, didn't you, that you had a
   responsibility for monitoring the build up of the crowd
   on the Leppings Lane Terrace? - A. The build up of the
   crowd?

Q.    On the terrace? - A. Yes, sir, I accepted that Ihad a
     duty along with others to monitor the crowd.

Q.    You would be able to see at 2.30, wouldn't you, that
     the centre pens compared with the side pens were
     clearly being filled, compared with the side pens? The
     side pens were hardly being filled up, isn't that the
     position, and the centre pens were being filled up, at
     2.30? - A. There were more people in the centre pens
     than there were in the others, yes.

Q. But itwas more obvious than that even. Clearly the
   centre pens were being filled, and the side pens there
   were wide open spaces, weren't there, even at 2.30? -
   A. No, I have said that there were more people in the
   centre pens. There were a lot more people in the
   centre pens than there were in the wing pens.

Q.    Right. Did you then at 2.30 consider that there might
     come a need to divert this crowd which you could see
     outside, when they came through into the Leppings Lane
     Terrace, to divert them from the centre pens to the
     side pens? - A. I didn't consider there was a need to
     divert the crowd at all.

Q. But I am not now talking about diverting it when you
   open a large gate, I am talking about simply so as to
   ensure that there was a reasonable distribution across
   the terraces before dangerous pressures, crowd
   pressures built up. Wasn't it obvious at 2.30 that you
   should have that in mind? - A. No, I have said that at
   that stage I did not consider it was necessary to
   divert the crowd and I only knew from experience, or I
   thought I knew from experience that in the past the
   crowd had found its own level on the terraces.

Q. I am sorry to press the point again, Mr. Murray, but
   you only had one experience, which was 1988? - A. Yes,
   sir, but that was based on success in the previous
   year.

          THE CORONERS   Mr. King, I think you have pressed
     the point quite sufficiently.

          MR. KING:   I appreciate that.   I am trying to
     move on in time anyway:

Q. But at 2.30 at a time when you made an assessment of^
   the numbers still to come, and at a time when - was it
                         at

                                                         66

                                               B. P. MURRAY


   at that time you told Mr. Duckenfield you thought you
   could get them all in? - A. It was about 2.30, yes.

Q. So there was clearly a discussion between you as to the
   numbers still to come at that time? - A. I don't know
   whether it was a discussion or whether it was just
   something I said to him.

Q. And at that time coincidentally there was also a
   discussion as to when one would delay kick-off? - A. I
   think it was coincidental, yes.

Q. It was at exactly the same time, wasn't it? - A. It was
   about the same time, it wasn't exactly, about the same
   time.

Q. How did that come into discussion? Remind me, please,
   Mr. Murray, as to when one would delay kick-off? Do
   you know how it came about that was brought up? - A. I
   think it was just about the way that you have put it
   there, Mr. Duckenfield saying that to me.

Q. But you would not have a discussion like that, would
   you? You would not be interested in it unless you were
   beginning to become concerned as to whether or not you
   could get everybody in? - A. That was something I could
   remember being spoken about, about 2.30. It was my
   intention to try and put everything I could remember
   had occurred on that day into a form of statement, for
   the information of the Public Inquiry. Everything that
   I could remember that we had talked about, everything
   that I could remember that had happened, I wanted to
   bring to the attention of the Public Inquiry, and I
   could recall that particular conversation happening.

Q. Doesn't it sound as if the reason that came up in
   conversation at 2.30 was that it was beginning to
   become obvious in the Control Box that you night not
   get everybody in still to come at 2.30? - A. I think it
   was just a question of Mr. Duckenfield getting his rni-w
   straight on the circumstances about delaying kick-off.

Q. And the answer you gave was by reference to some
   agreement, wasn t it, because you said it was what you
   had agreed? - A. What I had spoken to him about before,
   yes.

Q. I am interested in the use of the word agreed, because
   that is the expression you have used, isn't it? - A.
   That is the expression I have used. Okay, as far as I
   am concerned I used the word agreed. I certainly
   discussed it with Mr. Duckenfield, I told him the
   scenario that a kick-off would normally be agreed.
                                                          67

                                              B. D. MURRAY *


Q. An agreement sounds as if in advance it has been worked
   out a policy as to when you would delay kick-off and
   that is fair, isn't it? - A. I would say that by agreed
   I meant it was something that we had discussed before.

Q. And it is a fact, isn't it, that all you told Mr.
   Duckenfield as regards this agreement was that there
   had to be a specific reason, an identifiable problem
   for people not arriving, before you would delay kick-
   off? That was the gist of what you were saying, wasn't
   it? - A. I told him that was the usual situation with
   delaying kick-off as far as I was aware.

Q. There was no suggestion that you would abandon the
   policy if in fact, albeit people had come too late
   through their own fault, they were in difficulties
   outside? There was no mention of that, was there? - A.
   I don't think it was ever a rigid policy, it was the
   only circumstances, the only thing I knew about when
   kick-off would be delayed.

Q. Since we are dealing with kick-off, do you remember -
   you do remember, don't you - an invitation or
   suggestion from, I think, P.C. Buxton that kick-off be
   delayed? - A. Yes, sir, I recall that.

Q. You told us that you thought that had come after the
   gates had been opened? - A. I feel it must have.

Q. Why do you say it must have? - A. Because of the timing
   of it and the fact the players were coming onto the
   pitch.

Q. I say that because, I only put it to you, that you
   could be quite wrong about that, on the basis - and I
   don't know if you were at the Inquest when P.C. Buxton
   gave his evidence? - A. No, I wasn't.

        MR. KING:   Sir, I think it is important that I
   put this:

Q. P.C. Buxton's evidence was that it was several minutes
   after his request to delay kick-off that .he saw that
   the crowd was being relieved outside the turnstiles by
   the opening of the gates? - A. I can only accept that
   when I heard that message was when Sergeant Goddard
   replied immediately, "It's too late now, the players
   are on the field".

Q. Let me accept that for a moment. Why would it just be
   too late because the players were on the field? Why
   does that make it automatically too late to delay kick-
   off? - A. It was too late in those circumstances, I
                                               B. D. MURRAY'


feel, that presumably P.C. Buxton wanted the kick-off
delayed for whatever reason I don't know.

To say "for some reason I don't know", you were aware
by that time, whatever it was, that there had been a
very large problem outside the turnstile area at
Leppings Lane, weren't you? - A. There is no doubt that
if we could have communicated to that crowd outside the
turnstiles that the kick-off had been delayed, and if
they had taken any notice of that communication, it may
have had an effect.

Mr. Murray, I want to take it in stages. I want to
know why at the time you say it was, whenever it was,
that it was just too late to delay kick-off, merely
because the players were on the pitch? - A. It wasn't
merely because the players were on the pitch, it was
because the gates were open and the crowd had come in
by unauthorised means.

I understood - I may have totally misunderstood- that
you were saying, and that was the communication of
Sergeant Goddard, it was too late because the players
were on the pitch, so it is nothing to do with the
players being on the pitch then, it was too late? - A.
No. It doesn't nake any difference whether the players
were on the pitch or not, apart from the fact that once
the players come out a cheer goes up naturally, and it
would be extremely difficult to try and convince
anybody after that stage that you had delayed the kick-
off.

But it is a fact, isn't it, Mr. Murray, that you should
not refuse.to delay kick-off merely because the players
are on the pitch, if there is a crushing situation
outside? - A. I think I have already said that there
aren't any hard and fast rules at all about delaying
kick-off. There are no limitations. A kick-off can be
delayed whenever, for whatever reason.

Would you not agree that the statement, "It is too late
to delay kick-off, the players are already on the
pitch" sounds like just the application of a rigid
policy? - A. No, I don't.

You don't, all right.     Let me move on in time ....

        MR. MANNING:   In that case, sir, can we call
time?

        THE CORONER:   Yes - 10-past-3.

                   (Short Adjournment)
                                                                     69

                                                            B. D. MURRAY


Q‘    —      **• KING:             Murray» you have told us what your
                         V-   2   - f°   onJ15th April as to vhether or
      not you get numbers in and your assessment of the
      »e55jCe8, Be5ween 2.30 and, shall we say, quarter-to
      3 did you »onitor in any way the Leppings Lane
      terraces, have a look at it, the build-up on the
      Leppings Lane terraces between 2.30 and quarter-to 3?
      - A. I am sure that I would have looked at the
                tta “ t i « ! aCeS and eVer7 Part °f the *round
Q.    In looking at the Leppings Lane terraces, did nothing
      al     strike you as to the distribution of the fans
      at that time between 2.30 and quarter-to 3? - A. There
      was nothing I saw that caused me any concern at all.

Q.    Did you observe the marked disparity between the wing
      -e»S Z ** i?* ce?tre Pens? “ A- I can't recall noticinr
      a marked disparity. It wasn't something that I recall
      particularly noticing.                                1


Q*   ?° bad « disparity that it looked, for example, in Pen
      6- and you know what I mean by Pen 6 , do you not? -
     A* IGS| I do*

           thut had 5 een set aside for segregation purposes
     j?jnuWe ^n®ir»    course, that it had not been? - A. I
     did hear that afterwards.

              CORONER: Hr. King, I think somebody said
     tnat. It does not necessarily mean that that is
     correct.•

          MR. KING: I agree, sir. He is entitled to
     disagree with it, of course.

          THE CORONER: But if you put it so marked, then
     you are stating it as a gospel fact.

     know                **ir, I was not there, as you well

            THE CORONER: Indeed, that is why I said it.

          MR. KING: I am trying to fit this witness's
     evidence in with other evidence, of course, sir. At
     the end of the day I do not have to assess the
     evidence. I am in that happy position.

            THE CORONER:      Yes, a very happy position.

          M®* KING: But, Mr. Murray, would you regard
     yourself as the principal Officer in the Control Box
     who was monitoring the build-up of the crowd? - A. I
                                                                    70

                                                        B. D. MURRAY

               charge of the Control Box. I would be looking
          ij6 kCr?       would be looking at everything. I '
       would be looking all around.                Tuning, i

 Q‘    L ? 3 2 n<>t pr58S l t any further than this. It is your
       t h       a    t W* ?U8t af8ess At» but y°u are saying
       In d             reSi8tered wlth y«>« at all between 2:30
       and, shall we say, quarter-to 3 as to the distribution
       oena?6 8 JeCTa*iS8 i,be£Wee? the centre Pens and the side
       pens?       A. I think what I said was that nothing caused
       Uft*C£nCernu 1 *°uld o n ly qualify that by saying I do
       not know what effect or how long the Control Room was
       disrupted when the radio went down.
 Q.    The radio was out of operation from - I do not want to
                 Jnt? 3'0ur mouth- n°w lon8 »ould you say, In
           r  5 mJn»     was the rad*o out of operation in
       estimates0}* hX! " A * 1 d°n,t kn(W» but 1 think 1 have
       be longer, I E tS T i £ )£ n,,t*'’ t’'° mi"utes- U could

Q‘ -®A        r ^ A  l0?f tlme» but 8 relatively short time?
    long.     consider l t was a short time. I don't know how

Q‘    ?hA?e i 8 8 “®ssage, is there not, which is logged at
      r ™ ? r « ? 6re«. J?8rd 1 8 radioing, I think, to Force
      Control outside the ground at Hammerton Road and is
      mfssafef          18 d<>Wn? “ A ‘ YeS* 1 have 8een that


Q’ 2!30handP2 ?4 ? !n tS U * * * ,4 2 ? " A‘ " h i c h ±a between
Q.                  radi° was back in business by the time
              5!   ?    is first request  for the gates to
      be opened? - A. I think so, yes.
Q.    I just want to return briefly to make sure I
      f2 nfr8t?!! I?!Jr evidence as to the distribution of the
           I ™       ? not se? anything unusual which caused
      you concern, but could you tell us this. It did
      register, did it, that the centre pens were clearly
      fuller than the side pens? - A. Yes.           xeariy
Q.    Did it register with you - this is between 2.30 and
      fSii       °«.2 ~     the centre Pens were markedly more
      neii i     l   l  dt pens? " A - 1 think that the centre
      pens and the north-west terrace were fuller than the
      UillfrE parts of the terrace. I wouldn't say that the
      centre pens were any fuller than the north-west
      terrace or vice-versa.
                                                              71

                                                   B. D. MURRAY

 Q.    I am really considering the centre pens as opposed to
       the side pens? - A. Yes, I know.           PP°sea to

 Q.    I am not suggesting for one moment thatyou did a head
       count, but do you think you looked at the west
       terraces at about 2.45, something like that? - A I
       would think I did. I was looking all over.

 Q.    I am not suggesting that you necessarily would have
       formed the conclusion that pens at that stage had a
       specific number in them, but the centre pens on any
       view were full at that stage, were they Sot, at 2 ?4 5 ?
         A. I can t recall. I can't recall sufficiently to
       describe them as full or nearly full.

 Q.    I am not suggesting that you cannot arguewith me -   I
       Know there are arguments about whether you could see
       an empty space here, or an empty space there - but
      ± r & ? 0np;r^ W l 5 5 the 8lde pens’ the c*nt*e pens
            w * ?             pens clearly had space, that
      would be fair, would it not? - A. There were a lot
      more people in the centre pens than the side pens.

Q.    I cannot take that any further. Even at that stage,
                    * an?          t 0 °Pen «ates comes,was it
      not within your mind, did you not turn yourself tothe
           <°n    th? need t 0 dlvert any people coming in
      even in a regular route to the side pens as opposed to
      the centre   pens? - A. It hadn't crossed my mind to
      take a course of action such as that, no.

Q.    As I understand your evidence earlier today, that
      really was not part of the system you thought you were
      operating is that right? - A. To divert?

      Iff*      No* 1 had n0 Prior planning for it and it
      aid not cross my mind at that time.

Q.    At 2.40 there was a request from Inspector Hand-Davi
      was there not, a mounted Officer, for mounted Officers
                   Leppings Lane end? - A. Yes, he asked for
      mounted Officers from the other end of the ground.

Q.    Upon that you sent round a mounted serial, did you
      not? - A. Sergeant Goddard was very quick, he straight
      away asked Sergeant Salisbury to make available to
      Leppings Lane all the horses that he could spare from
                    Roa2 end\ 1 disPatched a standby serial
      of foot Officers from the gymnasium.

Q.    The foot Officers which you sent round were Inspector
      Delaney's serial then? - A. Inspector Delaney, yes.
                                             B. D. MURRAY

 You also got a message around that time about the
 tannoy to be used outside Leppings Lane? - A. A little
 later I think the request came for a tannoy message.

You were able to see on the video the condition and
state of the crowd outside the Leppings Lane
turnstiles, the enclave which you have described? - A.
It was about that time that the video operator used
his zoom lens and zoomed in on one of the horsemen who
was surrounded by a crowd of people.

How was the density of the crowd at that stage, that
is about 2.40, changing compared with what you had
noted at about 2.30 when you were making your
assessment as to whether you would get everybody in? -
A. That is very difficult because at 2.30 I had an
overview of the whole of the enclave and Leppings
Lane. At 2.40 the video zoomed in, as I say, on a
horseman and the people around him. But my impression
from that was that the crowd was more densely packed.

Right, so at 2.40 we could summarise the position in
the Control Box to your knowledge as this, could we
not, that at about 2 0 minutes before, or just over 2 0
minutes before, at around 2.17, there had been the
request from Mr. Marshall to close Leppings Lane? - A.
Yes, that is correct.

Then there had been a request for further mounted
Officers to be sent? - A. At about 2.40, yes.

There is the sending of the reserve serial, there is a
request for the tannoy message and you have seen the
crowd in your perception getting a lot denser. Taking
all those factors together, was it not at that stage
obvious that there was a problem outside the turnstile
area in terms of the numbers of people and getting
them into the ground? - A. I think we were getting t. '
a situation then where there was obviously a problem
because of the fact of the request for mounted
Officers, as you say, the despatching of the serial
and the messages that were to be passed.

At the   same time you were able to see, by just looking
at the   monitors, the state of the west terraces? - A.
Yes, I   could see if I looked round the ground how many
people   were on the terrace.

You then have the malfunction of the radio system for
about two minutes or so, that is what you have told
us? - A. I think we are possibly talking about two
minutes being down air time. Just how long the place
was disrupted, I do not know. The Communications
Officer was a large, heavily built man and, like I
                                                           73

                                                  B. D. HURRAY

      say, it was not just losing the air time:   it was
      actually the disruption to the control.
Q.   I understand that, but none the less the radio is back
     on after that period of time, that short period of
     time? • A. Yes, the radio comes back on.

Q.   As regard then available manpower, by which I mean
     what was available to you in the Control Box to call
     up for assistance if you so wanted, the position was
     this, was it not, that before Hr. Harshall's first
     request for opening the gates, but just before, you
     got the message from Inspector Bennett asking for
     assistance at Leppings Lane, is that not right? - A. I
     cannot say whether that message came before or after
     but Inspector Bennett certainly asked for assistance*
     He was on top of the turnstiles. Again the camera
     picked him up and I could see him. He asked for
     assistance down at Leppings Lane.

Q.   Hr. Hurray I do not want to delay matters too much - I
     am conscious of time - but you have been able in the
     past, have you not, to suggest that it was about the
     time of Hr. Harshall's message, immediately before or
     shortly before, that Inspector Bennett asked for his
     assistance? - A. I will accept that if I have said
     that somewhere else.

Q.   I do not want to mislead you. - A. I can’t remember, I
     am sorry.

        Tou did say At» for example, to Lord Justice
           *       you would accept that, would you? - A. If I
     did say it, it was fresher in my mind than it is now.




                              /Q.   I will move on
                                                   B. D. MURRAY

 Q. I will move on but for those who want to check it, it is
    page 90 of the transcript, at letter F.   We have this
    picture that Inspector Bennett asked for assistance at
    Leppings Lane and around the same time you get
    information that in fact there are a number of spare
    Serials in the gymnasium?   That is a message which comes
    through from Inspector Sewell? - A. If I can just
    explain, the radio, of course, is on talk-through so that
    everybody can hear the messages being passed.   Inspector
    Sewell picked it up from the radio message from Inspector
    Bennett to Control.

Q. Yes. - A. He came through on the telephone before we
   could ring him and said he had spare Serials of D
   Division Officers who should have taken up a standby
   position in the gym after quarter to three.

Q. How many Serials did he have available? - A. He had ten
   Serials.

Q. Of how many men? - A. Well, he had ten Serials; they
   were a Sergeant and eight.   I asked him to send five and
   fifty.   He actually sent, I think, six Serials, which is
   six Sergeants and forty-eight.

Q. So there were in fact available to you, if you had chosen
   to use them, up to eighty men, ten Serials with eight
   Officers? - A. Yes.                               B

Q. You despatched to Inspector Bennett six Serials of eight,
   that is forty-eight? - A. Yes.

Q.    This is before any instruction was given to openthe
     gates? - A. Yes, I think it was before the gates were
     opened.

Q. Therefore, before the gates were opened, as regards
   available manpower to you in the Control Box there was
   the reserve Serial which had already been sent ahead -
   Inspector Delaney's? - A. That is correct.

Q. There was the eighty men who you were told were in the
   gymnasium, of which forty-eight were despatched? - A.
   Yes, I asked for five and fifty.

Q. Of course there were the existing Serials on the
   concourse? - A. Yes.   The despatching of the Officers
   down to the Leppings Lane end was to try and retrieve the
   situation which was existing outside.

Q. I want just to discover the available manpower.   You are
   helping us very fairly with it.   Let me take it in
   stages.   Had Inspector Delaney's Serial been sent to any
   particular part of Leppings Lane? - A. I did not give
                                                  , ,
                                                           7,5   •



                                                 B. D. MURRAY *

   them a particular part.    I sent them down to the
   Leppings Lane end.

Q. What about the one sent to Inspector Bennett?   Were they
   sent to any particular area? - A. They weren't sent to a
   particular area by me.   They were asked to go down to
   the Leppings Lane end.

Q. They would approach the end from within the ground? - A.
   I would have expected them to have gone along the
   concourse behind the North Stand.

Q. They would therefore end in a position whereby they could
   gain access to the concourse area at the Leppings Lane
   end? - A. If they had gone that way, yes, they would.

Q. Of course we still had left in the gymnasium the four
   Serials which had never been sent? - A. I retained those
   as reserves.

Q. Given that is the manpower, let me now deal with timings.
   You would accept, I am sure, there was a time gap between
   Mr. Marshall first asking for the gates to be opened and
   the instruction to open them? - A. Yes, there was a gap.

Q. The instruction to open them, of course, was the
   instruction which led to Gate C being opened for what we
   cell the second time? - A* Yes, Gate C was opened when
   the instruction was sent through.

Q. We know there were two openings and the first one was not
   one you were expecting?   That is the one you saw open
   for a short period and then closed again? -A. Yes, that
   is correct, it did.

Q. What we call the second opening was at 2.52? - A. I will
   accept that time, yes.

Q. The time of Mr. Marshall's first message, the first
   message he gave, seems to be accepted to be 2.57.   Would
   you accept that? - A. I have to accept that if it can be
   proved.   It seemed only two or three minutes between the
   first request and the second request, but I will accept
   whatever times have been proved.

Q. If - I mean, it is a matter of evidence - but if it is
   evidence, and accepted, that the first message from
   Mr. Marshall is 2.47 and the order to open the gates led
   to the authorised opening at 2.52 of Gate C, that is a
   time gap of five minutes? - A. Yes, it is.

Q. Indeed, as regards Gate A, 1 don't suppose you know the
   times of the opening of Gate A yourself? - A. I only seem
   to think that Gate A came soon after the other requests.
                                                             76

                                                   B. D. MURRAY


Q. The request to open Gate A was after Gate C had been
   opened, wasn't it, the authorised opening? - A. Yes, it
   was.

Q. So it was after 2.52.   The request to open Gate A, and
   the order to open it, followed on very quickly? - A. Yes,
   the request came in, and the authority was given almost
   straight away.

Q. If, and it is a matter of evidence, if Gate A was opened
   at 2.58, if that be the case, then there would have been
   eleven minutes between Mr. Marshall's first request to
   open the gates at 2.47 and the opening of Gate A? - A. If
   the times are right it has got to be eleven minutes, yes..

Q. Dealing with the five minute period between 2.47 and
   2.52, when Gate C was opened in the unauthorised way, how
   many people came through from your view? - A. I think I
   estimated 150/200, but I did not see it open.   I only
   saw part of it.

Q. Within those five minutes Mr. Duckenfield was having to
   make the decision whether or not to authorise the opening
   of the gates, was he not? - A. Yes, he was having to do
   that, sir.

Q. You ultimately had to press him for a decision? - A. I
   did say to him that as far as I was concerned a stage had
   been reached when it had to be opened.

Q. You said to him, "Are we going to open the gates or not?"
   - A. Yes, I did - words to that effect.

Q. That is something you remember because it clearly sticks
   in your mind? - A. I do remember, yes.

Q. Was the impression you were gaining that Mr. Duckenfield
   was uncertain in his mind as to what to do? - A* I don't
   think I gained that impression.   I think it was just a
   question, as far as I was concerned, that the time had
   come when we had to open the gates.

Q.    During those five minutes it is right, of course, that as
     regards those five minutes no instructions were sent out
     from the Control Box as regards any sort of reception
     committee - reception Serials - for the people who would
     come in upon the opening the gates? - A. I don't think
     anyone was given specific instructions to receive the
     people coming in.

Q. As a matter of fact, no instructions were sent out to any
   of the Serials we have talked about, saying, "The gates
   are about to be opened.    Position yourselves here,
   there, or what have you."?
                                                            77•   •



                                                  B. D. MURRAY *


          THE CORONER:   This is another one which I am going
     to refresh your memory on.

          THE WITNESS:   Yes.   Well, no instructions were
     given to that effect, but like I have said, the radio was
     operating on the talk-through mode and every Officer with
     a radio could hear messages going backwards and forwards
     from Control and whoever they were talking to.

Q.        MR. KING:   As a matter of fact there was no
     specific instruction sent out? - A. I didn't send an
     instruction out, no.

Q. It follows from that there was no instruction, for
   example, to direct them in any particular way for anybody
   coming through the gates? - A. I did not give any
   instructions to direct people.

Q. There were no instructions, obviously, from that to close
   off the entrance to the tunnel? - A. I gave no
   instructions to close the tunnel.

Q. As a matter of fact, in those five minutes you clearly
   had the manpower available to utilise for the purpose of
   closing off the tunnel if you had wanted to?   You had
   the manpower there, didn't you? - A. If I could have got
   the manpower to the tunnel in time I would have thought
   it was possible.

Q. There were five minutes between the first request and the
   opening of Gate C, all right?    That is long enough, more
   than long enough, to get the Serials we have already
   described in a position, if you had wanted to, outside
   the tunnel? - A. One would have hoped so.    I heard a
   Sergeant in one of the Serials speaking here two or three
   days ago and he obviously never got to the Leppings Lane
   end.   I heard him say he made his way along the track
   and stop behind the goals.    I cannot say.   I would hope
   that if I had been able to identify a particular task for
   Officers at the gymnasium to do, I would have hoped that
   they may have been able to get there in time, but I
   cannot say.

Q. In any event you had already sent ahead not only the
   reserve Serial of Mr. Higgins', there had already been
   sent ahead the six times eight Serials to Inspector
   Bennett? - A. Those are the Serials I was talking about,
   just now.   One of them did not get there, obviously.

Q. Those forty-eight men, the six times eight, had already
   been despatched before the instruction to open the gates?
   - A. I would have hoped so, sir, but as I say, one of the
   Sergeants was in here saying he never got there.
                                                                  75
                                                      *                *

                                                    B. D. MURRAY

 Q. You know of nothing yourself to tell us about which gives
    you any reason to think you did not have the manpower ~
    if it had been so decided - the manpower to utilise
    before Gate C was opened, or any of the gates were
    opened, for the purpose of closing off the tunnel,
    directing fans and so forth? - A. I think I could
    probably have got the manpower to attempt to do that task
    and got them down to the tunnel in time if it had crossed
    my mind.

Q. Before the order for the gates to be opened, it was known
   to you in the Control Box that there was a large crowd in
   the enclave outside the turnstile area at the Leppings
   Lane end? “A. Yes, I could see there was a large crowd ■
   outside.

Q. You were in a position at that stage, in the five minute
   period between 2.47 and 2.52, to observe the state of the
   West Terraces, weren't you? - A. I was in a position to
   be able to observe them, yes.

Q. To be fair to you, Mr. Duckenfield in the Control Boxwas
   in a position to look first of all at the monitor showing
   the Leppings Lane turnstiles, wasn't he? -A. He was in
   the same situation as I was.

Q. Just as you could see there was a large crowd outside,
   you have no reason to doubt that he also could see it,
   have you? - A. No, I have no reason to doubt it.

Q.    You were in a position from the Control Box to see the
     state of the LeppingsLane terraces and Mr. Duckenfield
     was too? - A. I would think we could both have looked at
     the terraces and seen the state of them, yes.

Q* H * 1 cf w ^ st show y ° u for a ®°®ent photographs 509, and
   511 - 509 is probably the best we are going to do for
   about this time.

         MR. GRIFFITHS:   C.509, sir.

Q.        MR. KING:   Mr. Murray, this is a photograph which
     shows at 2.52, all right? - A. Yes.

Q. I would have-liked to have shown you one at 2.51, but
   i ficis     best 1           1 ne®d to show you C.511 and
   C.326.A for the purpose of looking at the side pens.
   Just look at 511, which is two minutes later. - A. Yes.




               Q* I am sorry, I will have to
                                                             79
                                                    1L_P. MURRAY

Q. I am sorry but I will have to come back to 509 for a
   moment. On 509 we can see the beginnings of the wing
   pen, pen 6? - A. Yes, we can.

Q. On 509 all we can see is a corner of it but such corner
   as we can see clearly, it would be fair to say, it
   looks as if it is almost completely empty apart from
   two or three people? - A. It looks very sparse in that
   particular part I can see on this film.

Q. Again under the Control Box the area leading into pen 1
   and leading into pen 2, although there is clearly more
   people at the back again it looks very sparse to the
   side of pen 1 and down to the front? - A. Yes, there
   are less people there but that is the part of the
   ground where I expect there to be less people.

Q. I accept that. Then to 511 we get a better view of pen
   6 two minutes later? - A. Yes.

Q. If we can move to 326A we get an even better view of
   pen 6 at somefive minutes later? - A. Yes.

Q. Going back to     the position just beforethe order was
   given to order the gates to be opened, because we know
   gate C was opened at 2.52, if one looked at the west
   terraces it would be clear that pen 6 had marked empty
   spaces in it? - A. From where that photograph is taken,
   yes.

Q. Even without the photograph, the position on the
   photograph, it must have been obvious, must it not,
   from your use of the cameras you had from the Control
   Box that pen 6 was markedly empty? That was not
   difficult to see, was it? - A. From the views that we
   were getting from the cameras, from the views that I
   could see from the Control Roan, it wasn't obvious.

Q. At the end of the day that will be a matter of
   evidence. You are saying that from the Control Box
   with your use of the videos, the cameras, and you had
   the ability to look along as we have already described?
   - A. I think you have got to look at the individual
   cameras. I think the colour camera was unfortunately
   focussed on the problem area in the Kop and that is
   where it stayed until about three o'clock. The camera
   on the gantry next to the Control Box was unfortunately
   not working up to its potential. I do not know how
   that affected it but I can see from the angle that that
   photograph is taken, 326A, yes, there is a lot of room
   on the front of pen 6 but I didn't have that view and
   if I had had that view it might have affected my
   decisions.
                                                                       ao
                                                             B. D. MORRAV


 Q. If you had had that view, which decision would have
    been affected? - A . I don't know.

             THE CORONER:-   I think that is hypothetical.

 Q.          MR* KING: Before the gates were opened, if one
      o ^ o t - at h i ? % r St terraces' would you accept this much
          not, that there was an obvious difference between
      the state of the centre pens and the side pens, would
      you have said that much? - A. I think I have said that
      there were a lot more people in the centre pens and the
      north west terrace than there were in the other parts
      of the terrace.

Q. You have agrees with me that there was a large crowa
   outside the gates? - A. Yes, there was a large crowd of
   people outside the gates.

      fJJ respect of which the orderwas aboutto given for
      them to be opened? - a . Yes.                  s   or

Q. Once in the concourse area, whichever gates were
   opened, those People had to go somewhere, did they not?
      from S S ' c S H .       9   int° thS concourse first away

°* not? -hA7 Yes t0 9° somewhere into the ground, did they

Q * H i 8 i2 a f*e8t±on y°« <^o not have to answer. Before
         ° er      v   9ates to be opened was made did you
    ask yourself the question, "Where are these people
    going to go when we open the gates?"? - A. I can’t
    recall asking myself the question. All I can recall is
    trying to relieve the injury and suffering that was
    taking place outside the gates in the concourse in the
    enclave in front of the turnstiles. That was the
    problem.

°*            ?uVS bee?.odious to anybody who turned his
     mind to the question of what was going to happen after
     the gates had been opened that those people had to go
     somewhere on to the terraces? - A. What Sas obvioSs ?o
     me is that we had a terrible problem outside.
     Experienced Officers were letting us know that people
     were being injured, likely to be killed. We had never
     had anything like it before. There was tremendous
     pressure to take a course of action to relieve that and
     Obvious1^ 86    actlon was taken. Nothing else was
                                                                       81
                                                       &.P, m      m

Q. So your evidence is that you yourself never considered
   where these people were going to go if these gates were
   opened? - A. I did not consider they were going to go
   in any particular direction.

Q. Did you consider where they were going to go?     Did the
   question enter your head.

          THE CORONER: Mr. King, forgive me, but I think it
     is at least the third time in this particular series
     that you have asked the same question and he has given
     you the same answer.

          MR. KING: I apologise, sir, I thought he was
     saying something different.

          THE CORONER:   It is difficult for you I know.

          MR. KING: I thought he was saying something
     different and I apologise for that.

          THE CORONER: I thought he said, and let me make
     sure I have got it right, that the question of where
     they were going to go did not cross his mind.

          MR. KING: I thought he had said that and I
     thought he was saying something different just then.      I
     apologise.

Q.        THE CORONER:   That is right, Mr. Murray, is it? -
     A. Yes, sir.

          MR. MANNING: Sir, I was about to say, I am
     writing and my learned friend obviously is not but I
     will read him out the two replies that have already
     been given in answer to that question. I am sure the
     shorthand writer could read it back if my learned
     friend needs it.

          THE CORONER:   I am satisfied we do not need to go
     over that again.

Q.        MR. KING: I misunderstood you. I thought you
     said in the end that you did not consider which
     particular direction they were going in but what you
     are saying is, and I accept it, that you did not
     consider where they were going to go at all? - a . They
     were going to go in through the gates.

Q. After that the question of where they were going to go
   did not cross your mind, we have established that? - A.
   It did not cross my mind that they were going to go in
   any particular direction.
                                                      B. P. MURRAY


          MR. KING: As long as everybody is happy that
     means the same thing, so be it.

          THE CORONER:   That is what he has said.

Q-        MR. KING: You would agree with me though that
     they would have to go somewhere? - A. Once into the
     ground they had to go somewhere else, yes.

Q. Po you know yourself, and please say yes or no, as to
   whether or not Mr. Puckenfield in the five minutes
   between the first request and the order to open the
   gate, considered the question of where the spectators
   were going to go if the gates were opened? - A. I do
   not know that, sir.

Q. Going back to the view of the terraces, and you have
   told us you did not see this which is why I have to put
   it in this way, if it was obvious - and you do not
   agree - from the Control Box before the gates were
   opened and the order was given that there was plenty of
   space in the side pens and little or no room in the
   centre pens, if that had been obvious but I accept you
   say it was not, you would not have wanted, would you,
   the people who were still outside the gates who were
   going to be let into the ground when the gates were
   opened, you would not want them to have gone into the
   centre pens?

           MR. MANNING: Sir, I have to say I do not think
     that that is a fair or proper question. If, as my
     learned friend has already said, the witness does not
     accept the premise from which that particular question
     starts but then says, "If you did accept it then what
     would have been the position?", it seems to me that he
     must work from the situation that the witness starts
     from.

          THE CORONER:   I agree with you.

Q*        MR. KING: If you in the Control Box are
     monitoring a terrace and you know that a large number
     of people are about to enter through a large series of
     gates, do you not accept that the question you have to
     ask yourself in that situation, and the obvious
     question you have to ask yourself is, where on the
     terraces are we going to let this large number of
     people go to?

          THE CORONER: Mr. King, I am very sorry, I do not
     want to interrupt but we have dealt with this four
     minutes ago. He gave a clear reply as to what he
              ■0


                                                            •   8-3

                                                      a, p, msm
     thought or did not think at the time. There is
     absolutely no point in doing it again.

          MR. KING: I am entitled to ask, sir, and I do not
     accept it as a pure hypothesis, because it is important
     to know what this witness in his experience cam tell us
     about policing at matches. I am entitled to ask him
     whether or not he agrees or does not agree that if the
     position is that side pens have plenty of space and
     centre pens do not that in that situation he would want
     to take steps to prevent a large number of people about
     to come in from getting into the centre pens. I do not
     understand why I am not entitled to put that question
     to him.

          THE CORONER: Are you wanting to ask him based on
     his experience? I suppose if you put it like that,
     purely hypothetically.

          MR. MANNING: As long as it is understood, sir,
     that it is purely hypothetical because the Officer has
     used the word on more than one occasion that this was
     unprecedented. That in any usage of the word means
     that he had never ever known it to happen before which
     means, therefore, if he is drawing on experience his
     experience cannot help him. Therefore, how cam he
     possibly amswer the question?

Q.       MR. KING: Mr. Murray, when the order was given
     there was no specific order given as to which gates,
     was there? - A. Frew what I cam recall, no, sir.

Q. You accept, do you, when gate C was opened that the
   crowd coming through gate C, the first thing they would
   see a&ead of them as regards the direction into the
   ground would be the tunnel? Do you accept that? - A. I
   know that now, yes.

Q. You say you know that now as if you did not know it in
   1989 but as regards the gate which we know as gate C
   and I am not now specifically worrying about the letter
   but where it was and if Mr. Griffiths could just point
   it out to us, that gate, gate C, through which on the
   instruction which was going to be opened, once that was
   opened and people came through that gate the only thing
   that people could see in front of them as regards
   getting into the ground would be the tunnel, would it
   not? - A. I have said that I can see that now but at
   the time I couldn't draw the sort of route that people
   coming through an unexpected exit gate would take when
   they got into the ground. I don't know that end of the
   ground that intimately.
                                                                       84
                                                          D. MURRAY


Y e s ^ I ^ a d 611 r°Und 1116 9round         had you not? -   a   .

You would know the gates to which the reference was
being made by Mr. Marshall presumably? - a . I knew
           three large 9ates at tlMt end of the ground.
I didn t know exactly what was in front of each gate or
where they opened on to.                         9   or




                             /Q. You knew..
                                              B. D. MURRAY’


Q. You knew that they would open onto the concourse? > A.
   Yes, I did.

Q. Are you saying that you did not even know that one of
   them entered into the concourse immediately behind
   turnstiles A>G? - A. I knew that one of the gates
   entered that concourse, yes.

Q. And you knew that before the beginning of the match on
   15th April, 1989, didn't you? - A. Yes, I am not trying
   to deny that.

Q. Therefore you can confirm, can't you, that anybody
   coming through that gate leading onto the concourse
   behind A>G, what is immediately in front of them is the
   tunnel, isn't it? - A. I am saying to you that now I
   know and I will accept that, but what I am saying is
   before that event I didn't know the Ground that
   intimately that I could see what was immediately in
   front of each exit gate, each turnstile. No, I didn't
   think that that was the obvious thing that would face
   people coming through that gate.

Q. Well, I can't pursue that any further.

       THE CORONER:   No, I don't think you can. I want
  to stop for a few minutes because we are going to go on
  until 4.30. Can I say we will go on until 4.30 today.
  If need be we are going to sit on the Saturday, so make
  arrangements > not the whole of the Saturday, of
  course. That is not popular with me, let me tell you,
  and it is not going to be popular with anybody but if
  we have to we have got two Saturdays left before the
  end of the month, I want us to conclude this Inquest
  before the end of the month, and if need be we will do
  that, so make the necessary arrangements. We will go
  on until 4.30 every day, as far as I can see, and
  Friday we are going to have to treat as a full working
  day this week, certainly.

       Let's have a quick break until 5-past, but we are
  stopping at around 4.30, we are not going on and on.

                   (Short Adjournment)

       THE CORONER:   Before we continue, Hr. King I have
  tried to give you as much latitude as possible and I
  hope you accept that, and I have never tried to prevent
  you asking whatever is appropriate, but if you could
  try and focus in.

       MR. KING:   I agree, sir. The reason why we have
  gone a bit longer than normal is, of course, we are
  dealing with vital events at this stage.
                                                            8.6

                                               B. D. MURRAY *

         THE CORONER:   I know, I appreciate that and that
    is why I have not wanted to hinder you more than I need
    to.

         MR. KINGs   I don't intend to be as detailed in
    subsequent matters.

 Q. Can I just make sure I understand, as quickly as
    possible, what your state of knowledge was on 15th
    April, Mr. Murray, as regards the layout of the Ground.
    You would know, wouldn't you, that there was a tunnel
    which was a centre tunnel leading onto the West
    Terraces? - A. Yes, I knew there was a tunnel there.

Q. And you knew where it was positioned in the Ground? -
   A. I knew it was at the Leppings Lane, yes. I knew it
   was in the concourse.

Q. Did you also know that the centre pens tended to be the
   most popular pens? - A. I knew that the centre pens
   tended to be the most popular pens?      I knew, yes,
   the centre pens were the most popular.

Q. Had you yourself ever gone down the tunnel yourself,
   walked down it? - A. Just walked down the tunnel, yes,
   I would think I had walked down the tunnel.

Q. You would know therefore that it had a marked gradient
   near the end of it? - A. I can't recall being aware of
   that. I don't know whether I walked down it or up it,
   I can't remember. If you realise that I haven't
   policed the Ground, I haven't been on the Ground when
   events were taking place. I have walked round the
   Ground when it was empty on more than one occasion and
   taken in what I could see.

Q. Letme go on to after the decision to open the gates
   had been made and the order had been given.  You in the
   Control Box were able to see the gate C opened and
   being in a state of openness for about five minutes,
   weren't you? - A. I could see that the gate was open
   and people were coming through, yes. I don't know how
   long I watched it.

Q. We know that it was open from 2.52 and 6 seconds to
   2.57 and 40 seconds, so we know it was open for about
   five minutes? - A. Yes, well I will accept that.

Q. Andyou would be in a position to see during those five
   minutes what was happening as regards seeing people
   coming through the gates, wouldn t you, gate C? - A. I
   do recall seeing people coming through the gate.
                                                            87

                                                  B. D. MURRAY’

 Q. And you were able to see, if you were watching, a
    steady stream of people coming through the gate over
    that five minute period? - A. I recall seeing a lot of
    people coming through the gate, yes.

Q. At that stage, and this is a different question from
   the one before, because I am now asking you as to your
   considerations after gate C was opened, at that stage,
   at any time during that five minutes, did it ever enter
   your head at that stage where that throng of people
   were going to? - A. Yes, I considered that people would
   go all over, onto the terraces, into the stand, into
   the concourse.

Q. No, I am sorry, I am talking now about those people you
   could see on the monitor entering gate C into the
   concourse area you could see on the monitor? - A. I am
   talking about people coming into the Ground, yes, that
   I could see.

Q. Those people coming in over that five minute period,
   you could see on the monitor were entering the area of
   the Ground which was bordered on one side by a wall
   with a gap in it, you knew that, didn't you? - A. Yes,
   I did.

Q. And you could see from the monitor, therefore, the area
   they were entering was that area which was in front of
   the tunnel, you would know that? - A. I knew the tunnel
   was in that particular part of the concourse.

Q. What reason if any did you have to think that the
   people entering through that gate in that throng would
   go sideways through the gap in the wall, that is the
   wall dividing the A-G concourse from the 1-16
   concourse? - A. I am sorry, Mr. King, but I didn't
   think they would go in any particular direction. I
   didn't have any reason to feel they were going to go
   for a gap in the wall, for the tunnel. I just saw thf~j
   coming, they had been released from outside, they had
   taken the pressure off the people who were being
   injured and they came into the Ground. I expected them
   to disperse all over.

Q. You would know   that there was nobody    on the concourse
   when they camethrough gate C directing     them sideways,
   you would know that, wouldn't you? - A.    I know that
   there were serials on the concourse, I    didn't know what
   they were doing.

Q. You weren't expecting those serials, were you, to
   direct them sideways? You had no reason to think that,
   did you? - A. I wasn't expecting them to, nor was I not
   expecting them to do.
                                                          $8
                                               B. D. MURRAY'

Q. You would know that it was no part, under the
   Operational Order, of any of your serials specifically
   to direct spectators sideways. You would know that? -
   A. There was nothing in the Order to say that, no.

Q. I don't want to waste time but are you really saying
   even in the five minutes when gate C was opened that it
   wasn t obvious then that that throng were heading
   straight for the tunnel and the centre pens? - A. Do
   you think I would have done nothing about it if I had
   known that that was going to be the case, or if it had
   been obvious to me that was going to be the case? Do
   you think I would have done nothing about it if anybody
   had brought it to my attention?

Q* If it had been obvious that they were going to the
   tunnel and the centre pens, what would you have done
   about it? - A. I don't know. I feel I might have got
   in touch with the Officer in charge of that area and
   asked him to deflect. I honestly don't know.

Q. Why would you have wanted to do something about it.
       THE CORONER!    No.

       MR. MANNING:    Are we not back really one question
  down the line to where I intervened before?

       MR. KING!   I am sorry, it is a legitimate line of
  reasoning. If this Officer is saying, "if I had known
  they were going towards the tunnel I would have done
  something about it", to ask why he would have done
  something about it?

        THE CORONER:   It is a legitimate and an
   interesting point but it does not, I think, advance the
  object of this Inquest, and that is simply, Mr. King,
  that this Officer has said that he did not do anythin^
  about it, that is fair enough.    You have asked him.
  and I didn t object to that, whether it wasn't obvious
  to him that something needed to be done. His response,
  was that if it had been obvious to him he would
  undoubtedly have done something. Now the next
  question, which is what we are talking about, "What
  would you have done?", doesn't advance matters any
  further forward. I did allow the first one but I am
  not going to allow a whole string of questions as to
  what could have been ....

       MR. KING:   Sir, with respect, that wasn't my
  question. My question was if it had been obvious to
  him they were going to the tunnel why he would have
  done something about it, what ....
                                                          89

                                               B. D. MURRAY

        MR. ISAACS:    I am sorry, sir, I must interrupt
   my learned friend because that is not, in fact, what
   happened. He asked the question what he would have
   done and then the Superintendent gave an. explanation,
   he said he was not sure what he would have done, he
   might have done something, and then my learned friend
   said, "Why might you have done that", so my learned
   friend has fallen into error, no doubt because he is on
   his feet at the moment. He actually did ask the
   question why in relation to the Superintendent's answer
   as to what, in fact, he might have done.

        THE CORONER:   That is right.

        MR. ISAACS:   It is a marvellous exercise in
   hindsight, sir, with respect.

        MR. KING:   Sir, I don't want to get into argument
   and I will move on. I will have an opportunity later:

Q. At any stage beforeyou saw or were conscious of people
   coming over the top onto the perimeter track, Mr.
   Murray, do you recall looking at the cameras, the video
   monitor, which showed the terraces, and this is after
   ga teC had been opened? - A. I cannot recall
   specifically but I would have been looking all over. I
   would have been looking at the terraces, looking at the
   monitors.

Q. Do you recall the use at all of any of the zoom
   facility at that stage on the people in the centre
   pens? - A. I don't know, sir.

Q. When you saw people were coming up over the top, people
   being let out apparently onto the perimeter track,
   because that was your first indication that something
   was wrong, wasn't it? - A. Yes, it was.

Q. At that stage did you consider zooming in with that
   facility to see what the problem was in the centre
   pens? - A. I cannot recall whether I asked P.C. Bicharc
   or whether he did it off his own initiative, but he
   certainly took the camera from the Kop and swung it
   round to the Leppings Lane end.

Q. I don't want to mislead you, including the zoom
   facility? - A. Well, of course, it is on the camera.

Q. Were you not able then to look at and see the faces of
   those in the centre pens who were in the front third of
   the pen? - A. No.

Q. No? - A. No.
                                                          90

                                                 B. D. MURRAY

Q. Why not? - A. I don't know.     You couldn't see the faces
   of the people in the pens.

Q. Do you recall a message going out of the Control Box to
   the effect that all available people, men, should go to
   the Leppings Lane Terraces end? - A. I cannot recall
   that message. I don't know what time it was sent but I
   can't recall it.

Q. It is a message which we have heard from a number of
   sources which originally called serials onto the pitch,
   and people heard it from all parts of the Ground? - A.
   I can't recall it being sent.

Q. You can't? - A. No.

Q. Do you recall, before you left the Control Box for the
   first time, do you recall any discussion with Mr.
   Duckenfield about what had happened? - A. I can't
   recall a conversation. I am sure we had a conversation
   as to what is happening and part of that conversation
   would be Mr. Duckenfield saying, "Get Roger Greenwood
   round to have a look at it", then there was the
   observations from Mr. Greenwood that I took as the
   match had to be stopped.




              /Q. What I want to
                                                   B. D. MURRAY

 What 1 want to discover is whether or not you heard
 “ I irr S i ? ®uggestion that it was a pitch invasion?
   A. I really can't remember. I didn't know what
 people were suggesting.                        ftat

      iold     that aftef
 which we know was
                          the       had been stopped,
                      at 6 minutes past the hour, you
 Yes?riedid°r 8          Period to the Control Box? - A.

 Can I show you documents C517A and B. This is a
 ve are told, of message, which were being s e « out ®’
            ?£th YorkJhl«         Operation Room. wiich
 JlMJS     *   *8E°   *     ls outslde the ground. I
 think it is at Hammerton Road? - A. It is the
 Headquarters at Snig Hall.

 fin*?8 PUt    ln the conte*t of calling for an
 ambulance. I want to look at a message which
 apparently was sent out at 15.08, so that is two
 minutes after the match was stopped. - A. Yes.

 1508^14? - Y h5ea?C°nd Page*    00 y°“ 8ee 8 reference

th*i-m!?f»8eKWl?lch aPParently was being sent out at
£ k i    8®e    yeen   e Operations Room and the
Ambulance Service was:

     lL l° l~ iZ3'Xredt ?PParently one of the gates, has
     they ve been pushing and pushing and shoving I
     understand and one of the gates has, they've
     collapsed the gates and there's."
A. Yes.
      f l -




Con??«i SVe any^^knowledge from your time in the
SU      • f* 1   you were there in the Police Contr'
past 3 ?J- SA.aYesr     matCh W®S stoPPed at   6    minute*
    information such as we know was transmitted onwards
  An*T KSnS            °Ut of the Co»trol Box to Snig Hall’
think
-mu  i t h U ethi»a 0 rti5 Kre50llection of that*
              that would                           1 WOuld
                           be in response to my request for
ambulances that that message was passed.

S E  * WanJ    lnYestigate - you may not be able to
        “ f 5 °W    came about that the message at 8
minutes past 3 was that "...one of the gates has
they've collapsed the gate"? - A. I would fhiSkihai I
for°the fl£itChfat      tlm® because it was my request
in     r ! i°£ ambulances and I would not have been
in the Control Room at this tine*
                                           B. D. MURRAY

  Because it is right, is it not, that as regards the
' opening of the gates, apart from the one at 2.48, the
  short one, they were authorised openings, were they
  not? - A. Yes, they were.

 Can you think of any reason from your time in the
 Control Box as to how it may have come about that the
 message which was sent out from the ground, and then
 out to the Ambulance Service, was a suggestion that
 "they’ve collapsed the gates"? - A. I don’t know
 whether that refers to the track gates, I really don't
 know. The message is a bit of jibberish, it doesn't
 make sense, but I wouldn't have been there and I
 wouldn't have known why that message was passed.

Just in terms of timing, you yourself did not
appreciate, as I understand it, that there were
injuries, crushing injuries, requiring ambulances
until the time of the stopping of the match at 6
minutes past? - A. I didn't realise that the thing was
so serious until I went down to the pitch the second
time, which would have been about 7 minutes past.

When you got back into the Control Room, whatever that
was, about 9 minutes past, 10 minutes past, something
like that? - A. Immediately after the match was
stopped?

Yes. - A. I was there for only a few seconds, 30
seconds, and then I was back down on the pitch.

At that stage, which is 8 or 9 minutes past perhaps,
something like that --

     THE CORONER: He has just said that the fleet of
ambulances was requested at his initiation, and we
     got a *°8 which clearly shows that that was at
1507, so it cannot be 1509.

     MR. KING: I am sorry, sir, I was not trying to
add on minutes.
What I want to know is when you were back in the
Control Box for theshort period of time? - A. Yes.

What was your understanding of what had happened at
that stage? - A. My understanding then was the same as
it had been all thetime, that we had had some
pushing, some crushing, we had been relocating people,
that for whatever reason lots had come onto the pitch,
taken advantage of the situation. I have seen it
happen before where once you ease a situation people
will not go back, they do stay where they are, and
apart from that I wasn't sure.
                                                                93
                                                   B. D. MURRAY

 Q.
       u L d h«f fi®8* Wa® any use ln the Control Box being
       A I         % M nvraS °;t?     f^PPixss Lane terracf? -
       A. I would think so, I don't know. Having gone back
       the monitors?* sec0nds' 1 wouldn,t s*art looking at

       Let me just ask one or two matters. The
       communications, the radio system: had any checks been
             ? °Ut bffore the 15th April match as to their
       wffld          thSlr worklnSs? " A. I cannot say but I
       M ^o c^o n ^es^ "        W0Uld CheCk u   before 8“ h •
 Q.    Is there any emergency word which is known to those
       who have to operate radios, either in the Control Room
       °K4 °u  6 ground> when there is congested traffic
       triffJ?U       S!°Ut lnto U whlch w111 clear the
       traffic? - a . There is a code number for an Officer ■?•
       ?RSJheSS,ian 0fflcer needs immediate assistance. The
       is the only emergency code.
 Q.   What is that code?

      n . . THE CORONER: No, we do not want to know the code.
      Did you ask him what it was?                          ‘

      apologiseKING:    1 mlsunderstood what he said, sir, I

           THE CORONER: Perhaps I misunderstood you. We
      would not want him to disclose the code number.

           MR. KING: I am only interested in whether there
      was a means by which one could unscramble it, sir.
           THE CORONER: By all means explore the
      methodology, but not the detail.

               KINGj -Is t?e ansver there was a method? - A.
               ® CO?ed number that an Officer who needs
      immediate assistance, and usually for his own safetv
      can pass to prefix a message whiJh will usually    7’
      receive immediate response by any units in the area.
Q.    So if, for any reason, somebody wanted to get a
      message through as an emergency and there was
      congested traffic, all that person had to do was to
      use this code? - A. If it was heard, people wo“ d ?end
      not to pass messages while he got his message through.

Q*    fh*?nL 2 taKe4°n 15tb APril did you yourself ever hear
      that code being used? - A. No, I did not hear it.
                                                            94

                                                B; *D, MURRAY


Just one'matter.   Do you know a Sergeant Morgan? - A.
Yes, I know Sergeant Morgan.

It is Sergeant John Morgan. - A. Yes, I know Sergeant
John Morgan.

Do you recall meeting him at all or passing him when you
were returning to the Control Box after the game had been
stopped? - A. No, I cannot recall seeing Sergeant Morgan.

Can I just put it to you to see if it jogs your memory.
There was an exchange between you and him.   You were
going up the steps and he was coming down and you said to
him, "Do what you can"? - A. I have seen that in Sergeant
Morgan's statement, but I cannot recall seeing him at
all.   I can recall seeing a Sergeant Hemmingway.

     MR. KING:     Thank you.

                 Further by THE CORONER:

Can I just ask one question and then we are finishing?
You mentioned that the Serials, the five and fifty, or
six and eighty, as it turned out.    You said that one of
them actually gave evidence here.    Was that Sergeant
Green you are talking about? - A. Yes, it would be
Sergeant Green.

     THE CORONER:   Very well.   We wanted to know who we
were talking about.   Now we will pause until tomorrow
morning at ten o'clock.   There are the usual rules of
evidence and so on, which you know about?

    THE WITNESS;      Yes, sir.

                   (The Jury left Court)

    THE CORONER:      Can we get a few estimates of time?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   I believe I will be very short and
should be less than five minutes.

    THE CORONER:      Mrs. McBrien, what do you say?

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   I am not absolutely sure, but most
of my questions may just require a yes or a no, so it
could be quite a short time, really.

    MR. RUSSELL:      Very short9 a handful of questions.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Manning, have you any idea?   The
only reason I ask is so we can have some idea when we are
likely to get to Mr. Duckenfield.
                                                      ' 95




     MR. MANNING:   I believe that my client - I say in
the absence of the Jury - has answered fully.   I do not
believe there is a necessity, knowing you are going to
sum-up, for me to necessarily go through everything all
over again.   It is my intention to highlight one or two
points and to clarify, but otherwise be short.

     THE CORONER:   Hopefully, then, we will be starting
with Mr. Duckenfield sometime during the morning.

    MR. ISAACS:    I would hope so, sir.

      THE CORONER:   I mentioned Saturday.    That was not
intended as a threat, although it is a threat and if we
can avoid it obviously I would very much prefer to do
that.    However, I think if I have got to balance an
adjournment against a few hours on Saturday, I would
rather have a few hours on Saturday, but we will see.

      MR. ISAACS:  I have taken a straw poll of everybody
down the line and we do not believe it will be necessary
because the proceedings have taken on a pace now and we
hope to be able to finish within your expected finishing
date.
     THE CORONER:   As I say, it is exceedingly
inconvenient for me if we sit, so it is not as if I am
doing it because I want to.   It is simply that I am
anxious to make sure that we do meet the timetable if we
possibly can.   Is there anything else?   No. All right.

          (The Inquests were adjourned until
          ten o ’clock the following morning)
             SIXTY EIGHTH DAY«S PROCEEDINGS

                TUESDAY, 12th MARCH 1991
     THE CORONER: After you left we had another chat
and we think that perhaps Saturday may not be
necessary. That is good news, isn't it? What I did
think is that if I do decide we need extra time, would
starting half an hour earlier be better for you rather
than Saturday? Yes, okay. I am not saying we will do
that because we will be able to judge but it will
actually give us two and a half to three hours if we
need it, which is equivalent to a Saturday. Are you
happy with that? Good.

     MR. KING: Sir, there is one matter which is very
short which I should have raised with the witness
yesterday, if I might do so now.
     THE CORONER:   Yes, do that.

     MR. MANNING: Sir, perhaps before my learned
friend does that, in the interests of saving time
again, could I make reference to the caution, if one
may call it that? Periodically yesterday you did
remind Mr. Murray that he was not under an obligation
to answer a question which might tend to be
incriminating and that he had that right not to do so.
I simply come to my feet, of course, simply to remind
ourselves that that holds good overnight and the
position has not changed but also to say, sir, yet
again we acknowledge that. Whilst I know that you
might from time to time especially want to say, "This
is a potentially incriminating question" again we do
not need you to say it on each and every occasion.

     THE CORONER: That is very, very kind of you.
Thank you, Mr. Manning.

              BERNARD DEAN MURRAY Recalled

          Further Cross-Examined bv MR. KING

Mr. Murray, it relates to ay questions to you as to
whether or not you accepted that the Police had a
responsibility in relation to the distribution and
filling of the terraces. Can you confirm that at some
time between twelve and two, some time between that
time, in the Control Box, Chief Inspector Creaser
visited you and asked you what strategy was going to be
adopted by the Police for the purposes of filling the
pens? - A. Yes, sir. I find it difficult to recall
Chief Inspector Creaser coming into the Control Room.
I have given it a lot of thought. I do not want to go
back on what I said before but I am quite satisfied
that Chief Inspector Creaser did come in although I
cannot recall it myself.
Q. You would, therefore, not take Issue with his evidence
   that he came and spoke to you, asked what system was
   going to be adopted, and you indicated the system of
   the fans finding their own level? - A. I wouldn't
   dispute that at all, sir, no.

Q. In other words, you were indicating to him what system
   ought to be adopted by the Police for the purposes of
   the filling and the distribution on the terraces? - A.
   Yes, I was telling him that they would find their own
   level.
Q.        THE CORONER:   I think what you are saying is that
     although you cannot remember your part of the
     conversation you do not dispute his evidence that that
     took place? - A. I wouldn't dispute it, sir, and if he
     had come in and asked me that is what I would have told
     him.
                 Cross-Examined bv MR. CATCHPOLE

Q. Superintendent Murray, I have only two areas which I
   would like to explore with you very briefly. The first
   is the evidence you were giving yesterday partly in
   answer to my learned friend, Mr. King, about the north­
   west terrace. You have told us your observations were
   that it was filling at about the same rate as the
   centre pens? - A. Probably. The north-west terrace is
   popular and the centre pens in the north-west terrace
   did fill first.
Q. Do you mean the whole of the elevated section over on
   the far side by the North Stand? - A. I mean the
   elevated section, yes, sir.

Q. Does that mean what we call pen 7 and the bit above it?
   - A. It means the raised area over and above pen 6 .

Q. That whole corner from the pitch right the way up to
   the top? - A. Yes. Sorry, the raised section. The
   actual raised area. There is a wall.

Q.        THE CORONER:   Walk up to it and show us because
     that will be easier? - A. I mean this section here,
     sir. There is a wall that goes round here and people
     tend to find that very popular, probably because it is
     higher than the rest of the terrace.

Q.        MR. CATCHPOLE: Can we take it from your evidence
     that at about 2.30, when questions are being aimed at,
     that section is at roughly the same density as the
     centre pens? - A. I cannot remember the density but
                                                                 3
                                                    b.,. p. m   mm
   there were a lot more people in the raised section and
   the centre pens than there were on those terraces.

Q. Your evidence is that those two areas were the ones
   that were looking fuller? - A. The most popular, yes.

Q. Turning to a slightly different topic, you said in
   answer again to questions by my learned friend, Mr.
   King, that you did not know precisely where all the
   stewards were going to be around the whole ground? - A.
   No.

Q. But that you expected the stewards to be briefed by the
   Officers in charge of that particular section of the
   ground as to their proper duties on the day? - A. Yes,
   I did.
Q. If I told you that we have had evidence from Chief
    Inspector Creaser that he both himself knew where the
    stewards were going to be and also overhead and
    applauded the briefing given by Inspector White to the
    stewards on the day, would that be what you would have
  , expected from an Officer in his position? - A. Yes, I
    would have expected that.

       MR. CATCHPOLE:   Thank you very much.

               Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN

Q. Mr. Murray, you had an input into the 1989 Operational
   Order, didn't you? - A. Yes, I did.

Q. So if improvements needed to be made you would be able
   to make suggestions? - A. I did make suggestions of
   areas where I considered we needed to pay attention to.

Q. You mentioned a number of problems but one was that the
   fans were climbing up from the West Terrace into the
   West Stand. Do you remember? - A. Yes, I had seen that
   at the 1988 Semi Final.

Q. Did you think that something should be done about that,
   that some alteration should be made in the Operational
   Order to cater for that? - A. I wanted the Officers in
   the West Stand to be very aware that people were going
   to take that course of action. I just felt that having
   done it once it may become more prominent a second
   time.
Q. Do you think it may have been difficult for the
   Officers up in the West Stand to actually see these
   people climbing up? They may have already got to that
   point before the Officers spotted them doing it, might
                                                               4
                                                     B. D. MURRAY

   they not? - A. I think it is difficult to see them
   climbing from the terraces into the West Stand, yes.

Q. So do you think in the way of an improvement a
   suggestion could have been made to have Officers
   positioned below on the terraces so that that could be
   prevented? - A. I am sure that now you mention it that
   that would possibly have been a better deterrent but we
   didn't have Officers on the terraces at football
   matches behind the fans.

Q. Did you find out why the fans were moving up into the
   stand? - A. I didn't find out. I could only assume
   that it was to get a better vantage point to watch the
   game.

Q. Might it have been a good idea to find out from the
   fans why they were doing that just in case there was
   overcrowding there? - A. I think it is very sad that we
   do not have a good dialogue between football supporters
   and people in charge at football matches about problems
   at football.




                                 /Q. So that they.
                                                           5
                                              B. D. MURRAY


Q. So that they could be alleviated, couldn't they? - A. I
   think it would be very encouraging and very useful to
   know problems from people who attended matches, yes.

Q. You have accepted the "find your own level" for fans on
   the Leppings Lane Terrace, didn't you? - A. I had seen
   it operate and seen it operate successfully.
Q. That would work as a circuit, wouldn't it, really?
   They would come in and they had the freedom to go down
   the tunnel and round via the radial gates. They could
   make a complete circle if they wished, couldn't they? -
   A. There were several entrances and exits from the
   terrace and also, yes, you could walk right along the
   back of the terrace.
Q. As we know, with the circuit system it is fine as long
   as we don't overload the system? - A. I think that you
   have got to be able to get from place to place, yes.

Q. If you had blocked the tunnel off in 1989 or '88, to
   stop fans going down there, there was nothing to stop
   fans going around and then using the radial gates to
   get to the centre, was there, because the radial gates
   were open? - A. The radial gates were open and people
   could pass from pen to pen via the radial gates.

Q. So that may not act as a deterrent for overcrowding in
   the centre pens, might it? It could still happen? - A.
   I am not sure what you are saying, I am sorry.
Q. It was possible for fans to move, if the tunnel was
   blocked, go round to the left or right and make their
   way by way of the radial gates to the centre, if they
   wished to do so? - A. Yes, it was.
Q. In fact, crushing, although we know the centre pens are
   the most popular, we know that in 1981 there was a
   crushing incident in pen 1. Were you aware of that? -
   A. I wasn't aware before 1989, before the 1989 semi­
   final.
Q. But you would agree that crushing could take place
   anywhere depending on the numbers who come into that
   area? - A. I think you can have problems anywhere in
   the Ground, yes.
Q. In 1989 you were in overall control of the Control
   Room, that is right, isn't it? - A. That is correct,
   yes.
Q. You were in control of the event itself? - A. I was
   monitoring the events. The Officer in charge, there is
   only one Officer in charge of the whole event.
                                                            6

                                                B. D. MURRAY


Q. But you were adviser to Mr. Duckenfield in the Control
   Box? - A. I considered that I was there as an adviser,
   yes.
Q. You were particularly interested in communications,
   weren't you? - A. Well yes, communications came under
   my sphere.
Q. You agreed with the allocation of the ends, didn't you?
   Liverpool in the Leppings Lane end and Nottingham
   Forest in the other end? - A. That wasn't my decision,
   that was the decision that was put to the Club by Mr.
   Mole and that was accepted.
Q. Did you think it was a good idea?    Did you have any say
   in the matter.
         THE CORONER:   No, Mrs. McBrien, I don't think


Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   As Mr. Duckenfield said he would
     like a log kept of the events that day, you ensured
     that this would be done, didn't you? - A. I discussed
     it with the Sergeant in the Control Room. I wanted an
     extra person in there but because of the size of the
     Control Room, and acting on his advice and in
     agreement, decided that it was impractical to have
     anyone else in the Control Room so I endeavoured to
     keep a log, yes.
Q. Were checks carried out that day on the radio equipment
   and on individual radios before the match started? - A.
   The radios are always tested. It took a considerable
   time on that day because there were so many serials,
   but they were all tested after the briefing.

Q. What time was that, please? - A. It is in the log. I
   think it would perhaps be about 11.30, maybe a little
   later. The whole thing lasted about an hour.

Q. Was the public address system tested, as well? - A. The
   public address system was tested by the Control Room
   staff just before I arrived at the Control Room. In
   fact, as I went to the Control Room an engineer was
   working on one of the speakers near to the Control Room
   and he completed that and that was tested while I was
   there.
Q. Did you   personally go to see the referee to tell him
   about a   coded message in the event of an emergency?
   Did you   brief him in that way? - A. Yes, I saw the
   referee   and told him about the message.
                                                             7

                                                B. D. MURRAY


'Q. You said you got a message at 17-minutes-past-2 from
    Superintendent Marshall asking for Leppings Lane to be
    closed to traffic. That is in the log, isn't it? - A.
    Yes, that is correct.
Q. I presume you did not see a problem in Leppings Lane at
   that time? - A. I didn't consider there was a
   particular problem from what I could see on the
   monitor, but he being the man on the ground had the
   best view, and if he wanted    it closed then he had
   reasons for it.
 Q. Strangely enough, Superintendent Marshall when he gave
    his evidence, he said that there was nothing unusual at
    that time happening, as the numbers arriving at that
    time were about what he expected and the behaviour of
    the fans was very satisfactory. Did you query what he
    was asking for? - A. He was asking for Leppings Lane to
    be closed. I think a message came through saying that
    people and vehicles were getting mixed up, words to
    that effect, and Superintendent Marshall, I know him,
    he is very experienced, he is the one that took command
    of football matches in Mr. Mole's absence, he asked for
    Leppings Lane to be closed and I arranged for it to be
    closed.
 Q. So you did not query it? ** A. No, I did not query it.

 Q. Did you think it was an unusual request to be making at
    that time of the day, such a while before the match was
    to begin, three-quarters of an hour almost before the
    match was to start? - A. It was an unusual request in
    that we had not closed Leppings Lane before to my
    knowledge, before a football game, and it showed there
    were a lot of people in Leppings Lane, yes.
 Q. As Mr. Duckenfield was a new Commander, did you tell
    him that that was not the usual procedure? - A. I don t
    think so. I can't recall but I don't think so.

 Q. You said you had not known of it closed before a match
    before, didn't you? - A. Yes, that is correct.
 Q. When you were planning the Operational Order you did
    not think it might be necessary to close Leppings Lane
    at that time, did you? It wasn't written into the
    Order? - A. It wasn't written into the Order. Like I
    say, it was a complete one off, it was unexpected.

 Q. Although the request came at 2.17 it took a little
    while before the traffic stopped completely though,
    didn't it? You saw buses going along at a later time
    on the photographs? - A. It took a little while to
    close because we could only contact one serial
                                              B. D. MURRAY


  initially to close the bottom end. I had to get back
  to Mr. Marshall and ask him to send someone up to close
  the top end, or find some Officers up there to close
  it. I think I said yesterday it would not be unusual
  for an Officer to use his own initiative and perhaps
  allow a bus or a couple of buses through. I can't
  really say.
Q. But about 2.30 did you see that a larger than usual
   crowd had developed outside the turnstiles? - A. I
   can't say whether it was a larger than usual crowd. It
   was a large crowd; I did notice it was a large crowd,
   yes.
Q. Did you think at that time, when you looked at the
   monitor, that all the people you could see outside the
   turnstiles would get in by 3 p.m? - A. I thought that
   all those people and more would get in by 3 p.m.

Q. So it did not appear a problem then at 2.30? - A. It
   did not appear a problem to me at 2.30, no.
Q. Would you say that the turnstiles were operating
   efficiently at that time, as far as you could tell? -
   A. I certainly did not see anything which made me
   believe that the turnstiles were not working
   efficiently at that time.
Q. But you did become concerned at just before 2.45,
   didn t you? - A. About?
Q. Just before 2.45? - A. Concerned about what?
Q. About the crowd and the happenings at the turnstiles? -
   A. Oh yes, I was getting concerned about matters at
   that time, yes.
Q. At that time did you try to contact the Club or
   Security Officer? - A. I did. It may have been a
   couple of minutes before 2.45 but I did try and contact
   Mr. Lock on the Club's radio system.




                   /Q. Were you successful
                                           B. D. MURRAY

Were you successful in doing that? - A. No, I wasn't.

Did you or Mr. Duckenfield consider delaying the kick-
off at that particular time just before 2.45? - A. I
don't know about Mr. Duckenfield. I did not consider
it. I think that so many things were happening -
again we were in a state of turmoil in the Control
Room - that that thought never crossed my mind at that
time.

I believe the radio had become faulty at 2.42, that-is'
right, is it not? - A. I would think it was some time
about 2.40-ish and for several minutes the Control
Room was in disarray and disruption.

And you threw the radio down, did you not? I made a
note of that. - A. I think Sergeant Goddard threw the
handset down. When I say threw it down, he just went
like that (Indicating) in disgust.

This disruption that was caused then, it was only for
a very short time, though, was it not, a minute or so?
- A. I really can't say. I don't know whether it was
a minute or two minutes. That was when the radio was
down. I don't know how long it took the engineer to
sort everything out. It wasn't the time, it was the
disruption to the communications. It was disruption
to everybody in the room. It was having to get up out
of your seats and move around. It was very
disruptive.

I believe about that time you sent a reserve serial to
Leppings Lane. I am talking now about 2.40? - A. Yes,
it would be slightly before the reserve serial was
sent.

That was Sergeant Higgins, was it? - A. Yes it was.

The Crime and Vandal Squad. You also sent extra
mounted Officers to the area? - A. Yes, extra mounted
Officers had been deployed from the Penistone Road
end.

Did you consider doing anything else to enable
Officers to manage the situation at that time? - A. I
would be looking to see whether there were other
serials that we could perhaps get together if the
situation became worse. I was hoping that the
additional mounted Officers and the extra serial might
be able to give the support that Mr. Marshall needed,
together with the tannoy messages that were being sent
from the Control Box over the public address system.
                                                           10

                                                B. D. MURRAY

Q.   Was this to try and retrieve the situation outside the
             es? Was that the Purpose of the extra mounted
     Officers and the serial being sent there, so that
     control could have been regained? Was that the idea
     of it? - A. I am sure that was the idea.

Q.   You were getting a lot of messages at about the time
     the radio was faulty and just after, and you received
     one from Superintendent Marshall asking for the gates
     to be opened at Leppings Lane. His initial request
     did not mention crushing at the turnstiles, did it? -
     A. I really cannot remember. I do not know. I am
     sorry.

Q.   That request came at 2.47, did it not? - A. So I have
     been told, yes.

Q.   Did you notice on the monitor at that time that the
     number of people who were outside there did not look
     as though they were going to get in by 3 o'clock? Did
     the numbers look too large? - A. I would not dispute
     that at that time, no.

Q.   So kick-off could have been a possibility then,
     looking at the numbers on the screen that you were
     getting? - A. I say, I don’t dispute that. I didn’t
     give thought to postponing the kick-off at that time.
     I didn't give thought to it.

Q.   Was it noticeable that the turnstiles had actually
     slowed down? Do you think this was causing a problem?
     - A. It was noticeable to me at about - I do not know,
     I think I would put it about 2.44/2.45 that there
     seemed to be a problem behind the A to G turnstiles.
     I was watching the turnstiles and I couldn't see the
     amount of people coming in that I expected.
Q. The rate flow had altered, had it then? - A. It
    appeared to me that the rate of flow was far less than
    it should have been, and that is why I tried to get in
    touch with Mr. Lock.

Q.   You then received a further three requests from
     Superintendent Marshall to open the gates, did you
     n°t? - A. I think I described them as two requests
     fairly close together, and then a pause, and then a
     further two requests fairly close together, yes.
Q. Have you ever thought of Gates A, B and C being
    entrance gates at Hillsborough? - A. I have never
    thought of the exit gates being entrance gates, no.

Q.   When Superintendent Marshall made his first request he
     was told to stand by while the situation was assessed,
                                           B. D. MURRAY

was he not, to see if it could be recovered? - A. I
think I said it was an extremely serious step to take
and, yes, he was told to stand by. Whether it was me,
or probably the radio operator, but I did ask the
radio operator to tell him to stand by.

After the fourth request was made, which was five
minutes after the first one,, you said, "Mr.
Duckenfield are you going to open the gates? You have
got to make a decision now." That is right, is it
not? - A. I don't think so. I think the first part is
right. I don't recall saying, "You've got to make a
decision now". I think I said, "Mr. Duckenfield, are
we going to open those gates?"

I believe Mr. Duckenfield was still considering the
possibility of regaining control, was he, outside at
that time? - A. I don't know what he was considering,
but I was hoping that we might retrieve the situation
and I came to the conclusion that we couldn't, we
couldn't wait any longer, that we weren't going to
recover what was happening outside, and that the risk
to the people out there was far too great to wait any
longer.

So in your opinion you thought the gates had to be
opened? - A. Yes, I did.

Although Superintendent Marshall’s initial request
came at 2.47, we know that Gate A was not opened until
2.58 •

     THE CORONER: I think on that point we have got to
be a little careful. In fact, Mr. King said that as
well. We will be showing a video of Gate A opening,
and I think all that is on the video is it shows Gate
A open at 2.58. It does not show the opening and so
it is very difficult actually to be certain exactly
what time it was opened. So I do not think you can
quite put like that. That is not your fault. It is
just that the video of that particular gate is not as
good as some of the other videos which we have had the
advantage of seeing. But I do not want you to put it
like that because you might get an answer which does
not actually make any sense.

     MRS. McBRIEN: But the requests from
Superintendent Marshall did say "gates", did they not?
They did not say "gate"? He was not referring to one
specific gate, was he? - A. He said, "Open the gates".
So it would include B and C, would it not? - A. I
thought it would include B and C gates, yes.
                                                               12

                                                   B. D. MURRAY

Q.        we know that Sergeant Higgins made a request for
     Gate A to be opened, did he not, later on? - A. Yes.
     he did.

Q.    As far as I can make out, It wasn't opened and this is
     why he made the request for it to be opened. That is
     how I am summing it up.

          MR. KING: Sir, to help Mrs. McBrien on the
     evidence on timing, I think it is established, is it
     not, that it was after 2.52, whatever time it was,
     that the request to open Gate A came, because it was
     after Gate C had been opened?

          THE CORONER: I cannot quite remember when
     Sergeant Higgins made the request, but I think there
     is no doubt that Gate A was opened after 2.52.

          MR. KING: I think the evidence of this witness,
     sir, is that the request came after Gate C had been
     opened.

          THE WITNESS: There is no doubt in my mind, sir,
     that the request for Gate A did come after Gate C was
     opened.

             THE CORONER; Okay, fair enough.   Thank you Mr.
     King.




                                 /Q.   MRS. McBRIEN:
                                                             13
                                                   B. D. MURRAY


Q.        MRS. MCBRIEN:   Thank you.    Gate B was never
     opened, was it? - A. I don't know.
          THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, how can you say that?

          MRS. MCBRIEN:   I would like to turn to the
     transcript of Superintendent Murray's evidence at*the
     Taylor Inquiry, where it says that.

          THE CORONER:    Mrs. McBrien, it may say that, but
     you are putting itto him.    You can put to him whether
     he knows whether Gate B was opened, but you cannot say it
     wasn't opened unless of course you say that Mr. Ridge,
     and several of the spectators like Mr. Pitt and
     Mr. Seddon and various others all were telling untruths.
     Not just untruths.
          MRS. MCBRIEN:   I am sorry to interrupt, but I spoke
     to the gentleman who was at Gate B...
          THE CORONER:     Mrs. McBrien, I said you cannot put
     that question.    I was trying to be helpful but I am now
     telling you that you can ask the question as to whether
     or not he knew that Gate B was open and you cannot ask
     him anything else on that score.
Q.        MRS. MCBRIEN:   Superintendent, do you know if
     Gate B was opened or not? - A. I don't know, no.
Q. The radio was on talk-through that day, wasn't it? - A.
   Yes, that was the usual state at Hillsborough for all
   matches.
Q. Would that mean that all Officers could hear what was
   said? - A. With talk-through all Officers can hear both
   incoming and outgoing messages.
Q. Did anyone in the Control Box notice anything unusual or
   alarming in pens 3 and 4 a few minutes after Gate C had
   been opened for the second time at 2.52? - A. I don't
   know whether anyone else did, but no-one said anything to
   me, no-one drew it to my attention.   I think I have
   already said that I didn't.   None of the Officers in
   there said to me there was something wrong.
Q. Did you notice anything at 2.59 happening there? - A. I
   can't go by the exact timing but    I did notice that the
   gates were   opened and an Officer  was helpingsone people
   out.   I do not know exactly what time that was.
Q. You do not   know if it was before    kick-off? -A. I don't.
   It is very   difficult, but it was  at an earlystage.
   There were no other people on the track at that stage.
                                                             14
                                                B. D.MURRAY


Qv Did you connect those two events, the opening of Gate C
   and the people coming out on to the pitch?   Did they
   connect in any way? -A. They did not form a connection to
   met no*
Q. Did you go on the pitch at that stagef or was it a little
   later? - A. I went on to the pitch to try and stop the
   game and them a minute or so after that.
Q. But you did not stop the game? We know that
   Superintendent Greenwood did that, didn’t he? - A. That
   is correct.
Q. At that particular time did you consider using the PA
   system to announce there was an emergency in the ground,
   when the Superintendent was going to stop the match?
   Was it considered necessary to make an announcement to
   the whole ground? - A. I didn’t consider making a public
   address message at that time because I did not know
   exactly what the problem was at that time.
Q. Did Superintendent Greenwood speak to you at all?   Did
   you discuss anything before he went to stop the match? -
   A. No, I did not speak to Superintendent Greenwood at
   all.   I had seen him from the track side indicating to
   me to stop the match.   He actually stopped the match
   before I did, but I did not speak to Superintendent
   Greenwood after that.
Q. Did you think it must be something quite serious for the
   match to be stopped? - A. Well, people were on the pitch
   and I think that is a stage when play is normally
   stopped.   I would expect it to be stopped once people
   are actually on the field of play*
Q. However, you weren’t able to assess what was happening in
   the pens, is that what you are saying? - A. At that time
   I was unable to tell exactly what was happening.
Q. I believe you did put out tannoy messages at that time,
   didn't you, telling people to move back?

       THE CORONER:   I don't think it was Superintendent
  Murray.   Let's just check that:
Q. Did you yourself authorise the tannoy messages around
   this time, PA messages, for people... - A. I was on the
   pitch and asked for them to be sent.   I asked for tannoy
   messages to be sent asking for people to move back.
Q. This was after the match had finished? - A. That was
   after the match had finished, yes.
                                                                  15

                                                        B. D. MURRAY


          MR. KING:   I think the evidence was he asked for
     it, but there is no evidence as to whether or not it was
     broadcast.
          THE CORONER:   Or, to put it another way, no
     evidence that anybody heard it?
             MR. KING:      Either way, sir, one can say it is the
     same.
             THE CORONER:     No, it is not quite the same.

          MR. CATCHPOLE:        I remind you of the evidence of
     Mr. Mackrell.
             THE CORONER:That is      why I rephrased the comment.

          MR. MANNING:    We were almost there.  I think what
     the Superintendent said was that he did pass a message
     through for the public address to used, but he cannot say
     himself whether it was.
             THE CORONER:     That's right, yes:

Q. That is correct, isn't it? - A. Yes.
Q.        MRS. MCBRIEN:    I know there have been a lot of
     comments.   What I have got written here is that tannoy
     messages were put out saying, "Please move back and stop
     pushing."   Was that ever said? - A. I don't know. I
     cannot recall hearing tannoy messages, but I don't know.

Q. If it was that message, "Please move back and stop
   pushing," do you think a message such as, "There are
   people being crushed in the front of the centre pens.
   Will people at the rear of those pens come out of the
   tunnel immediately,** that might have been a better
   message?
          THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, no.   This is a
     hindsight question which really does not help us one tiny
     bit.   Do not answer that question.   It is not a proper
     question.




               Q. MRS. MCBRIEN:    So you
                                                                   16

                                                     B. D. MURRAY

Q.        MRS. McBrien, So you were not aware of the
     messages you said? - A. I didn't hear the messages. I
     didn't consciously hear the messages. I do not know
     whether they were sent but I didn't hear them myself.
Q. I made a note that they were sent out at seven minutes      >
   past three and nine minutes past three...
          THE CORONER: He has given you an answer, Mrs.
     McBrien, and I am not letting you introduce evidence.
     I am sorry.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN: When you went on the pitch were you
     just standing there? I think you did say you helped
     one or two people, is that right? - A. When I went on
     the pitch I was going to try and clear the people off
     the centre of the pitch towards the wings so that they
     could see exactly what was happening and I think I said
     that I very quickly realised that that was an
     impossible task. It was different. There was
     something different about the whole scenario. People
     appeared shocked and appeared dazed and were standing
     around. I think I said that as I approached the goal
     posts I then saw that people were actually trapped
     against the fence. I could see their faces against the
     fence. It was then I realised we had a very serious
     incident and my first thought then was to get some
     ambulances to the ground because I had heard the
     operator saying he was putting an ambulance on standby
     as I left just half a minute or so earlier and I
     realised we wanted a lot of ambulances.

         I went to get a radio. I think I said I approached
     one or two Officers who were PCs who did not have
     radios and then found a Sergeant and took his radio off
     him and asked for the fleet of ambulances and asked for
     the tannoy messages and asked for the cutting
     equipment. Then it is very difficult to say exactly
     what I did then. As I looked around I saw that people
     were being got out of there. They were lying on the
     track. There were attempts to resuscitate them by
     Officers, by fans at the game. I gave what little bit
     of help I could to some. I couldn't afford to get
     involved with one individual. That wasn't my role. I
     wanted to try and keep some control of what was
     happening.

Q. Did you decide to go round to the back, to the
   concourse area and round to the tunnel?

          THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, I have tried to be as
     patient as I can but all we have done up to now is to
     recite the evidence which I elicited in chief and which
                                                                   17

                                                          B, D. MURRAY

     everybody else, in so far as it was relevant,
     questioned. There is no need to repeat all the
     evidence. You know he went round the back. You do not
     need to ask him. He has told you. If you have a
     question relating to that then by all means ask it but
     we are not going to go on reciting the evidence which
     is what we have been doing for 85 per cent of your
     questioning time. All we have done is repeated what he
     has already told us and it is of no use whatsoever.
     Have you got a question about him being at the back of
     the terrace?
          MRS. McBRIEN: When I ask a question I may be
     asking it in a different way, looking for a different
     answer.

          THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, I have given a ruling.
     You have to abide by it whether you like it or not. I
     have not said you may not ask a question. What I have
     said is that you are not going to recite all the
     evidence which we have already heard. It is sometimes
     difficult and that is why I have allowed you to go on
     for three quarters of an hour but common sense has got
     to prevail as well at some point.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN: What were you intending to do when
     you went round to the back of the terrace? - A. I was
     hoping to get people to move back from the terraces.

Q. When you first went down the tunnel, did you see an
   Inspector, some Police Officers and some people in the
   tunnel?

          THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, were you listening,
     with great respect, to what was going on yesterday? I
     am sorry, he does not have to answer that question. He
     has already answered it.

          MRS. McBRIEN:    Sir, I wanted to investigate who
     they were.

          THE CORONER:    He has answered that as well.

          MRS. McBRIEN: I am terribly sorry but I made a
     note when evidence was being given that it was said,
     "We have got them all out”. I wanted to establish who
     it was you were referring to and so I checked up on
     that and I found it was not the injured people who were
     got out.
          THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, the Officer has told
     us that he does not know who the name of the Inspector
                                                               18
                                                     B. D. MURRAY

     was. Is that right? Are you going to read it?    Will
     you help Mrs. McBrien?

           MR. MANNING: You tried very hard, sir. You asked
     him about Inspector Sykes and Inspector Bullas and he
     said:

         "I just cannot recall which Inspector it was."
          MRS. McBRIEN: Thank you, Mr. Manning. I know
     Superintendent Murray said he did not recall who the
     Inspector was but what I am concerned about is the
     little bit that was said, "We have got them all out
     now". That could mean to anybody that it could be
     referring to the injured people.

          THE CORONER:   Just a minute.

Q. You heard the remark made, "We have got them all out"
   or words to that effect by one of these Police
   Officers. You have answered this as well but I do not
   mind you repeating it. What did you understand that
   remark meant? - A. Because of what was said I thought
   it meant people in the tunnel.

Q. People in the tunnel? - A. In the tunnel.

Q.       MRS. McBRIEN: I was looking at the transcript of
     your evidence at the Taylor Inquiry, Mr. Murray, and
     the 50 people or thereabouts who were in the tunnel
     were people who were moved out because, as it says in
     the transcript, they were the worse for drink. They
     were the people who had been removed from the tunnel.
     This is why I felt it was important to establish who it
     was who had been removed, not the injured people who
     were in front, in the front of pens 3 and 4. - A. What
     the Inspector said to me was, "We have got them all
     out. They were all drunk". That is what he said and I
     assumed he meant people who were in the tunnel area.
     There were still some people there when I got there. I
     estimated a figure of 50, I don't know. It may be
     higher and it may be lower. There weren't a lot of
     people in.

Q. So they were got out safely these people, of course,
   were they not? They were in no danger, were they? - A.
   No.

Q. Not in the position they were in? - A. They were just
   standing about.

Q. I think you said in your evidence that you saw Officers
   on the terrace but once again I found in the transcript
                                                             19

                                                   B. P. MURRAY

  of your evidence at the Taylor Inquiry that you were
  not able to make your way down on the terrace. Which
  one am I to read as... - A. I don't recall saying that.
  I didn't consider that there was a need to 9 0 down.
  The need to make people move back from the front had
  gone as far as I was concerned. You must appreciate
  that I had seen people trapped against the fence. I
  wanted to get the pressure off those people because I
  thought it was pressure from behind that was trapping
  them. When I looked down the pressure had cone off.
  Police Officers were on the terrace side and were
  actually working there. I didn't know, and I had no
  idea that there had been a particular problem, that a
  barrier had collapsed, that people had been trapped in
  those circumstances. The people I saw were against the
  fence.
Q. That was from the trackside though that you saw that,
   wasn't it? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. Mot from the tunnel side? - A. Mo, not from the tunnel
   side.

Q. You turned back and went back to the pitch, didn't you?
   - A. Yes, I did.

       MRS. McBRIEN:   Thank you very much.

                Cross-Examined bv MR. RUSSELL

Q. I have one or two questions, the first of which is
   going to relate to something Sergeant Griffiths may
   have gone to fetch. Perhaps I can introduce the matter
   first? Superintendent, may I touch on three matters?
   First of all, you were asked yesterday about a time
   which came when you dispatched an Officer from the
   Control Room to assist in the relocation of supporters
   on the perimeter track following a time when you had
   seen a number of supporters coming out from the centre
   pens? - A. Yes.

Q. You told us that you dispatched the Officer to assist a
   woman Police Officer who was at either gates 1 or 2? -
   A. Yes.

Q. That Police Officer, can you remember his name? - A. It
   was Chief Inspector McRobbie.

Q. Be was an Officer who was in plain clothes that day? -
   A. Yes, he wasn't involved in the event.

Q. You were asked by the Coroner whether you could
   remember when that happened and when Chief Inspector
                                                                 20

                                                        B. P. MURRAY

     McRobbie went down. First of all, can I clarify this;
     did you see Chief Inspector McRobbie do what you asked
     him to do? - A. Yes, I think he went down on to the
     track and spoke to the Policewoman, yes.

Q. I wonder if you could please look at a photograph of
   which I hope Sergeant Griffiths has prepared an acetate
   which may assist you with the time about which you said
   you were unsure yesterday. That is from album PR1 and
   it is frame 4A.
         THE CORONER:    This is a new one I take it?

          MR. RUSSELL: Sir, it is a new one and that is why
     I have had an acetate done.
          MR. BEECHEY:   The C number for this, sir, is
     C.534.

Q.        MR. RUSSELL: First of all, Officer, you can see
     the perimeter fence running across the bottom of the
     photograph, can you not? - A. Yes, I can, sir.

Q. At the bottom left hand corner of the perimeter fence
   is an open gate which would be gate 1? - A. Yes, there
   is a gate open.

Q. Can you see in that open gateway there - unfortunately
   you can only see half her head - a woman Police
   Constable? - A. Yes, it appears to be a female Officer,
   yes.
Q. To the right of the photograph in the bottom right hand
   corner, do you see a man pointing to the left with his
   back to the camera? - A. Yes, I can.
Q. That is Chief Inspector McRobbie, is it not? - A. Yes,
   it looks very much like it.

Q. That photograph appears to illustrate a man directing a
   number of fans towards that open gate where the woman
   Police Constable is standing. Would you agree with
   that? - A. That is what it appears, yes.

Q. That photograph has a corrected time of exactly three
   o'clock. Poes that help you in your recollection as to
   when you sent the Officer down to assist the woman
   Police Constable to relocate the fans you had seen come
   out of the centre pen? - A. I would think that is
   probably about right. It was at a very early stage.

Q. The next matter concerns the radio message that you
   sent either at that or about that time to
                                                          21
                                               p .,.p. vm m

Superintendent Greenwood asking him to go from the
players' tunnel to see what was happening at the
Leppings Lane end. Po you remember that evidence? ~ A.
Yes, I do remember that.




                            /Q. As I understand your.
                                                          22

                                               B. D. MURRAY


Q. As I understand your evidence you sent a radio message
   to him but you don't know whether he received it or
   not? - A. I don't know. I have heard what Mr.
   Greenwood said but I don't know. I don't recall an
   acknowledgment as such.
Q. But as I understand your evidence, could I just deal
   with the timing of it, there came a time when you saw
   Superintendent Greenwood going from the area of the
   players* tunnel towards the Leppings Lane end, is that
   right? - A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. That time at which you saw him do that was very shortly
   after the radio message was sent? - A. Yes, everything
   seemed to fall into place.
Q. So either he received the message or coincidentally, as
   he told us, he was acting on his own observation? It
   all happened at one and the same time? - A. It happened
   in perfect sequence, yes.
Q. The importance of this is there was not a delay between
   the sending of the message and any perceived reaction
   in Superintendent Greenwood? - A. Not that I am aware
   of, no.
Q. The final matter that I want to touch upon is you say
   there came a time when you saw Superintendent
   Greenwood, whom you have described as being head and
   shoulders above the crowd at gate 3, gesticulating to
   the Control Box? - A. Yes, indeed.
Q. You were in no doubt that what he was telling you or
   advising you wasthat in his view  the game should be
   stopped? - A. No doubt at all.
Q. I just wonder if we could look at a photograph which he
   has identified, in which he has identified the gesture
   that he was making, and see if that rings any bells
   with you?
        MR. RUSSELL:   Sergeant Griffiths, the original
   reference was PR133A.
        SERGEANT GRIFFITHS:   I think it is C529, sir.
        MR. RUSSELL:   Thank you, it is.   Could you please
   put that up?
0. Do you have that photograph, Superintendent? - A. Yes,
   I do.
                                           B. D. MURRAY


In that photograph we can see Superintendent Greenwood
gesticulating in the direction of the Control Box? - A.
Yes.
Is that, albeit a frozen image of it, but is that the
sort of gesture that you recall him making, by which
you understood him to be saying the game should be
stopped? - A. It would appear so. I saw the gesture
quite clearly; there was no doubt in my mind as to what
he wanted.
And that, of course, was at 4-minutes-past-3, as we can
see from the time of that photograph. That would fit
in with your recollection, would it? - A. Yes, sir.

Thank you very much.
     MR. MANNING:   Are there some questions, sir, that
you have for the Officer? I can promise you that what
I have left to do would, I think, militate towards
trying to finish the Superintendent's evidence before
we break.
     TEE CORONER:   Okay. I have got a few from the
Jury so let me do those first, and then if that is the
case we might as well have our coffee break afterwards.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Sir, before you do that I have
just thought of another three questions, please, if I
may ask them? I am sorry, I thought I would have had a
second chance.
     THE CORONER:   No, you don't normally get a second
chance any more but ask your three questions, if they
are relevant, of course. Put your three questions and
I will decide whether you can ask them. Carry on.
       Further Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Mr. Murray, is it correct that no one was briefed as to
the method of getting fans out of the pens if there was
a crush? - A. I did not brief anyone on that particular
method. I don't know whether there is an authorised
method and I don't know whether any Officers considered
that.
There was mention of a coach in Leppings Lane when you
were giving evidence, but I believe you said there
would be a coach there but it would have no Officers on
it? That is the note I made. - A. The coach that I
arranged was to contain Officers who were doing public
order duties and would have made their way down to the
coach after the kick-off, or after we had authorised
Officers to go on what we call phase 2. There should
                                                            24

                                                 B. D. HURRAY


  not have been a coach with Officers in at any time
  prior to 3 o'clock.

Q. So you are saying the Officers would be there after
   kick-off? - A. These were Officers ....

Q. Not before? - A. These were Officers who were
   performing duties on the periphery of the Ground, round
   the shopping malls, round the public houses. Once the
   fans were all into the Ground I had arranged for two
   coaches to park in Penistone Road and Leppings Lane,
   and 50 Officers to board each coach and stay there as a
   standby in case they were needed during the event.

Q. So there were Officers then in the coach.     I am getting
   a bit muddled with this. I was reading in
   Superintendent Greenwood's evidence at the    Taylor
   Inquiry, when it was stated that there was    a coach with
   50 Officers positioned in Leppings Lane in    order to
   dea1 ....
        MR. RUSSELL:    Sir, I wonder, could we have a
   reference?
        THE CORONER:    Have you got a page number then we
   can look it up.
        MRS. McBRIEN:   Unfortunately I was going through
   the whole of Superintendent Greenwood's evidence last
   night and it got to 1 o'clock and I thought ....

        THE CORONER:   Well unless we have a page number
   it is very difficult to take it up.

        MRS. McBRIEN:    It is in that transcript.   I do
   know that ....
       THE CORONER:   No, Mrs. McBrien. I don't like
  using other people's evidence anyway. It is bad enough
  using the individual's. You can ask him about the
  coach ....
        MR. MANNING:   I think probably Mr. Murray is only
   going to be able to say he knows what he had arranged
   and not anything else more than that, because of course
   he was static in the Control Box.

        THE CORONER:    That is right.
        MRS. McBRIEN:    All right, thank you:

Q. Just this last question: P.C. Buxton we know did ask
   for a delay of the game, didn't he? - A. Yes, I think
   it was P.C. Buxton.
                                                       25
                                              B. D. MURRAY


Q. And you said Sergeant Goddard said no to him? - A.
   Sergeant Goddard said, "It's too late now, the players
   are out".
Q. I am sorry, I thought he said the gates had been
   opened. I don't know where I have got that from, but
   would you agree that it is never too late, if there is
   a risk of fans being injured in any way by the action
   that is being taken? - A. I think I have said that
   there are no rules, or there were no rules about
   delaying kick-off. It can be done at any time for any
   reason.

Q. Thank you very much.
                  Further by THE CORONER

Q. The Jury have got a few questions. The first question
   is, "Were any alterations made in the Operational Order
   to account for the cuts in manning level?" I think
   what the Jury are asking you is, in fact, what cuts if
   any were made in manning levels, where and why? - A. I
   think there was one reserve serial was removed that
   would normally be   down at the Ground, that was
   reduced from three to two. Most of the public order
   serials were reduced from a Sergeant and ten Officers
   to a Sergeant and eight. These are the serials that
   are outside in the residential area around the Ground.
   The mobile units were cut down by one Officer into a
   Sergeant and five instead of a Sergeant and six, or a
   Sergeant and four, I can't remember. I think one
   serial was cut out down at the Hillsborough precinct
   end. I had been very concerned about that the year
   before but the problems that we had anticipated never
   arose. The general reduction was right' across the
   board outside the Ground, and I think that apart from
   the one reserve serial there was no alteration to the
   manpower actually in the Ground.
Q. Were these alterations made in the light of the
   experience of 1988, is that what you are saying? - A.
   Very much so. We tried to balance it by bringing in a
   number of new features. I arranged for three prison
   vans to be utilised. What we had found the year before
   is that if a prisoner was arrested, say at
   Hillsborough, we had to send one of our tango units,
   which was a Sergeant and six men, and they were tied up
   in just taking one prisoner away. I introduced three
   single man prison vans that would go to wherever there
   was a necessity and the Officers making the arrest
   would go back with the prisoner, hence not tying the
   tango units up.
                                                       26

                                              B. D. MURRAY


  We have also heard about the coaches. We found that
  there was an enormous amount of manpower last year, in
  1988, that was obliged to take its meal and its standby
  position down at our Police garages at Claywheels Lane.
  When we did have problems in the Ground they were too
  far away to deploy and everything fell upon the
  unfortunate "D Division serials that for the whole of
  the game were employed within the Ground and did not
  get a chance to get a meal. I arranged for the two
  coach loads and Officers on standby during the match,
  who would be there and very easy to deploy, but there
  were certainly Officers that were very much under
  employed the year before, and because of the few
  problems we had I was instructed to aim for a reduction
  in manpower, which I did.

Q. Would the size of the Control Box have any effect on
   the duties of the Officers inside? - A. I think the
   Control Box is just about the right size for the amount
   of people who are intended to be in it. On semi-finals
   we are quite disciplined. On other matches we get a
   lot of people visiting the Control Room but we try and
   keep it tight on a big match. Obviously, I think it
   was big enough for the normal staff but it is not big
   enough when you want more people in, or when more
   people come to it.
Q. On the day of the disaster were you able to monitor the
   different parts of the terrace at random? I think what
   the Jury is asking is with the cameras, not with the
   eyes. - A. The camera that would be best equipped for
   that was the one that was in the centre of the South
   Stand, which would show a slightly oblique picture of
   the terraces and the Kop. Unfortunately for most of
   the event that was trained on the problems that we had
   in the Kop, particularly after some ejections and
   arrests had been made from that area. What we normally
   use the cameras for is evidence gathering and you can
   only gather and preserve the evidence of what you are
   actually looking at, at the time. When we foresee
   problems in a certain part of the Ground we will record
   that particular area for the whole of the event, and
   that gives us the chance to then take still photographs
   from the video and blow them up later, and utilise them
   as evidence and identify people who are wrongdoers.

Q. The next question is a supplemental one on that really.
   Did you rely more on your own physical view from the
   Control Box or on the monitors, and I think we must be
   talking about the terracing still because you could
   not, of course, see outside, could you, without looking
   at the monitors? - A. No. We had a good view of the
   terraces from the Control Box. We could see the
   terraces, had a good view of the terraces. I probably
                                                   27

                                          B. D. MURRAY


relied more on what I could see with my own eyes than
anything else. If I had seen a particular problem I
would have tried to get the video operator to zero in
as close as he could get. All cameras have a zoom lens
but their capabilities are only as good as the actual
lens, and the better the lens the much more expensive
they are. They seemed to be all right for our
purposes.




             /Q. Do you think .
                                                           28
                                                B. D. HURRAY

     Do you think that concentrating on the matters outside
     tne turnstile areas may have distracted you from
     seeing the build-up of fans on the terraces? In other
     words, were you distracted, was your attention
     directed away from the terraces, because of the events
     which were occurring outside? - A. It is very
     difficult to say, but obviously the major problem
     between 20-to 3 and whatever time the gates opened was
     going on outside the Leppings Lane terraces. I feel
     that that is where the majority of my attention would
     be directed. I would still be looking at different
     aspects of the ground. I would still try and keep
     abreast of everything that was happening inside and
     outside, but obviously the problems that were apparent
     there and that were increasing there would take my
     main attention, yes.

Q.   Do you, by chance, remember what the radio technician
     was wearing? - A. He would be in civilian clothes
     because he is not a Police Officer, he is a civilian.
     I can't remember, no sir.

Q.   One of the questions that Mr. Russell dealt with was
     what Chief Inspector McRobbie was wearing. He was in
     civilian clothes, was he not? - A. He was in civilian
     clothes, yes.

Q.   Do you recollect what he was wearing? - A. I have just
     seen him on the photographs, but I couldn't have
     recollected it. I seem to remember him in a jacket
     and trousers, but I have just seen it, it is a dark
     blue jacket, but I don't know whether I would have
     recalled it.

Q.   In other words, it is what you have just seen? - A.
     Yes.

Q.   The final question from the Jury is could you have
     used the tannoy system to stop the match rather than
     the procedure which, in fact, was adopted? - A. That
     is very interesting. I would never have considered
     it, and I do not think that the referee -- I don't
     know. I don't know whether they are tuned into what
     is going on. Certainly we have from time to time
     tested the emergency evacuation procedure by passing
     messages and the referee is briefed immediately before
     the event and told the message that we would use. On
     one occasion I have known a referee say what was the
     problem, he heard the message; and on other occasions
     they have never heard them. That is why we utilise
     the linesmen to try and attract the referee's
     attention. I do not think it is a recognised form of
     stopping the event.
                                            B. D. MURRAY

 Can I just ask you one question for clarification. We
  now you had, I think, five monitors, presumably five
 cameras? - A. Yes.

You had another two screens which could record? - A.
For recording purposes, yes.

Is it right that not everything that is visible on
your screens is recorded on tape? - A. No.

Only what is selected at the time? - A. Only what is
selected by the operator.

     MR. RUSSELL: Sir, before my learned friend Mr.
Manning gets to his feet, if the Jury will be
assisted, there are other photographs which are before
the Jury which show Chief Inspector McRobbie much more
clearly.

     THE CORONER: Give us the best ones.
     MR. RUSSELL:   525 show his face.

     MR. CATCHPOLE: Once the Jury have seen what he
looks like, if they are still interested, he is shown
quite clearly on the video at about this time, and his
activities in that area, I can remember.

     MR. RUSSELL:   He is full length in 529.   (Shown
on screen)                                       -----

     THE CORONER: I think we are reasonably clear
about it now.

          Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

Superintendent Murray, you are a 25-year service
Officer? - A. Yes, I have 25 years service.

You have been proud of being a member of the Police
Service? - A. Yes, I have.

You had gone on duty in the course of your service
that morning at 8.00 a.m. to do your duty? - A. I
think that would be about right, yes.

You knew that your duty was based upon a plan which
had been devised by Chief Superintendent Mole? - A.
Yes, that is correct.

You had worked to that plan in 1988 shortly after
taking position in Control? - A. Yes, I had.
                                  i




                                                            30
                                                B. D. MURRAY

Q.   You had found that plan and the arrangements for the
     ®atch to be almost wholly satisfactory? - A. Very
     successful, yes.

Q.   You had considered the de-briefings, the comments made
     by people and, as a result, you had made and suggested
     refinements to the plan and with others it had been
     worked upon, ultimately being submitted through the
     hands of Mr. Duckenfield, who signed it, to Mr.
     Jackson, the Assistant Chief Constable who approved
     it? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q.   You had with you in your team very experienced
     Superintendents? - A. Yes - Mr. Marshall, Mr.
     Greenwood, Mr. Chapman.

Q.   Chief Inspectors who knew their job and had worked
     there, Inspectors who had worked there and knew what
     to do, Sergeants and PCs? - A. Very experienced
     Officers right down to the PC level, yes sir.
Q.   All of them had that experience which comes from
     practise in addition to the written and spoken word? -
     A. Very much so, they were experienced Officers on the
     ground. They had done it all before.

Q.   Although there was care in briefings and at briefings
     at various levels, in effect many of them knew what to
     do and what was expected of them as Police Officers,
     men and women who had carried out this function
     before? - A. They knew their role, they knew what they
     had to do.

Q.   In your Control Box you had with you your Commander,
     you had your ears in Sergeant Goddard, a man who had
     worked in Control since 1986, and PC Ryan, who had
     been in Control since 1985? - A. They were experienced
     Officers. I was very pleased with the team.

Q.   You had as your eyes the camera, or video operator, PC
     Bichard, who had been in Control since 1987? - A. I
     will accept the dates, but I know that PC Bichard had
     been properly trained in the use of the equipment.
Q.   As you said a few moments ago, none of those
     experienced Officers drew your attention at any time
     to any problem or any necessary action? - A. Not on
     the terraces. They would from time to time at all
     events let me know if there was an area of concern or
     a problem that needed attention.

Q.   That is, indeed, what they were there for and what you
     expected of them? - A. We were all part of a team, we
     worked together.
                                                             31

                                                  B. 0 . MJMRAY

Q.   wfi          all,of that, a time arrived when a man who
     nr* J n ? 0”     ?r ch6n the Chlef Superintendent was not
     present, namely Superintendent Marshall, asked on two
     separate occasions, indeed demanded on the last of
     those occasions, that gates be opened because people
     were being injured and would be killed unless that
     action was taken? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q*   this*Ply t 0 ^   learned frlend Mr. King, did you say

           What was obvious to me is that we had a terrible
          problem outside. Experienced Officers were
                  us know that people were being injured,
                       kllled* We had never had anything
          like it before. There was tremendous pressure to
          take a course of action to relieve that, and that
          course of action was taken. Nothing else was
          obvious."
     A» I think that is what I said yesterday, yes.

Q.   Superintendent, if there had been anything that was
     obvious* anything that would have saved injury to one
     single person, anything that would have saved the
     death of one single person, you would have taken that
     action, would you not? - A. Of course, yes.

          MR. MANNING: Thank you, Superintendent. You
     have answered every single question that has been
     asked of you through these difficult times. Thank
     you, sir, for your forebearance. I have nothing
     further for this Officer.

      14 J F CORONER: Superintendent Murray, it has been a
     slightly longer session, but at least we have
     concluded. Thank you very much for being here and for
      4 ^ 1 f your evidence. It is much appreciated. We
     will break for quarter-of-an-hour and then we will
     start with the next witness.

                      (Short Adjournment)
