T
                                                                                            M IR .15



O THER DOCUMENT FORM
                                                                                                                              I b>
                                                      Date and time raised                             Number


Title   ........................... ^ )®K                                                  }x M i                 ftbHxJU
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)                                                           CJIm I o S

Receiver's instructions          urgent action — Yes/No                               /ffaeci&hST C^- CurIt iT ^
                                                                                                                      Receiver
                      '   t     o           U ,k n            3        i          -   Jktfo £ic<J$ hctfr*-*-
                                                                  l'L?J      lC/OQob Sojefoi It^jirtniaizc
Document registered/indexed as indicated    £                                                                           Indexer


No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                  Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions


                                                                                                                        Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined • further action to be taken                                                                             O/M         SIO




Further action No(s)
                                                                                                                 ¥
When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form

                                                                        ipT BBS
                           THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                                       LIMITED
                                                        Founded 1863
                                       Patron: H e r M a j e s t y T h e Q u e e n
                                     President: H.R.H. T h e D u k e o f K e n t
                                           Chairman: F. A. M i l l i c h i p

       C hief Executive:                                                                  Phone: 01-402 7151/262 4542
R. H. G. K       e l l y FCIS                                                                    Telex: 261110
                                                                                            Facsimile: 01-402 0486



                                16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW
  O ur Ref:    ART/AS/1429
                        129                         Y our Ref:              22nd September 1989

To: All Football League Clubs

Dear Sirs

Following the extensive investigation into crowd control and safety at the Public Inquiry
into the Hillsborough Disaster, The Football Association consider that the Memorandum on
Crowd Management dated 18th November 1985 has been superseded by the Interim Report produced
by Lord Justice Taylor. In addition, the Crowd Safety Memorandum and Certificate printed on
pages 342-345 of the current Association Handbook should be disregarded (our letter of 1st
September 1989 refers).

The Football Association have therefore compiled a new document entitled "Crowd Safety
Information" in which we have extracted the recommendations from the Taylor Report which, we
believe, will be a helpful guide to all Football League clubs. Also contained are extracts
from the Home Office Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (1986 Edition) (the Green Guide). The
recommendations take the form of guidelines but represent, in the words of Lord Justice
Taylor himself, "the minimum necessary to ensure that existing football grounds can for the
present be safely used." In addition these are meant to complement the recommendations that
Mr Justice Popplewell set out after his Inquiry at Bradford.

We are aware that many clubs will already have implemented the recommendations.
Nevertheless, there have been suggestions in the press that even some of those asterisked (to
be carried out before the 1989/90 season starts) have not been implemented. These
allegations must be a matter of concern to all those involved in football and it is hoped the
enclosed document will give you a convenient reference point from which to ensure that safety
issues get the priority they deserve. It is issued with the support of The Football League
and recent communications from FIFA endorse many of the recommendations. It may be that
further recommendations are made when the final report is published at the end of the year.

One of the issues Lord Justice Taylor has still to deal with is the problem of ticket touts.
The Football Association have been advocating the undesirability of touts for many years and
see the main problems as:

(i)          bona fide supporters without a ticket can only obtain one at an inflated rate;

(ii)         a build up of non-ticket holders outside the grounds; and

(iii)         rival supporters may end up in the same area thus reducing the effect of segregation.


Whilst appreciating all the difficulties associated with the removal of ticket touts, we urge
clubs to do their utmost to minimise the number outside grounds.


Continued..                         Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Gate, London W2 3LW
                                    Incorporated in London Registration Number 77797
The Football Association will, in all probability, be making a further submission to Lord
Justice Taylor and would, therefore, be interested to receive, within the next fourteen days,
any comments on the recommendations with special reference to any difficulties encountered by
your particular club.

I also take this opportunity of informing you that Adrian Titcombe of this Office is how
undertaking the role of Crowd Management Co-ordinator and will be pleased to discuss these
and related matters.

Yours faithfully




Chief-Executive
ftyc- 0 .Zb
THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION




CROWD SAFETY INFORMATION




                SEPTEMBER 1989
                         TAYLOR REPORT - CHAPTER 24
                           INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS


315. The recom m endations which follow are the minimum necessary to
ensure that existing football grounds can for the present be safely
used, based upon the evidence which I have heard at Sheffield and
other information I have received. They complement the
recom m endations which Mr Justice Popplewell set out after his inquiry
at Bradford.

316. Those which are asterisked should be carried out before the
1989/90 season starts. The rest should be started forthwith and
completed as soon as possible.


Maximum Capacities for Terraces

*   1. W here a viewing terrace is divided into pens or areas which
     are self contained, the Safety Certificate should specify the
     maximum num ber of spectators to be admitted to each such pen or
     area.

    A pen or area is to be deem ed "self-contained" notwithstanding that
    it has a gate or gates affording access to another pen or area and
    whether such gate or gates be open or shut.

* 2. Each figure for maximum capacity should be assessed in
   accordance with Chapter 16 of the Green Guide ("the Green Guide
   figure") subject to the following qualifications:-

     (a) in arriving at "the G reen G uide figure", proper and realistic
            allowance must be m ade for all factors which should reduce the
            permissible density in accordance with the range of maximum
            figures specified in paragraphs 221 and 222 of the Green
            Guide;

    (b) after assessing "the G reen G uide figure", a deduction of 15%
           should be made to improve the safety margin.

* 3. Arrangements should be made;-

    (a) to limit the num ber of spectators entering each self-contained
           pen or area to the maximum capacity figure assessed in
           accordance -with Recom m endation 2 above either electronically,
           mechanically, by a ticketing arrangement, by counting or
           otherwise, and

    (b) to close off further access to such pen or area when its
           maximum capacity is about to be reached.


Filling and M onitoring Terraces

* 4. T here should be a written agreement between the club and
   police setting out their respective responsibilities for crowd
   safety and control and in particular for the filling of each self-
   contained pen or other terraced area and the monitoring of
   spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding. Any
   variation of the agreement in respect of an individual match
   should be agreed in writing in advance.
* 5. A t each match, there should be on the perim eter track, for each
   self-contained pen or other terraced area, a steward (if the club
   is m onitoring that area) or a police officer (if the police are
   m onitoring it) whose sole duty is to check crowd conditions in that
   area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the period
   the area is occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should
   be in addition to any other steward or police presence. H e should
   have ready access to the police officer authorised under
   Recom m endation 9 below, and by radio to the control room.


Fences and Gates

      6. All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to
    the terraced areas and especially those with duties under
    Recom m endation 5 above, should be fully briefed and trained with
    regard to the recognition of crowd densities, to the recognition
    of signs of distress and to crowd dynamics. Training should
    include demonstrations at the ground and photographs, designed
    to enable stewards and officers to recognise different crowd
    densities.

* 7. All gates in radial or perim eter fences of pens or other self-
   contained areas should be painted in a different colour from the
   rest of the fence and marked "Emergency Exit".

* 8. W here there are perim eter fences, all gates to the pitch
   should be kept fully open during the period when spectators are
   on the terrace.

* 9. T here should be in respect of each gate in a perim eter fence
   (or group of gates if they are close together) a police officer
   authorised to decide whether or n o t to allow spectators through a
   gate to relieve overcrowding. The officer so authorised in respect
   of each gate should be identified for each match and known to be so
   by all stewards and police officers in that vicinity. He should be
   able to m ake radio contact with the control room either himself or
   via an officer close at hand.

* 10. Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be provided
   by the club at each ground where there are perimeter fences to
   permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release numbers
   of spectators if necessary. Agreement should be reached as to
   whether the equipm ent should be used by police, the fire brigade,
   or stewards. W hoever is to use it should be trained to do so.
   W hether to use it should be a decision of a nom inated senior police
   officer at the ground.


Crush Barriers

*   11. All crush barriers should be visually inspected immediately
     for signs of corrosion. Any barrier found to be affected by a
     significant degree of corrosion should be repaired or replaced.

*   12. The layout of barriers in each pen or terraced area should be
     reviewed immediately to ensure that it complies with the criteria
     contained in Chapter 9 of the G reen Guide. If it does not, the
     assessment of the maximum capacity figure for that pen or terraced
     area, in accordance with Recom m endation 2 above, should reflect the
     fact.
Safety Certificates

      13. T here should be an imm ediate review of each Safety Certificate
    by the responsible local authority, which should consult the club
    in respect of which the Certificate is issued, the police, the fire
    service, the ambulance service and the building authority. Such a
    review should include an inspection of the stadium. Its object
    should be to ensure that the operative conditions of the
    Certificate are complied with and to add or substitute any
    condition shown to be necessary as a m atter of urgency following
    the findings and recom m endations in this report.

      14. Any local authority within whose area there exists a sports
    stadium designated under the 1975 Act for which no Safety
    Certificate has yet been issued should proceed forthwith to
    remedy the situation.

      15. Every Safety Certificate should be reviewed by the local
    authority at least once annually and each Certificate should
    require to be renewed annually.

       16. Each local authority should review its arrangements for
     issuing, m onitoring, enforcing, reviewing, amending and renewing
     Safety Certificates. Such review should require that there exists
     or is provided an accountable administrative structure whereby the
     functions of the local authority are regularly and effectively
     supervised by senior officers and elected members and decisions
     are properly taken in accordance ■with the local authority’s rules.

       17. To assist the local authority in exercising its functions, it
     should set up an Advisory G roup consisting of appropriate members
     of its own staff, representatives of the police, of the fire and
     am bulance services, of the building authority, of the club and of a
     recognised supporters’ club. The Advisory G roup’s terms of
     reference should encompass all matters concerned with crowd safety
     and should require regular visits to the ground and attendance at
     matches. T he Advisory G roup should have a chairman from the local
     authority, and an effective procedure. Its resolutions should be
     recorded and it should be required to produce regular written
     reports for consideration by the local authority.


Duties of each Football Club

* 18. Each turnstile should be inspected and its potential rate of
   flow m easured. Thereafter, regular inspections should be made to
   ensure that each turnstile remains capable of admitting spectators
   at the rate anticipated.

* 19. The correlation between each viewing area in the stadium and
   the turnstiles serving it should be such as to ensure that all the
   spectators intended to be admitted to that viewing area can pass
   through the turnstiles within one hour. If that cannot be done,
   the capacity of that viewing area should be reduced accordingly.

* 20. Turnstiles should be closed when the perm itted capacity of
   the area served by them is about to be reached and arrangements
   should be m ade to ensure quick and effective communications with
   turnstile operators for this purpose.
      21. Closed circuit television should be so installed as to enable
    crowd densities outside the ground, within concourse areas and in
    pens and other standing areas, to be m onitored before and
    throughout a match.

* 22. All signposting for spectators both outside and inside the
   ground should be comprehensively reviewed. It should, in relation
   to the arrangements for each match, be unambiguous, eye-catching,
   simple and clear and should be designed to ensure the rapid
   m ovem ent of spectators to their appropriate viewing area.

* 23. Inform ation on tickets should be unambiguous, simple and clear
   and should correlate absolutely with the information provided in
   respect of each m atch both outside and inside the ground. Retained
   ticket stubs should contain information necessary to guide
   spectators once inside the ground.

* 24. Inform ation on tickets requesting spectators to be in position
   by a particular tim e should be reviewed by clubs in conjunction
   with the police to ensure that it corresponds with the planned
   arrangements for admitting spectators to the ground.

      25. Each club should consult with a recognised supporters’ club as
    to the provision of pre-match entertainm ent aimed at attracting
    spectators to the ground in good time.


Police Planning

* 26. The Chief Constable of each police force in whose area there
   is one designated stadium or m ore should nom inate a chief officer
   to liaise with the management of each football club and local
   authority concerned in respect of the safety and control of
   crowds.

* 27. The O perational O rd er for each match at a designated stadium
   and the pre-m atch briefing of all officers on duty there should
   alert such officers to the importance of preventing any
   overcrowding and, if any is detected, of taking appropriate steps
   to remedy it.

* 28. The O perational O rder for each match at a designated stadium
   should enable the police to cope with any foreseeable pattern in
   th e arrival of spectators at a match and in their departure. It
   should provide for sufficient reserves to enable rapid deployment
   of officers to be m ade at any point inside or outside the ground.

* 29. The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion
   of the officer in comm and at the ground. Crowd safety should be
   the param ount consideration in deciding whether to exercise it.

     30.    T here should be available in the police control room the
   results of all closed circuit television monitoring outside and
   inside the ground and the record of any electronic or mechanical
   counting of num bers at turnstiles or of numbers admitted to any
   area of the ground. Officers in the control room should be skilled
   in the interpretation and use of these data.
Communications

     31. T here should be sufficient operators in the police control
   room to enable all radio transmissions to be received, evaluated
   and answered. T he radio system should be such as to give operators
   in the control room priority over, and the capacity to override,
   others using th e sam e channel. Additional channels should be used,
   where necessary, to prevent overcrowding of the airwaves.
   Consideration should be given to sound-proofing the control room
   against excessive crowd noise.

     32. To com plem ent radio communications, there should be a
    completely separate system of land lines with telephone links
    between the control room and key points at the ground.

      33. Within the control room , there should be a public address
    system to comm unicate with individual areas outside and inside
    the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole ground.
    Im portant announcem ents should be preceded by a loud signal to
    catch the attention of the crowd despite a high level of noise in
    the ground. This arrangem ent should be prominently advertised on
    every program m e sold for every match.

      34. Use should be m ade where possible of illuminated advertising
    boards to address th e crowd. Consideration should also be given
    to the use by police officers of a simple code of hand signals to
    indicate to the control room the existence of certain emergencies
    or requirem ents.


Co-ordination of Emergency Services

* 35. The police, fire and ambulance services should maintain
   through senior nom inated officers regular liaison concerning crowd
   safety at each stadium.

* 36. Before each m atch at a designated stadium, the police should
   ensure that th e fire service and ambulance service are given full
   details about the event, including its venue, its tuning, the
   num ber of spectators expected, their likely routes of entry and
   exit, and any anticipated or potential difficulties concerning
   the control or movement of the crowd. Such details should be
   readily available in the control rooms of each of the emergency
   services.
 * 37. Contingency plans for the arrival at each designated stadium
    of emergency vehicles from all three services should be reviewed.
    They should include routes of access, rendezvous points, and
    accessibility within the ground itself.

 * 38. Police officers posted at the entrances to the ground should
    be briefed as to the contingency plans for the arrival of emergency
    services and should be informed when such services are called as to
    where and why they are required.


 First Aid, M edical Facilities and Ambulances

 * 39. T here should be at each stadium at each match at least one
    trained first aider per 1,000 spectators. The club should have the
    responsibility for securing such attendance.
        40. T here should be at each stadium one or m ore first aid rooms.
      The num ber of such rooms and the equipment to be m aintained within
      them should be specified by the local authority after taking
      professional m edical advice and should be made a requirem ent of any
      Safety Certificate.

  * 41. T he club should employ a medical practitioner to be present at
     each m atch and available to deal with any medical exigency at the
     ground. H e should be trained and competent in advanced first aid.
     H e should be present at the ground at least an hour before kick-off
     and should remain until half an hour after the end of the match.
     His whereabouts should be known to those in the police control
     room and he should be immediately contactable.

  * 42. A t least one fully equipped ambulance from the appropriate
     ambulance authority should be in attendance at all matches with an
     expected crowd of 5,000 or m ore.

        43. T he num ber of ambulances to be in attendance for matches where
      larger crowds are expected should be specified by the local
      authority after consultation with the ambulance service and should
      be m ade a requirem ent of the Safety Certificate.


                        GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS
                                 (1986 EDITION)



       9. C rush Barriers and Handrails



    112. The maximum spacing of crush barriers will be dependant on
    the gradient of the terrace or viewing slope. Paragraphs 113-119
    below give recom m endations for the spacing and strength of crush
    barriers.

    113. Ideally, crush barriers should be provided along the full
    width of a terrace, with gaps only at the radial gangways.

    114. W here barriers are not continuous between radial gangways,
    the alignment of gaps in successive rows of barriers on a terrace
    should form an angle of less than 60° to the barriers. There should
    be no m ore than 2 consecutive gaps in any line of gaps. (See Figure
    3 below).


                                                                    /
              \             t Barriers                          /
                    '
                   -A       ' — i ■■
                                          }
                                          1                 M
                                                           /
                          \                               /
                           \
                        60° A                         A    6 0 ° max
                        ■ - ■r k
                                                  /
                                              f                         >-
                                                                        *- B a r r i e r s -i
                                           /                                              1
Figure 3    Arrangement of gaps between crush barriers
   115. W here there are gaps in the line of crush barriers these
   should be at least 1.1 metres and not m ore than 1.4 metres in
   width.

   116. Column A in Table 1 below provides the maximum distances
   between barriers conforming to the greater strength requirements
   of crush barriers as described above; column B provides the maximum
   distances between barriers conforming to the lesser strength
   requirem ents. Interpolation may be m ade between these figures.

   117. A distinction is m ade between barrier intervals required in
   "peak" viewing areas. T he term "peak" viewing areas describes the
   most popular parts of the terraces where there is a tendency for
   spectators to crowd together and become so emotionally involved in
   the occasion that their reactions can cause additional pressures to
   be set up in those sections of the ground. The peak viewing areas
   are particularly associated with football grounds and are typically
   behind the goal areas, although other parts of the terraces known
   locally may come within this category.
    TABLE 1

                                                        M a x im u m h o riz o n ta l distance
                                                        b e tw e e n b a rrie rs

    Terrace G ra d ie n t                               Peak V ie w in g         O th e r A re a s

                            Step riser :   Step width   A          8             A           B

    05°               ie       1     in       11.4      5.0m       3.3m          8.4m        5.6m

    10°                        1     in        5.7      4.3m       2.9m          6.7m        4.5m

    15°                        1     in        3.7      3.8m       2.6m          5.6m        3.7m

    20°                        1     in        2.7      3.4m       2.3m          4.8m        3.2m

    25°                        1     in        2.1      3.1 m      2.1m          4.2m        2.8m

    30°                        1     in        1.7      2.9m       1.9m          3.8m        2.5m

T erraces and viewing slopes

    221. W here crush barriers m eet the strength and spacing guidelines
    of Chapter 9 the capacity of a terrace or viewing slope should be
    assessed from the area available for standing by allowing a packing
    density of between 54 and 27 persons per 10 square metres depending
    upon the condition of the terrace or slope. Only those parts of
    the terrace or viewing slope from which the whole of the playing
    area can be seen, excluding gangways, should be included in this
    calculation.

    222. T he extreme allowances for packing density are as follows:

     (a) 54 persons per 10 square metres when the terrace or viewing
           slope is in good condition (as set out in Chapter 8); and

     (b) 27 persons per 10 square metres when it materially deviates
           from the recom m ended guidelines, so as to constitute a
           possible hazard to individuals closely packed.
