uj©<2_ |

       2,
                                                                   cpoRioq          1




HILLSBOROUGH ENQUIRY



I am Police Constable 1431 Jackson, at present stationed at Doncaster.

At 8.30am Saturday 15th April 1989, I reported for duty at Doncaster Police
Station.  I was in Serial 26 and Ps.2620 Cropley was in charge of the Serial.
I can recall that Pc.714 Bell, Pc.184 Geeson and Pc.1882 Rimmer were some
of the Officers making up that Serial.

We were conveyed to the Hillsborough Football Ground in the South Yorkshire
Transport bus.   We then paraded in the stand situated above the gymnasium
at the ground.   Following the parade we ate a packed lunch and then the
whole serial moved out of the ground to take up our points in Parkside Road
and Catchbar Lane.   Ps Cropley paired us off and I was in company with
Pc.714 Bell.   Ps Cropley instructed us all to patrol the full length of
Parkside Road and Catchbar Lane.   I was in possession of a radio which I
had taken from Al, Pc Bell did not have a radio with him.

It was   shortly after 11.00am that we began our patrol.  There were not many
people   about at this time, but almost immediately a group of youths approached
us and   asked for directions to a pub.  We informed them that we were strangers
to the   area and were unable to assist.  The group then wandered off without
saying   anything further.

As the day wore on we received more requests for directions to pubs and all
met with the same reply.   We were also asked where the ticket touts were.
Pc Bell and myself walked the full length of Parkside Road ’a f & ^ e n i s t o n
Road to Leppings Lane on a number of occasions.

As the crowds built up, more and more people were asking for directions
to pubs and the whereabouts of ticket touts.  We were also asked by many
people fo      ctions into the ground and often we found that Nottingham
supporter      the Leppings Lane end and the Liverpool supporters -t-hcn g<rt
to the Peniston Road end.

Shortly after 2.00pm Ps Cropley instructed us to remain at the junction
with Leppings Lane and Catchbar Lane as the crowd was building up.  There
was a lot of shouting, swearing and arm waving and I formed the opinion
that the majority of the crowd were hooligans and that they did not know
how to behave like human beings.  Of course not everyone was misbehaving
and I noticed one youth in particular, who was standing at the side of me
and not saying a word.  I do not know the identity of this youth, but he
was in his mid teens with wavy red hair and wearing a green anorak.  He
had unsuccessfully tried to buy a ticket and was now leaning on the railings
at the junction of Leppings Lane and Catchbar Lane.  He was then approached
by a mounted Officer, whose identity I do not know, however he was not a
South Yorkshire Officer because he was wearing a white shirt.  The Officer
took hold of the red haired youth and shouted at him, "Get into the ground."
The youth moved away, but I did not see where he went because I was distracted.

At about 2.30pm the crowd had built up so much that virtually the whole
of Leppings Lane was blocked.  An order then came up Leppings Lane by word
of mouth instructing Officers at the very top of Leppings Lane to close
the road to,all traffic, including PSV's.  I walked up to the top of the
road and passed the order on to Pc.1698 Martin.  I stopped with Pc Martin
for two or three minutes assisting in directing traffic, before returning
to my point.


                                                                 Contd
                                                                                i

Page 2   -   C o n t d ......



Many of the crowd that were*, now arriving appeared drunk and some were even
'legless', they were being supported by their mates.    Many were still drinking
from cans and bottles and some were sitting around drinking and eating take­
away food.

At this time I broke up four skirmishes between rival fans.  I remember
one of the youths taking part in a skirmish was a skinhead with the word
'Forest' shaved in his hair in the back.

Shortly before 3.00pm the majority of supporters had reached the turnstiles
and there were only a few stragglers making their way along Leppings Lane
towards the ground.  The streets appeared to be quietening down by this
time and I thought everything was in order until I heard Superintendent
Marshall speaking over the radio.  He was instructing Officers inside the
ground to open the gates and allow the supporters in as there was such a
crush.it was likely that someone would be killed.

From where I was standing I was unable to see the main turnstiles as my
view was obscured by   trees situated along the river bank. I could, however
see a large crowd of   supporters in the area near to the crescent of steel
railings and gates which are situated some yards in front of the turnstiles.
I could see seven or   eight mounted Officers in this crowd of supporters,
but they did not appear to be breaking up the crowd.    I again heard
Superintendent Marshall on the radio asking why the gates hadn't been opened.

By this time I could see him standing on the parapet of the river bridge
and holding onto a nearby road sign.   I walked down Leppings Lane to a location
mid way between Catchbar Lane junction and the ground and I stood near to
the Tyre Depot.   I could see people scaling the wall of the stadium and
making their way inside.   This appeared to go on for about five minutes
and no one tried to stop them.   I could hear Superintendent Marshall repeating
his requests for the gates to be opened and I could hear an unidentified
Officer replying that the gates could not be opened as it would be impossible
to check tickets.   However, Superintendent Marshall repeated his request
and eventually the gates were opened.

Within a few minutes I heard a radio message to say that the game would
have to be stopped and almost immediately I heard another radio message
which was, "Everyone into the ground and onto the track."

In company with Pc.714 Bell we ran down Leppings Lane to the concertina
gate which is situated near to the sweet shop.  We entered the ground
immediately and ran onto the pitch at the Leppings Lane end.  By this time
there were many people on the pitch and Police Officers were forming a cordon
and I formed the opinion that there had been a pitch invasion and I wasn't
told otherwise, either over the radio or by a Senior Officer, but I do remember
thinking , how on earth have so many people got over that fence.

I then saw that the terrace gates were open and Officers were assisting
people through them.   I saw people holding their chests and falling down
on the floor in front of the cordon and in among supporters who were milling
about.  I immediately formed the opinion that should there be another pitch
invasion these people would be trampled and I decided to assist them through
the cordon to the rear.

                                                           Contd
Page 3   -   Contd



I assisted four people in all and all of them could walk with assistance.
I took them well clear of the crowd and laid them on the pitch.  Some were
attended by supporters, others were attended by St John's Ambulance ladies.
The fourth person I assisted said to me, "There's some bastard dead in there."
I didn't say anything to this man, but I formed the opinion that he was
over reacting.  I just thought that no one could have been killed in a pitch
invasion.  Nevertheless I decided I'd better check out what he'd said and
I made my way to the terrace wall.  I looked through the fencing and I saw
two men laid out at the base of the wall.  Kneeling at the side of each
of the men was a Police Constable.  Both Police Constable's were thumping
the men's chests.  Both men appeared to be breathing, but looked unwell.

I can't remember anyone saying anything, but it would appear that the people
immediately around me all reached the same decision that those two men should
be taken off the terrace immediately.  A number of us began pulling the
wire fence in an effort to tear it down.  The fence eventually gave way
and I was able to lean over the wall.  I took hold of the man's arm and
with other Officers pulled him over the wall.  I then supported his shoulders
and carried him to an ambulance belonging to the St John's which had just
arrived.  He was still breathing at this time and the only thing I can
remember about him was that he was stocky and wearing a light coloured shirt
and trousers.  Although the man was breathing I formed the opinion that
oxygen equipment would have assisted him.  St John's Ambulancemen produced
a bottle and mask, but both were very antiquated.

I'd moved a little further along the track by this time,   but was still in
Section 3.  I was still with Pc Bell and together with him and other Officers
I began to pull down more of the terrace fencing.   However, our efforts
were thwarted somewhat by supporters on the terracing who were desperate
to break out and were themselves trying to rip the same panel down, but
were unfortunately pulling against us.  Pc Bell, myself and other Officers
then managed to get hold of the bottom of the wire panel and bend it upwards,
allowing us to crawl through onto the terrace.

Once on the terrace I lost contact with Pc Bell.   Almost immediately I saw
the body of a girl laying on the terrace.   I remember thinking, someone
really has died.  There was no crushing at this time, people were just
wandering about.  Together with some other Officers I lifted the girl from
the terracing and passed her through the fence and onjo the track.   I then
made my way along the terrace and as the crowd appeared, I was confronted
by a large pile of bodies.  They were as deep as the wall and they were
piled up against the wall.  There would be 25-30 bodies, possibly 35 bodies
in the pile, they were so tangled up, it was difficult to tell.   They were
all blue and it was obvious they were dead.



I noticed that this pile of bodies were directly in front of a crush barrier
which was mangled and laid flat to the terracing.   Sitting on top of the
pile of bodies were two men, both of them were alive and appeared uninjured,
however they were unable to move because their legs were trapped in the
pile.  One of them to the left of the pile nearest to me appeared to have
reddish hair and he was wearing a blue denim shirt.   Together with others
I assisted in pulling him free.  I then took hold of one of the bodies in
the pile by the arms, hesitated for a few seconds and I thought, will people
want to know where the bodies have died and I immediately came to the conclusion
that it was impossible to leave such a pile of bodies in their present position
and I was sure they had to be moved.

                                                                  Contd
Page 4   -   Contd



I continued to pull at this, body, I cannot describe the body in any way
other than a white male.   I remember that immediately on my left was a
supporter who took hold of the bodie'sleft hand and I saw an Officer take
hold of the bodie's waist and together we pulled until we freed the body
fran the tangled pile.  We then carried the body to the open gate and passed
it to Officers who were reaching through.   I then returned to the pile to
remove another body.   I cannot recall the identity of any Officer that was
near me.   I cannot recall how many times I returned to the pile and how
many bodies I assisted in removing because I got what I can only describe
as 'tunnel vision' and became totally oblivious to everything that was
happening around me.   All I could see was what was immediately in front
of me and all I was concentrating on was the job in hand and that was
removing the bodies from the pile and onto the pitch.   I was totally oblivious
to the noise and chaos that was about me.

One of the few things I do remember is every time we returned to the gates
with a body, seeing masses of outstretched black uniformed arms reaching
through to receive the body and take it onto the pitch.
            The gates were too narrow to get through with a body.  The only
other thing that broke my concentration was a Senior Officer with a loud
hailer who was leaning through the fence and shouting just to pass the bodies
to awaiting Officers and not to try and get through the gate with them.
I cannot recall how many times I returned to the pile, but eventually the
bodies were all removed.

I then remember noticing that the terraces were covered in clothing, shoes
and other personal possessions.  I then looked up the terrace two or three
steps and I saw the only other Police Officer who I recognised in that section
of the terracing and he was Ps Roddis.  I then became aware of the noise
coming from the seating area above and I looked up to see the crowd leaning
over and shouting and making two fingered signs at us.  They were also spitting
on us.  They were shouting, "You fucking murdering bastards, you're worse
than the Belgiums."

There were still a number of supporters milling about on the terrace, but
obviously no crush.  I looked around and I couldn't see anymore bodies and
I thought there was nothing more for me to do and I made my way onto the
pitch and up to an unattended body.   It was the body of a white male, about
19 yers old, about 5' 7" tall, slim build with dark brown hair and blue
eyes.  He was wearing blue and white Addidas trainers, blue jeans, fawn
socks and a green sweatshirt with yellow sleeves.   The logo on the front
of the sweatshirt read 'Best Trophy' which was in blue lettering.   I now
know this to be the body of Peter . M 1

Together with other Officers I placed the body on a makeshift stretcher
which was an advertising board.  We then carried the body to the gymnasium.
Once inside the gymnasium I was instructed by a Detective Constable to stay
with the body.

At 3.50pm Dr lIuuLof the Royal Hallamshire Hospital attended the body and
certified death.  I was then joined by Ds Hardy and together we attempted
to identify the body, however there was no ID on the body.  I remained with
the body throughout the night and it was stili unidentified at 5.00am on
Sunday 16th April 1989.

                                                             Contd
Page 5   -   Contd



Shortly after 5.00am I accompanied the body in an ambulance to the mortuary.
At 5.30am that same day I identified the body to Dc Wiegold.  I then returned
to Doncaster Polie Station, arriving shortly before 8.00am, however whilst
pulling at the terraced fencing I had sustained a small cut approximately
V long on my right index finger and this had by now gone septic and I w as
instructed by A/Inspector Smith to go



                                     I retired from duty at 9.00am.
