                                            SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB pic

Sheleld Archives R e fifb i/^ i | d 2 B 3
                                              ERNAL COMMUNICATION
                                                                                    ~b2<Zl
     To                                                                             Date
            D. Lock.
                                                                                           8th June 1988
                        , Insp. Sewell.




            INSTRUCTIONS FOR MATCH DAY STAFF


            I attach a copy of theabove which willbe included in
            the passes for the coming season. Could you please check
            through this carefully and advise me of any amendments
            or additions which you recommend.
            The copy will be going'to the printers on 17th June,
            so could I plaese have your reactions before then.
             S h e ffie ld Wednesday Football Club

             Instructions For Match Day Staff

Any continued disregard for the regulations in this schedul
could lead to the withdrawal of your pass.
Smoking is not permitted by any member of our Match Day
Staff whilst on duty.
Please remember that you are paid to help the spectator
enjoy a game of footbal 1.
I.D. passes should be worn, and should be clearly visible
at all times whilst on duty.



Match day staff are not to become involved with crowd
misbehaviour. This is a matter for the Police - AND
THE POLICEjONLY.
Their assistance must be sought on all such occasions,
and Match Day Staff are required soley to identify persons
who are breaking, or are likely to break ground regulations
If Police assistance is refused, take a note of the officer
number and report immediatley to the C h ^ f Steward or
his deputy. DO NOT GET INVOLVED.
Stewards do not have a responsibility for maintaining
public order but should be prepared to identify persons
to Police Officers who are either creating a disturbance
or whose presence is likely to create a disturbance -
this couvers a wide range of activities contrary to ground
regulations.
Please report to the Security Officer any damage or defect
likely to cause injury or danger to persons in attendance.
In the event of an emergency or incident the Senior Police
Officer present will take command.



Contd.
Gatemen and Turnstile Operators:

1/Gatemen and Turnsile Operators should report for duty
no later that than 2 hours before kick-off, or earlier
if advised. Anyone report "lifter the stated time cannot
be guaranteed a job.
2/ All exit gates should be manned at all times. If
any gate is left unmanned at all, the entire staff covering
the gate will be instantly dismissed.
3/ Turnstile Operators on cash turnstiles will be given
a cash float and batch of tickets. Full details of the
banking procedure will be given at the induction meeting
before the start of the season, and this procedure should
be followed at all times. All cash bamked should be
counted and placed in the correct bags. Continual disregard
of these procedures will result in dismissal.
The float, and unsold tickets should be returned to the
Turnstile Office together with banking details.
4/ Turnstile Operators on ticket only stiles should firstly
check that the ticket they are accepting is a) for the
correct match, and b) for the correct area of the ground.
The tickets should be sorted between season ticket vouchers,
match tickets, and (where applicable) shareholders vouchers
etc.
5/ Any season ticket holder who has forgotten or lost
histicket should be directed to the General Office.
Any season ticket holder not presenting the correct numbered
voucher should be directed to the General Office.

Stewards

1/ Stewards must wear their official waistcoat on duty
at all times. This will be allocated when you report
for duty.
2/ Stewards must report for duty no later than 2 hours
before kick-off time. Any steward reporting for duty
after this time cannot be guaranteed a job. This provision
may be subject to amendment in the event of major fixtures
when prior notice will be given.
3/ Whilst every effort will be made to allocate you the
same job throughout the season, you m u ^ carry out any
alternative duty as directed by the Che^f Steward, or
his deputy or an official of the club.


 Contd.
4/ Stewards are reminded that they should remain on duty
until the final whistle and until their area is clear.
The practise of Stewards leaving their positions before
the final whistle will not be tolerated. Except in an
emergency5 Stewards should not leave their place of
duty without consent of the Cheif Steward or senior Police
Officer who should, if it is considered necessary, arrange
for a replacement. At the end of the match, when your
area is clear, you should report back to your Cheif Steward
to hand in your official waistcoat and receive your wages.

5/ Stewards Working in Stand.
Stewards are responsible for ensuring spectators sit
in correct seats (as shown on tickets) where th-'s is
not the case, they have a responsibility in the first
instance for requesting them to do so, and only if there
is a refusal they should contact the Police for assistance.
Stewards are also resposible for ensuring that gangways
and exits are kept clear.
Stewards should prevent, as far as possible, standing
on seats, and the climbing of fences and other structures.
If Stewards are unable to comply with this request due
to the severity of the incident, they should report the
matter without delay to the nearest Police Officer.
Where more than one Steward is on duty at the sate gancway.
one steward is to remain at the bottom of the steps untH
at least 10 minutes after kick-off, or until anv 'rush'
is over, to ensure that the spectator uses the co r r e c t
gangway and remove any ticket s|ubs.
No gangway steward is to sit down until at least 15 mir.tes
after kick-off, and then only if there is a vacant seat
on the end of a row in the immediate vicinity of the
gangway - all other stewards must sit as close to their
allocated position as possible at the end of a row. No
more than two stewards may sit together.
In the period leading up to half time, it is imperative
that the gangways are kept clear.
Be aware of the location of fire fighting and mecical
equipment in the area for which they are responsible
and being capable of effectively operating the s=.me.
Familiarise youself with all aspects of the Grou~d Regt/ations.


 Contd...




                                                                  4
EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURE


All Match Day Staff must be aware of the following procedures
In the event of an emergency situation arising in the
ground (i.e. fire or bomb call) which require evacuation
of all or part of the ground, the following procedure
will be foil owed
a) Police Control Room will pass the following message
'The attendance of Mr. Meadows is urgently required at
Police Control1 This will be over the P.A. system and
will indicate to Police Officers and Stewards that emergency
evacuation procedures are in force. Stewards will take
up positions at their exits and gates.
b) In the event of an emergency evacuation being necessary,
an oval message will be passed by the Police Officer
in charge giving specific instructions as to action to
be taken by the public.
c)In the event of an all clear situation the following
message will be passed. 'Mr. Meadows is no longer required
at Police Control.

Be on the alert to recognise potential fire hazards and
suspect packages. Such findings to be reported to the
nearset Police Officer or in his absence the Cheif Steward
or designated club official.
