                                                                                        M I R . 15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                   Date and time raised   Ai/vy 9o   //OS                 Number


Title
(Include so u rce jfn d a n y docum ent num ber i f relevant)      r,                                j            fiJh Sp-lbY -ixzfiw
Receiver's instructions — urgent action      ^ s/N o                    <Q*(y
                                                                                                                          Receiver




                                                                                                                          Indexer
           gis^r
Document regiafered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                      Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions


                   £.
                                                                                                                          Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken

                                                                                                     law w

                                                                                                                BMW
Further action No(s)                                                                                                      Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                Vincent Hale & Co.
                                      Solicitors
                                       Nash House             Vincent Hale Solicitor
Telephone: (0742)
Office 325842                        140 Upperthorpe          Consultant:
Home 345214                              Sheffield            Gerard Vincent Hale B.A. (Hons.)
Fax    325644                             S6 3NF

     Our ref: VH/DB                         12th November, 1990
     Your ref: Detective Superintendent Beechey
     Dear Sir,
    Hillsborough inquest
    We have now taken instructions on the proposed statement of agreed
    facts. The only point which our client, Superintendent Marshall,
    makes is that the turnstiles allocated to Liverpool Supporters had
    to serve the entire North stand, not merely the West side of it.
    We have some observations on witnesses and hope it is proper to
    make them to you. We are sending a copy of this letter direct to
    H.M. Coroner, in case that is the proper course.
    We accept that it would be tedious to call all the witnesses whose
    statements were taken, when many of them merely tell the same
    story again and again. However, you will appreciate that as a
    result of the process of selection at the Taylor enquiry counsel
    for the relatives, and the judge himself, presented a picture of
    only a few fans ’with drink t a k e n ’ with the result that the
    interim report, at least, concluded that drink and consequent
    impairment of the judgment of the crowd outside the ground was
    only a very minor factor which played no significant part in the
    crushing which led to the gates being opened.
    Following my invitation to the v ic t im s’ solicitors to
    acknowledge that in addition to the admitted fault of the police
    and others there was some fault on the part of the supporters, I
    had only one reply, which stated that the supporters were entirely
    free from blame and that the danger of loss of life outside the
    gates could have been averted because the supporters would have
    responded to a request, by loudhailer, to ’hang b a c k ’.
    It is clear from this single reply, and the absence of any reply
    from the other solicitors involved, that it will still be alleged
    that drink and bad behaviour applied only to a small and
    insignificant number of supporters. It may therefore be
    necessary, to counter any such suggestion, to bring forward all
    the witnesses who speak as to these matters until the point is
    made clear that the evidence on these matters is very substantial
    - not merely confined to one or two instances.
    I would hope that after hearing half a dozen witnesses it may be
    possible for agreement to be reached by all concerned that the
    point has been made and that it would not make it any stronger to
    replicate the same evidence ad nauseam. If, however, in
    understandable grief, the relatives continue to press the view
    that the hooligan element had gone somewhere else on that day, did
    not attend the match and played no part in the crush outside the
    gates, I would like to be able to call all the witnesses who can
    speak as to these matters until a point is reached when (if the
    evidence comes up to proof) it is final 1y acknowledged that the
    Taylor enquiry was misled in this important aspect by its own,
    necessarily hurried selectfon of evidence.
    Yours faithfully,
    VINCENT HALE 8 CO
West Midlands Police,
Nechells Green Police Station,
BY FAX
Mi        inds Polices
Hillsborough Enquiry Team,
Necbells Green Police Station,
Fowler Street,
BIRMINGHAM
87 5DA
VINCENT HALE 8 CO. SOLICITOR'
NASH HOUSE, 140 UPPERiHOw«
SHEFFIELD. S6 3NF
TEL:{0742)325842/34521*
FAX: 325644
