                                                                                 WG401
 \
                                                                                     (&O.B25)
                         WEST MIDLANDS POLICE

                                                      Reference:

From; INSPECTOR DAVENPORT     O o !i                  Station:     Nechells Green

To:    DETECTIVE CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT FOSTER          Date:        7 July 1989


SUBJECT:   EXAMINATION OF PERIMETER FENCES




In accordance with the matters raised by Professor MAUNDER, I have visited
the football stadiums shown below and examined the perimeter fencing.

1 -   WEMBLEY STADIUM

      There are two types of perimeter fencing presently in use at Wembley.
      Type one was originally erected in 1977 as a result of pitch invasions
      at international football matches. Within the last two years these
      have been modified by the addition of two lateral metal strips across
      the diagonal sloping spikes. The gates are opened by releasing bolts
      at the top and bottom.  The gate space is measured at S ’S". There are
      35 of these gates, each manned by a Steward.

      The second type of gate has been fitted since the Hillsborough
      Disaster.  The mechanism consists of a lever which is secured by a
      piece of plastic strip. When the lever is pulled the plastic strip
      breaks, releasing the gate. The whole fence opens out onto the track.
      The space available for access is 10*3". There are seven of these
      gates in use and each one is manned by a Steward.

      Type two is easy to operate and gives quick access to the       pitch inthe
      case of emergency.

      Lateral fences are only used to divide standing/seating areas.

      A statement from Mr G WISE, Site Controller, is attached together with
      a newspaper extract concerning the erection of fences in 1977.

2     HIGHBURY. LONDON

      Highbury is the home ground of Arsenal F.C., the current League
      Champions.  They do not have and have never had perimeter fences.
      They do have a retaining fence approximately 3 feet high, which has a
      moat approximately 3 feet deep by 3 feet wide behind it.   Police
      Officers patrol the track and the Club have not experienced any
      problems with pitch invasions.

      There are lateral fences behind each goal. At the rear of each
      lateral fence is a transfer gate which is manned by a Police Officer.

3.    OLD TRAFFORD. MANCHESTER

      The home ground of Manchester United F.C.

      Perimeter fences were first erected behind the goals and Old Trafford
      in 1974 following a pitch invasion at a local derby match.  It was
      extended to the rest of the ground in 1976.

                                                                    Cont’d   I   .
There are 29 gates, each of which operate on a quick release lever
system. When opened the gate space measures 3*4". The Club, which is
one of the best supported in the country, have never had problems with
overcrowding and have not felt the need to modify the system since it
was first installed.

Behind the visitors end lateral fences have been fitted each of which
has a transfer gate at the rear.

All transfer gates and perimeter gates are manned by Police Officers.

Attached is a statement f   r    o   m   [ who has been employed by
Manchester United FC for 29 years and is presently Assistant
Secretary.             has kindly provided photographs of the existing
perimeter fencing at Old Trafford and also the latest fencing to be
fitted at Brighton and Hove Albion FC which is a bolt release system
with the double gates opening out to give access to the pitch.
Viewing for spectators is less restricted through these gates.

A Manchester United perspective on the National Membership Scheme is
also attached.

VILLA PARK. BIRMINGHAM

The home ground of Aston Villa FC where the other 1989 Semi Final
match between Everton and Norwich was played.

Perimeter fences were first erected at Villa Park in 1978/1979
season.  They are now erected in front of standing supporters, both
home and away, and also in front of seated away supporters.  The
fencing has only been slightly modified by the addition of 1" spike to
the top to prevent spectators climbing over.

The gates are opened by releasing a bolt and each gate is manned by a
Police Constable.  The gate space measures 3 ’8 " . There has been no
modification since the Hillsborough Disaster.

A statement from               Assistant Secretary is attached.

THE HAWTHORNS. WEST BROMWICH

The home ground of West Bromwich Albion FC. West Bromwich Albion are
in the Second Division, having narrowly missed promotion to Division
One last season.

Perimeter fences were first erected in 1974.  They have been
strengthened over the years and about 8 years ago an additional ’rake*
was added to the top of the fences to prevent spectators climbing
over.




                                                         Cont’d   I
    The gates are opened by releasing a bolt and the gate space   is4*5".
    All gates are manned by Stewards.

    Fences are only erected in front of home and away standing supporters.

    Since the events of Hillsborough the inside of the gates in the
    perimeter fencing have been painted fluorescent orange to highlight
    that they are emergency exits. A statement from                 ,
    Ground Director, is attached.

GENERAL

Only Wembley with the introduction of their type 2 fencing/gate have made
any major changes in the light of the Hillsborough Disaster.

All the grounds staff were of the opinion that existing arrangements would
ensure the safe evacuation of any pens or terraced area.

No advantages were seen in the suggestion of quick release system whereby
the whole fencing collapsed onto the pitch, as it was thought that
spectators were likely to trip and stumble in an attempt to reach safety.

None of the Clubs has photographs readily available to indicate crowd
attendances in the 1950’s, but will research their archives and forward
any suitable material.  It may be worth approaching the BBC for footage     of
previous semi-finals held at Hillsborough.




 1SPECT0R DAVENPORT
