                                                   ■



MMLKHSHlRt               Tbo\uTitaS    \-Tt)           '          7.6X0

     os-l&l W A L         TtfJDfc'R.

           l.r \< \    Phase.




          SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB LTD


               SPECIFICATION, BILL OF QUANTITIES

                          AND FORM OF TENDER


                      FOR USE IN CONNECTION WITH

               THE CONSTRUCTION OF NEW EMERGENCY EXITS


                 ALTERATIONS TO EXISTING STAIRCASES

          AND REPAIRS TO EXISTING REINFORCED CONCRETE


                          MEMBERS AND TERRACING




                                                       EASTWOOD & PARTNERS
                                                       CONSULTING ENGINEERS
  JUNE 197 9                                           BOWMAKER     HOUSE
                                                       23 K I N G F I E L D   ROAD
                                                       SHEFFIELD          S11   9AS
     SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB LIMITED
     THE CONSTRUCTION OF NEW EMERGENCY EXITS,
        ALTERATIONS TO EXISTING STAIRCASES

        AND REPAIRS TO EXISTING REINFORCED
          CONCRETE MEMBERS AND TERRACING
          AT HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND

           INSTRUCTIONS TO PERSONS TENDERING



The following documents are to be read in conjunction
one with the other and shall form the basis of the
tender
a.        Instructions to persons tendering.
b.        Conditions of Tender.
c.        Drawings as listed.
           Specification and Bills of Quantities.
e[        I.C.E. Conditions ofContract.
f.        Form of Tender.
g.        Daywork Schedule.



Tenders are to be delivered to Eastwood & Partners,
Bowmaker House, 23 Kingfield Road, Sheffield Sll 9AS,
in the envelope provided with the tender documents,
not later than noon on Wednesday 4th July, 1979„

Tenders shall consist of the complete volume of
documents referred to in paragraph 1 , with all items
of the Bill of Quantities fully priced, moneyed out,
cast and totalled, and the Form of Tender duly completed,
signed and witnessed.

Persons tendering are informed that no alterations or
erasures by them in the text of the documents sent
herewith will be allowed and if any suc h alterations
or erasures shall have been made, the Tender will not
be considered.

The Tenderer (whether his Tender is accepted or not)
shall treat the details of the Specification and the
other documents attached hereto as confidential and
in the event of a Tender not being submitted the
documents shall be returned.
6   .   The Person or Firm or Company whose Tender is acceptable to
        the Employers will be required within one month of being
        notified by them of the proposed acceptance of his Tender
        to enter into an agreement substantially in the form con­
        tained in the General Conditions of Contract.

7.      Persons tendering must obtain for themselves, on their own
        responsibility and at their own expense, all the information
        which may be necessary for the purpose of making a Tender
        and of entering into the contract and must examine all the
        documents sent herewith and must inspect and consider the
        site and neighbourhood and make their own enquiries with
        regard to every right, matter and thing which may affect
        their Tender.   They must also inspect and satisfy themselves
        as to the nature and levels of all existing works, road,
        railways, bridges, the availability of labour, means of
        communication and access to and egress from the Site and
        Works, and available accommodation as regards land (whether
        without or within the site) and must make their own
        enquiries as to workyard sites, depots and dumps, and as to
        the acquisition of such additional sites and areas as may be
        necessary for temporary purposes for the construction,
        completion and maintenance of the Works.

8   .   The Employers will not hold themselves liable for any
        expense incurred by the Tenderer in preparing and submitting
        his Tender.

9.      Should there be any doubt or obscurity as to the meaning
        of any part of the Contract Documents or as to anything
        to be done or not to be done by the accepted Tenderer, or
        as to these instructions, or as to any other matter or
        thing, the persons tendering must set forth such doubt
        or obscurity in writing and submit the same to the Engineers
        not later than ten days before the date fixed far the
        delivery of the Tenders.

10.     Except such reply as the Engineers may give in writing
        neither they nor the Employers nor any persons employed
        by them have authority to make any representation or
        explanation to persons tendering as to the meaning of any
        of the documents attached hereto, or the drawings, or as
        to anything to be done or not to be done by the accepted
        Tenderer for the Works, or as to any other matter or
        thing, so as to bind the Employers or bind and fetter the
        judgement or discretion of the Engineers in the exercise
        by them of their powers and duties under the Contract.

11.     No letter or statement of Conditions suggested or laid
        down by any Tenderers or any endorsement on the Tender
        Documents shall accompany the Tender, and should any
        terms or conditions be forwarded.with the Tender, this
        may automatically nullify the Tender.


12.     The Contractor is advised to visit the site prior to tendering
        and make a thorough inspection and obtain all information
        which may in any way affect is tender.   No claim will be
        allowed on the grounds of ignorance of the conditions
        under which the works are to be done.   Such a visit must
        be made in the presence of the Engineer, or his representative,
        through whom an appointment shall be made.
                                 9
                       CONDITIONS OF TENDER



1.   Every Tender shall be made out on the form supplied
     and accompanying every Tender shall be a complete and
     unaltered copy of (a) the Specification of Works
     supplied by the Employer, and (b) the Bills of Quantities
     supplied by the Employer, having the appropriate columns
     filled up by the Person, Finn or Company making the
     Tender (hereinafter called f,the Contractor”) giving the
     rates and amounts upon which the Tender is made.


2.   Tenders shall be for the execution of the Works in accord­
     ance with the Specification of Works, Bills of Quantities
     and the Drawings prepared by or on behalf of the Employer
     and which the Contractor shall be deemed to have examined.

     The numbers, quantities and measurements given in the
     Bill of Quantities are approximate only and the validity
     of the Tender or of any Contract based thereon shall be
     in no way affected by the subsequent variation in these
     numbers, Quantities and measurements.   The amount for
     every item in the Bills of Quantities calculated at the
     rate or price inserted by the Contractor shall be stated in
     each case, but the figures are intended solely for the
     purpose of facilitating the comparison of the various Tenders
     received and shall not be taken to be the sum which is to be
     paid to the Contractor for the execution of the Works, the
     actual sum to be paid to the Contractor if the Tender is
     accepted being (subject to the Provisions of the Conditions
     of Contract) the value at the rates or prices inserted by
     the Contractor in the Bills of Quantities, of the materials
     actually supplied and the work actually carried out by the
     Contractor.


3.   The rates and prices inserted in the Bills of Quantities
     shall include provision, delivery, unloading, storage,
     performance, completion and maintenance, together with
     profits establishment charges, transport charges, haulage,
     temporary works, labour, materials, plant charges, fuel,
     water, insurance, watching, lighting, pumping, maintenance,
     and all other expenses of every kind whatsoever, which may
     be incurred by the Contractor in executing the Works and
     in complying with the Specification of the Works.




                             3
4.      If, on examination of a Tender a discrepancy is found
        between the total amount of the Tender and the amount
        arrived at by valuing the quantities given in the Bills
        of Quantities at the rates or prices set against them
        by the Contractor, then the Contractor shall be called
        upon to alter the said rates or prices or amounts as
        directed by the Engineer by notice, in writing signed by
        the Engineer, and if within seven days after such notice
        in writing or within such further period as the Engineer
        may allow the Contractor shall not have made such alterations
        as directed, such Tenders shall be deemed to be wholly
        rejected unless the Employer shall otherwise direct.


5.      In consideration of the tender documents being supplied
        free of charge to tenderers a Tender shall be binding on the
        Contractor for a period of three calendar months from the
        date set for return of his Tender.


6   .   Employers‘do not bind themselves to accept the lowest
        or any Tender.

7.      Every direction or notice to be given to the Contractor may
        be posted to the address given in the Tender, and such post­
        ing shall be deemed to be good service of such notice, and
        the time mentioned in these Conditions for performing any
        act after direction or notice shall be reckoned from twenty-
        four hours after the time of posting.


8   .   Notwithstanding anything mentioned heretofore or hereinafter
        in the Contract Documents, the Form of Contract will be that
        contained in the General Conditions of Contract for use in
        connection with Works of Civil Engineering Construction
        prepared by the Institution of Civil Engineers jointly with
        the Association of Consulting Engineers and the Federation
        of Civil Engineering Contractors, Fifth Edition, (June 1973)
        with amendments as stated herein.   The Variation of Price
        (Labour and Materials) Clause, is NOT included in the
        Conditions of Contract.




                                  4
                      LIST OF DRAWINGS TO ACCOMPANY TENDER



    1610/ 4   South Stand - Repairs to existing Reinforced Concrete Members -
              Sheet 1.

          5   South Stand - Repairs to Existing Reinforced Concrete Members -
              Sheet 2.

        23    New Emergency Exit at East End of South Stand Open Seating

        24    New Timber Exit Door from South Side of Spion Kop

        25    Remedial Work to Areas of Damaged Terracing SpionKop

        26    Remedial Work to Areas of Damaged Terracing WestTerrace

        27    High Level Staircase from Spion Kop

        28    Profile of Staircase from Spion Kop - Sheet     1

        29    Profile of Staircase from Spion Kop - Sheet     2

        30    New Emergency Exits at Bottom of Spion Kop General Arrangements

        31    New Emergency Exits at Bottom of Spion Kop Gate & Frame Details

        32    Details of New Precast Step Units and Barriers in North Stand

        33    General Arrangement of New Exits from West Stand

         34   Details of Escape Stair at South End of West Stand
         35   Elevations   and details of South End of West Stand.

         36   Details of Escape Gangway at North End of West Stand

         37   South Stand Exits 1 and 2 - Steelwork Details

         38   South Stand Gangways 2,4,5,9,10 and 12 Steelwork Details

         39   South Stand Gangways 1,3,6 ,7,8 and 11 Steelwork Details

         40   Alterations to Exit from North Side of Spion Kop
        41    South Stand Internal Layout.




I
                   SPECIFICATION OF WORKS

                         SECTION 1

               GENERAL RULES AND PRELIMINARIES




GENERAL        1.01      This Specification of Works, Conditions
CONDITIONS     of Contract, Bills of Quantities, Drawings and
               Schedules are to be read together an in conjunction
               one with the other.

                         The Form of Contract will be that issued
               for use in connection with Works of Civil Engineer ini
               Construction prepared by the Institution of Civil
               Engineers jointly with the Association of Consulting
               Engineers and the Federation of Civil Engineering
               Contractors, Fifth Edition (June 1973). The Contrac
               Price Fluctuations Clause is not included.

                         In Clause 1(a) of the Conditions of
               Contract the "Employer” means



                         In Clause 1(c) of the Conditions oi
               Contract '’’Engineer" means Eastwood & Partners oi
               Bowmaker House, 23 Kingfield Road, Sheffield or
               other Engineer appointed from time to time by the
               Employer and notified in writing to the Contractor
               to act as Engineer for the purposes of the Contract
               in place of the said Eastwood & Partners’.

                         The Contractor is to allow for making him­
               self fully familiar with the I.C.E. Conditions and
               for providing himself with copies of the Conditions
               as necessary.

WORKS          1.02      The works are those measured and
COMPRISING     described in the Bills of Quantities. In essence
THE CONTRACT   they comprise the construction of new emergency
               exits improving, altering and stengthening
               existing exits and staircases together with
               repairing the existing reinforced concrete beams
               and columns within the South Stand. Repairing and
               replacing certain sections of the existing
               terracing is also included.

SITE           1.03      The site of the Works is at Sheffield
               Wednesday Football Ground, Hillsborough.
DEFINITIONS     1.04      The terms 'Approved', 'Directed' or
                'Selected' mean the approval, direction or selection
              • of, or by, the Engineer.

                          Wherever the word, 'Allow' occurs in
                this Specification the cost of the item is at the
                risk of the Contractor.


MATERIALS       1.05      The materials used in the works shall
                be new and of the quantities and kinds specified, and
                no materials shall be used in the works until
                approved.

                          Materials delivered to the works shall be
                equal toapproved samples,. Delivery shall be made
                sufficiently in advance of constructional
                requirements to enable further samples to be
                selected and tested by the Engineer before using
                the materials in the works.

                          Materials failing to comply with the
                Specification shall be immediately removed from
                the works at the Contractors expense.


SAMPLES         1.06      Samples of, or certificates for, such
AND TESTS       materials as specified or directed shall be
                presented for the approval of the Engineer as
                soon as possible after the commencement of the
                works and before delivery of the materials
                represented thereby.

                          If during the course of the works, the
                source or type of any material be changed, further
                samples shall be deposited with the Engineers and
                their approval obtained before the delivery of the
                materials concerned.

                          Samples or test pieces of materials if
                specified herein or instructed to be supplied
                by the Contractor shall be so supplied, prepared
                and delivered at the Contractors expense. The
                cost of all tests specified herein, or instructed
                to be made shall be reimbursed for such materials
                 as comply in all respects with this Specification.


                          Certificates and similar documents
                specified herein or instructed to be supplied by
                the Contractor to the Engineer shall be so
                supplied at the Contractor's expense and the
                Contractor shall make or have made at his own
                expense all tests necessary to obtain the
                certificates or similar documents.



                         -7-
PROTECTION OF      1.07      All materials shall be transported,
MATERIALS          handled and stored on the site in such a manner
as to pre          as to prevent damage, deterioration or contamination.
                   The Contractor is to provide all necessary sheds
                   and other facilities, as required by the Engineer
                   for the proper storage and protection of materials
                 . susceptible to damage.
                            The Contractor must allow for accepting
                  delivery of all materials (including those of
                  Sub-Contractors and Specialists Firms) and
                  returning package empties carriage paid.

WORKMANSHIP        1.08      All labour used in the works is to be
                   competent for the class of work on which it is
                   employed and is to be under the direction of an
                   experienced and competent surpervisor.

BRITISH           1.09      The initials "B.S" stand for "British
STANDARD          Standard". All materials and workmanship are to
                  conform to the appropriate current British Standard
                  and any tests in British Standards which are
                  applicable to the materials in question nay be
                  called for. This clause applies whether "B.S"
                  is referred to or not in the Specification herein­
                  after.

DRAWINGS AND      1.10      The drawings upon which the Contract
SPECIFICATIONS    Documents have been based are as listed in the
                  Bills of Quantities.
                             The Contractor must check all drawings
                   and schedules as issued to him at whatever time
                   one against the other and report at once to the
                   Engineer any ambiguities or discrepancies. The
                   drawings and specifications are to be kept on the
                   works for reference.

VISIT THE          1.11      The Contractor is required to visit
SITE               the site prior to tendering and make a thorough
                   inspection and obtain all the information which
                   may in any way effect his Tender, as no claims
                   will be allowed on the grounds of ignorance of
                   any of the conditions under which the works are
                   to be done.

TIME FOR           1.12      The work shown on the following drawings
COMPLETION         to be substantially complete before 11 August 1979.
                   1610/23, 25, 26, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36 and 40
                   The remainder of the work shown on drawings 1610/4,
                   5, 24, 27, 28, 29, 37, and 39 to be completed as
                   soon as possible after 11 August.
                             The use of machinery will not be allowed
                   between 5-8 July inclusive and between these
                   dates work on the three stands will be restricted.




                               -8-
              1.13     The Contractor will be called upon
TIME AND      to co-operate with the Engineer in the
PROGRESS      preparation of a bar time and progress chart
CHART         before commencing work on site, and in revising
              the chart if necessary during the progress of
              the contract. Similar conditions will be
              imposed upon any Nominated Sub-Contractors.
              This is independent of any critical path
              programme made by the Contractor for his own
              use.

ATTENDANCE    1.14     The Contractor must allow in his price
              for the general attendance of one trade upon
              another, including all Sub-Contractors and for the
              provision of all scaffolding, platforms, etc.,
              that may be required.
              1.15     The Contractor is to maintain and
MAINTAIN      protect all private and public property and that
PUBLIC        of drainage, electricity, gas, water and highway
PROPERTY      authorities and similar undertakings, and is to
              make good or pay for the reinstatement of all
              damage thereto, to the satisfaction of the
              Engineer and the property owners.

SETTING       1.16      The Contractor is to check all figured
OUT           dimensions on the drawings and existing site
              dimensions before setting out and in case of any
              apparent error is to immediately consult the
              Engineer.  In case of lack of agreement between
              the several drawings or between drawings and
              specification, the Engineer shall be consulted
              and his descision shall be followed at all times.

SAMPLES OF    1.17       The Contractor and Sub-Contractors
MATERIALS     shall allow for providing samples of all materials
              used for or to be used in the works as may be
              required by the Engineer.

CARE OF THE   1.18       The Contractor is to keep all persons
WORKS ETC     (including those employed by Sub-Contractors)
               under his control and within the boundaries of
              the site, and he will be held responsible for the
              care of the works generally until their completion
              including all work executed and materials
              deposited on the site by himself or his Sub-
              Contractors and Suppliers, together with all risks
              arising from weather carelessness of operatives
              damage or loss by theft or any other cause and
              is to allow for all watching day or night and
              protective lighting, fencing or barricades.
COVER UP      1.19     The Contractor is to cover up and
AND PROTECT   protect the works at all times.

                       In Winter weather all necessary tech­
              niques and precautions advised by the Department
              of the Environment to enable work to proceed
              are to be allowed for by the Contractor or Sub-
              Contractors in their prices and used as necessary
              or directed by the Engineer.


OVERTIME      1.20     Working of overtime as necessary in
              order to complete the Contract by the date
              agreed must be allowed for in the Tender.


INCENTIVES    1.21     The Contractor is to allow in his
              tender for the costs incurred by the operation
              of a payment by results or bonus system.


HOLIDAYS      1.22     The Contractor is to allow in his
WITH PAY      tender for the cost incurred by the operation
              of the holidays with pay schemes.


PROVIDE ALL   1.23     The Contractor is to provide all
PLANT         necessary hoists, ladders, scaffolding, staging,
              tackle, tarpaulins,  tools and other plant
              (mechanical and otherwise) and allow for all
              labour and materials in operating moving, adapting
              and maintaining it as necessary.


PROTECTIVE    1.24     The Contractor is to provide all
CLOTHING      necessary protective clothing for the operatives.


WELFARE       1.25     The Contractor is to provide amenities
              etc., in accordance with any agreement within
              the Industry, and in compliance with the
              requirements of any Statutory orders or amendments
              thereto.


TRANSPORT     1.26     The Contractor is to provide all
              necessary transport for labour, materials, plant
              and all other things for the execution of the
              works.


SHEDS ETC.    1.27     The Contractor is to provide, erect
              and maintain proper sheds etc., for the storage and
              protection of materials and goods, and for the
              execution of work which may be fabricated or
              wrought on the site.



                        - 10 -
RATES           1.28     The Contractor shall be responsible
                for paying all rates and other charges which
                may be made by local or other authorities in
                connection with offices, sheds and other
                temporary buildings erected for the use of the
                Contractor or Sub-Contractors.


BARRICADES      1 29     The Contractor shall provide all
FENCES AND      necessary barricades, fences, screens, etc.,
SCREENS         for the protection of his and the Employer’s
                operatives, adjoining properties and the public,
                and shall alter, adapt and maintain as
                necessary.


SHORING, ETC.   1. 30    The Contractor shall provide all
PROTECTION      necessary shoring, strutting, timbering, baling
                and pumping where necessary and as directed
                by the Engineer and protect the works from
                damage during inclement weather, frost, etc.


NOTICE          1.31     Allow for giving all necessary
                notices to the Engineer and complying with the
                Local Bye-Laws and Building Regulations and
                giving notice as and where required to the
                Statutory Water or all other Authorities.


CLEAR           1.32     Allow for taking down and clearing
AWAY            away all plant and temporary works, including
                messrooms, offices, sheds etc. unless otherwise
                directed, and reinstate or make good as
                originally existing or as necessary.

                         Allow for removing all rubbish, debris
                (including that of the Sub-Contractors) and
                surplus materials as they accumulate and at
                completion, cleaning of floors and pavings
                external surfaces of work generally and leaving
                the works clean and perfect at completion and
                ready for u s e .


REINSTATEMENT   1. 3 3   The Contractor is to allow for making
OR ROADWAYS     good all damage to existing roadways, footpaths,
ETC.            etc., and other work disturbed as a consequence
                of this Contract to the entire satisfaction of
                the Engineer and the. Local Authority where
                applicable.


                           -11-
VARIATIONS        1.34      No variations to the contract shall be
                  made by the Contractor or Sub-Contractors without
                  an order in writing by the Engineer. Any verbal
                  order by the Engineer shall be confirmed in
                  ■writing within seven days by the Contractor.


SUB-CONTRACTORS   1.35     All Sub-Contractors are to be approved
                  by the Engineer before placing any orders and a
                  copy of the Sub-Contract agreement is to be
                  deposited with the Engineer before work is
                  commenced.


ACTION BY         1.36     The Employer may, on expiry of the
EMPLOYER ON       contract period, together with such extensions
EXPIRY OF         of time as may have been granted by the Engineer,
CONTRACT          enter onto the site, and make such use as he
PERIOD            find necessary of those parts of the works as
                  may be in a sufficiently finished state. Such
                  action by the Employer shall not be deemed to
                  signify substantial completion of all or any
                  part of the works nor shall it relieve the
                  Contractor of his duties under the contract
                  to insure all or any part of the works. The
                  Employer will not be responsible for any delay
                  or increased cost incurred by the Contractor as
                  a consequence of such entry onto the site.


TEMPERATURE       1.3 7     The Contractor shall keep a maximum and
AND WEATHER       minimum thermometer on site, fixed externally in
                  a position not exposed to direct sunlight and
                  shielded from wind. Readings of maximum and
                  minimum temperatures during each 24 hour period
                  and of the temperature at 9.00 a.m. each day
                  shall be kept and made available to the
                  Engineer.
                           An accurate record of working time lost
                  due to weather conditions shall be kept and made
                  available to the Engineer.


 RECORDS           1. 38    The Contractor shall keep an accurate
 OF                daily record of all labour employed on site,
 LABOUR            including that of sub-contractors, which shall
                   be made available to the Engineer.




                           - 12 -
                          SECTION 2


                 EARTHWORKS AND EXCAVATION


GENERAL                     2.01        The Contractor must take
                            every precaution to ensure the safety of
                            persons and property at all times. The
                            Contractor’s attention is drawn to the
                            fact that the services to existing buildings
                            and plant must be uninterrupted throughout
                            the Contract.

                                        The Contractor is to be
                            entirely responsible for the safety of
                            all excavation and shall allow for, and
                            be responsible for the design of, all
                            strutting, poling, waling, sheeting and
                            piling necessary to prevent collapse of
                            excavations and to ensure safety of all
                            persons and property.

SITE LEVELLING             2.02        The Final Surfaces are to be
                           formed to the levels shown on drawings.
                           Where no levels are shown on drawings they
                           shall be left at the end of the contract as
                           the original S urface.

SURPLUS                     2.03        The Contractor is to remove
MATERIAL                    from the site and dispose of all surplus
                            excavated material unless otherwise
                            expressly required.

NATURE OF                   2.04        The Contractor is to carry
EXCAVATION                  out excavation in any material which may
                            be met with, whatever its nature and must
                            allow in his tender for so doing; and he is
                            advised to visit the site and ascertain for
                            himself the nature of the ground and the
                            site as no claim for additional costs will be
                            entertained on this account.

EXCAVATION                  2.05        Should rock be met with
                            in the course of excavation, it must be
IN ROCK                     removed with appropriate mechanical tools
                            or drills. The breaking of road surface
                            or road base will not be considered or paid
                            for as rock excavation.
                                        Rock is to be defined as
                            material incapable of being excavated
                            without the use of wedges and levers,
                            explosives or percussive mechanical breakers.




                               -13-
EXISTING           2.06        The existing terracing is
TERRACING AND      constructed from either precast or
SLABS              insitu concrete step units with an
                   expected average waist no greater than
                   125 mm. Some of these‘units contain
                   possibly two small diameter reinforcing
                   bars.
                               All the existing concrete
                   terracing and slabs are founded on made
                   ground comprising a mixture of sandy
                   soil, some ash and brick rubble. In
                   some places it is possible that old
                   timber sleepers will be encountered.

TEMPORARY          2.07        The Contractor shall
RETAINING BOARDS   supply all necessary temporary retaining
                   boards for hardcore or other filling.

CLEAR              2.08        The Contractor shall clear
SITE               the site of debris and other rubbish as
                   required preparatory to commencement of
                   works and at completion.
                   2.09        The Contractor shall excavate
EXCAVATE FOR       for surface trenches, stanchion bases,
SURFACE            post bases etc to the minimum widths
TRENCHES           and depths necessary for construction or
                   as directed by the Engineer to an
                   approved solid bottom.

BOTTOM OF          2.10        The bottoms of all trenches
TRENCHES TO        and foundation! holes are to be inspected
BE APPROVED        and approved by the Engineer, and where
                   necessary, Local Authorities before
                   concrete is laid, and the Contractor
                   must give sufficient notice for the
                   inspection to be made without any delay
                   being caused.




                   -14-
LEVEL AND
RAM EARTH          2.11            The Contractor shall level,
                   well ram and consolidate the ground surface
                   and bottoms of all excavations to receive
                   foundation bases and slabs. Such ramming
                   and excavation shall be deemed to be included
                   in the rates for excavation in the Bill of
                   Quantities.

EXCAVATION         2 .12           Should any excavation be made
BEYOND THE         to a greater depth than required by the
REQUIRED           drawings or by the Engineer, the Contractor
LINE AND           shall, at his own expense, fill up such excess
LEVELS IN          excavation with concrete (1 :1 2 ).
FOUNDATIONS
                                      Where any excavation is
                   carried beyond the lines necessitated by the
                   need to construct works as shown on drawings
                   and where, in the opinion of the Engineer,
                   such excess excavation may endanger or
                   adversely affect existing or future works or
                   structures, the Contractor shall, at his own
                   expense, fill up such excess excavation with
                   concrete (1 :1 2 ) or take such other measures
                   as the Engineer my instruct.

RETURN FILL        2 .13             The Contractor shall return
AND RAM            and fill with selected excavated material
                   around foundations and at the backs of walls,
                   etc., up to €Jbe original surface or as
                   required in layers not exceeding 150mm thick
                   and carefully ram and consolidate with the
                   addition of water if expressly required.

                                   No filling shall be carried
                   out until the parts of the structure to be
                   covered up have been inspected and approved
                   by the Engineer.

KEEP EXCAVATIONS    2.14           The Contractor shall keep
FREE FROM WATER    the whole of the excavations free from water
                   by controlled pumping, baling or other
                   approved methods. The cost of keeping
                   excavations free from water shall be allowed
                   for in the Contractors rates for excavation.

                                   The Contractor must ensure
                   that the method of pumping cannot cause loss
                   of ground support beneath adjoining buildings
                   or works.
PLANKING AND      2.15            The Contractor shall plank
STRUTTING         and strut (including closeboarded shuttering
                  as may be required) the sides of all
                  excavations to prevent slips and falls of
                  earth from the sides. Should any slips or
                  falls occur, the Contractor must at his own
                  expense, re-excavate the fallen material
                  and reinstate the side to a safe and
                  suitable condition before carrying out any
                  further work in that vicinity.
CRUSHED           2.16             The Contractor shall lay
ROCK FILL         under concrete where indicated on drawings
                  a bed of approved crushed rock, well rammed
                  and consolidated, laid to the required levels
                  with the surface well blinded and rolled and
                  consolidated to the finished thickness shown
                  on the drawings.

                                  The use of crushed bricks or
                  demolition rubble as fill material will not
                  be allowed except by written consent of the
                  Engineer. Such consent will be given only
                  in exceptional circumstances and will not
                  normally be granted.

                                  The Contractor must ensure
                  that all material used as fill or in regulating
                  courses is free from sulphates or other
                  deleterious material and shall, where
                  required by the Engineer, carry out at his
                  own expense appropriate tests to show that
                  this is so.

TRIAL HOLES       2.17            The cost of any trial holes
AND EXCAVATIONS   ordered by the Engineer for the purpose of
                  determining the line of a sewer, other pipe­
                  line, or service will be borne by the
                  Employer. After such determination of the
                  line the Contractor shall excavate, refill
                  and restore in advance of his work all such
                  trial holes as may be requisite for the
                  location of water and gas mains, cables, etc.,
                  whether in public or private roads, verges
                  or private property.

BURIED SERVICES   2 .18           The Contractor is to be
                  entirely responsible for the location of any
                  existing services and drains on the site
                  which might be damaged by excavation work or
                  subsidence resulting from excavation work. .
                  Where any damage is accidentally caused to
                  existing services and drains the damage shall
                  be remedied at the Contractors expense and
                  to the satisfaction of the Engineer, the
                  Local Authority and the appropriate Statutory
                  Undertaking.


                     - 16 -
SPOIL            2.19            Materials excavated from
                 trenches shall be laid compactly on the
                 sides of the trench except where in the
                 opinion of the Engineer this would so
                 obstruct any road or footway as to prevent
                 the passage of traffic or pedestrians.   In
                 such cases the Contractor must dig out the
                 trench in such lengths as directed and
                 keep his excavated materials at such a
                 distance as the Engineer approves. The
                 Contractor shall make his own arrangements
                 for the temporary storage of spoil and
                 include for all costs incurred in haulage
                 and double-handling.

                                 In storing excavated
                 material the Contractor shall give due
                 regard to the effect of such material on
                 the stability of the sides of excavations
                 and trenches.

                                 Where trench excavation is
                 being carried out by machine in restricted
                 circumstances and the interests of other
                 parties might otherwise be jeopardised,
                 the Contractor shall, during loading or whilst
                 waiting for loading, stand any spoil removal
                 vehicles only within the track width of the
                 excavator and shall employ a suitable excavatc
                 accordingly. This requirement shall apply
                 particularly in narrow roads, the use of whict
                 by traffic can be preserved by so doing.

                                 The materials forming the
                 surface and foundation of roads shall be
                 excavated separately and all hard materials
                 shall be kept free from soil or other
                 excavated material and set aside for re-use.

BARRICADES AND   2.20            The edges of all excavations
LIGHTING         shall be adequately protected by barricades
                 or fencing to prevent accidents.


                                 All excavations on or
                 adjacent to public rights of way or private
                 roads, passages and gangways which may be
                 in use during hours of darkness shall be
                 adequately marked by warning lights.




                     -17-
              GENERAL CONCRETE SPECIFICATION


                       SECTION 3


              CONCRETE WORK


WORKMANSHIP    3 .01       Unless otherwise stated, all
AND           workmanship and materials shall conform with
MATERIALS     B.S. Codes of Practice CP.114 and CP.110.
              Where these conflict CP.110 shall take
              precedence.


CEMENT         3.02        All cement shall be Ordinary
              Portland Cement and is to be manufactured at
              one works approved by the Engineers and shall
              comply in all respects with the requirements
              of B.S.12.

                           The acceptance of cement shall be
              subject to the compressive tests on cubes here­
              inafter specified being satisfactory.

                           The Engineer may, from time to
              time, direct that a consignment of cement be
              tested in accordance with the British Standard
              Specification either before the consignment
              leaves the works or after it has been delivered
              to either the site or a ready mixed plant. The
              cement on the site is to be stored so that any
              one consignment may be identified, and in the
              event of failure under test of the samples of
              a consignment, then that consignment shall not
              be used, and, on notification from the Engineer
              to the Contractor, shall be removed from the
              site within three days of such notification.

                           Cement shall be transported to site
              and handled with full protection from the weather
              and shall be stored in a dry watertight shed or
              in an approved bulk storage site. Storage is to
              be arranged so that the cement consignments are
              used in the order of delivery to the site. If,
              in the opinion of the Engineer, cement has been
              damaged in transit or during storage, then it
              shall be removed from the site within three days
              of notification.

                           ’’Rapid Hardening" or types of cement
              other than Ordinary Portland Cement shall not be
              employed in the Works without the express
              sanction of the Engineer.




                         18.
                         Admixtures for accelerating, or
            retarding the initial setting of the cement or
            for increasing the impermeability or workability
            of the concrete or for any other purpose shall
            not be used without the express written sanction
            of the Engineer.


CONCRETE    3.03         Materials used as aggregates for
AGGREGATE   concrete shall be derived from a source which
            is approved by the Engineer.

                     Aggregate shall be chemically inert,
            strong, hard, durable, of limited porosity, and
            free from deleterious matter. Aggregates shall
            be stored in a bin or on a clean hard surface and
            maintained free from contamination. Aggregate
            of different types or sizes shall be kept separate.

                     If the Engineer so directs, tests of
            the aggregates shall be made. The samples selected
            by the Engineer shall be tested in compliance
            with the respective procedures specified in
            British Standard No. 882.

                     Descriptions of aggregates to be
            used are as follows:

                     a)   Coarse aggregate 20mm graded
                     b)   Coarse aggregate 14mm graded
                     c)   Fine aggregate,

                     "Coarse aggregate (20mm) graded" and
            "Coarse Aggregate(14mm) graded" shall consist of
            Derbyshire Limestone and shall be washed unless
            otherwise allowed by the Engineer. The grading of
            coarse aggregate, when analysed by the method
            given for sieve analysis in B.S.812 shall be
            within the limits given in Table 1 of B.S.882.
            The "ten percent fines" value for coarse
            aggregate, determined in accordance with B.S.812,
            shall not be less than 1 0 0 k.n.

                     "Fine aggregate" shall consist of
            clean hard coarse naturally occurring sand
            approved by the Engineer, completely free from
            deleterious matter and shall be washed, unless
            otherwise allowed by the Engineer.




                          19.
                             The grading of fine aggregate,
                when analysed by the method of sieve
                analysis described in B.S. 812 shall be
                within the limits of grading zone 2 or
                3 given in Table 2 of B.S. 882.

                             Fine aggregate will not be
                accepted, if on testing it gives results
                in briquette tensile tests lower than
                those obtainable with *’Standard Sand".

                              Samples of coarse and fine
                aggregates are to be submitted to the
                Engineer for approval before commencement
                of concreting.    Subsequent deliveries of
                either aggregate, which, in the opinion of
                the Engineer do not conform to the approved
                sample, will be liable to rejection.

                             A set of eight nesting sieves,
                8" diameter, with cover and tray, f" mesh,
                I" mesh, 3/16" mesh, No. 7, No. 14, No. 25,
                No. 52 and No. 100 or appropriate metric
                equivalent, shall be provided together with
                scales, by the Contractor for the use of
                the Engineer if required.

                             Notwithstanding compliance
                with the foregoing requirements, aggregates
                will be liable to rejection by the Engineer
                if they fail to give the test results for
                compression in concrete as hereinafter
                specified.


WATER           3.04         The water used for making
                concrete or mortar or grout,cleaning out
                shuttering, curing concrete or similar
                purposes shall be taken from the mains
                supply wherever possible and shall comply
                with the requirements of B.S. 3148.    Where
                water is not available from the mains the
                Engineers approval shall be obtained before
                it is used.


REINFORCEMENT   3.05         The reinforcement shall be hot
                rolled, or cold worked high tensile steel
                bars, or round mild steel bars where
                specified, all steel being in accordance
                with B.S. 4449 or B.S. 4461 as appropriate.




                       20.
                                     High tensile steel shall have
                        a bond classification of Type 2, as
                        defined in B.S. 4449 and B.S. 4461.

                                     Steel which is non-British
                        manufacture will also not be acceptable
                        unless it is subject to stringent and
                        frequent testing during the progress of
                        the works, as required by the Engineer.
                        This testing shall be at the Contractor’s
                        expense even where the steel satisfies the
                        relevant British Standard requirements.

                                     All reinforcement shall be free
                        from pitting, loose rust, mill scale, paint,
                        oil, grease, adhering earth, ice or any
                        material that in the opinion of the
                        Engineer may impair the bond between the
                        concrete and the reinforcement or that is
                        likely to cause corrosion of the reinforce­
                        ment or damage to the concrete.   It shall
                        be protected on site at all times from
                /O'*'
                        contamination.

                                      If any reiuforcement is supplied
                        from the Contractor’s or any other stocks
                        for which mill test sheets or other records
                        are not available, or where in the Engineer’s
                        opinion, the material has been subject to
                        corrosion or other deleterious influence
                        the Engineer may select as many test pieces
                        from such bars as he considers necessary.
                        The Contractor shall obtain, deliver,
                        prepare and test the test pieces at his
                        own e xpense and shall have no claim for
                        bars mutilated in obtaining the test pieces.

                                     The size of a reinforcement bar
                        described on the drawings or elsewhere shall
                        be the minimum size and the rolling margin
                        and other tolerances shall be wholly above
                        this size.   The length of a reinforcement
                        bar shall not be less than the length of
                        that bar as described on the drawings or
                        elsewhere and shall not be more than 1 2 mm
                        in excess of that length.   All bars shall
                        be bent in accordance with B.S. 4446 unless
                        otherwise stated.


FABRIC                  3.06         Fabric reinforcement shall
REINFORCEMENT           comply with the requirement^ of British
                        Standard No. 4483.




                              21.
                               Fabric reinforcement shall be
                  cut to the dimensions described on the
                  working drawings or schedules within a
                  tolerance under or over of 25mm.


MEASUREMENTS OF   3.07         For the purpose of ascertaining
AND RATES FOR     payments due to the Contractor for fixing
FIXING            reinforcement the basis of measurement
REINFORCEMENT     of bar and wire reinforcement used in the
                  work shall be the calculated weight which
                  shall be computed from the sizes and
                  length of bars and wires described on
                  the working drawings or bar bending
                  schedules or elsewhere.   The basis of
                  the calculated weight shall be that lm
                  length of bar or wire weighs 7.85 kg per
                  lOOOmm2 of nominal cross-sectional area.
                  No allowance in the weight shall be made
                  for cutting to waste, rolling margin, extra
                  length, or other tolerances.

                               For the purpose of ascertaining
                  payments due to the Contractor, fabric
                  reinforcement shall be measured by the net
                  area of the work covered in each separate
                  layer.   Overlaps between sheets not
                  exceeding 300mm shall be considered as
                  single layers.

                               The Contractor’s rates for
                  providing and fixing unit area of fabric
                  reinforcement shall include extra material
                  in overlaps not exceeding 300mm as herein­
                  before described, for cutting to waste,
                  for taking delivery, unloading, storing,
                  handling, for fixing, protecting and
                  maintaining in the correct position in the
                  works.


FIXING            3.08         Reinforcing steel shall be
REINFORCEMENT     cut and bent accurately to the shapes
                  required by the Engineer.   Heating of the
                  bars will not be allowed except by the
                  written permission of the Engineer.

                               The reinforcement shall be
                  placed exactly in accordance with the
                  information or drawings supplied by the
                  Engineer and shall be supported by precast
                  concrete blocks or other approved means
                  and shall be securely tied in place with
                  16 gauge annealed steel tying wire so that
                  there is no displacement during concreting
                  and so that the thickness of concrete
                  covering the bars required by the Engineer
                  is obtained within a tolerance of 3mm.
                  If required by the Engineer, the Contractor
                  shall provide a competent steelfixer to
                  be in attendance during concreting.
                            22    ______________________________
                              The ends of the tying wire
                 shall be bent into the body of the work
                 and not left projecting towards the
             •
                 surfaces of the concrete.

                              Reinforcement shall be lapped,
                 jointed or spliced only as shown on the
                 drawings.

                              Where practicable, bars of each
                 member shall be assembled and fixed in
                 the form of a rigid cage before placing
                 in the moulds, shuttering or elsewhere.

                              Immediately before concreting,
                 the reinforcement shall be checked for
                 position, cleanliness, freedom from rust,
                 or other defects, both by the Contractor
                 and the Engineer, and it shall receive
                 the approval of the Engineer before any
                 concrete is placed.   Care shall be taken
                 to ensure that reinforcement remains
                 correctly in position during the placing
                 and consolidation of the concrete.


SHUTTERING       3.09         All shuttering, formwork,
                 moulds and centering shall be substantially
                 constructed of timber or steel or precast
                 concrete or other approved materials.

                              Shuttering shall be erected
                 true to line and level, camber or fall,
                 slope or batter and braced and strutted
                 to prevent deformation under the weight
                 and pressure of the wet concrete, wind
                 pressure, construction loads or other
                 forces.   The deformation under full
                 loads plus other inaccuracies shall not
                 exceed 3mm.

                                All columns and the corners
                 of exposed concrete work shall be formed
                 with 2 0 mm chamfered arrises, unless
                 specifically noted to the contrary. The
                 rates in the Bill of Quantities are to
                 include for these arrises.

                              All joints shall be sufficiently
                 well fitted to prevent the loss of cement
                 and water and the formation of grooves or
                 ridges on the ^surface of the concrete.
                 Particular care is to be taken in the
                 case of soffits of slabs.




                        23.
                        A shutter release agent shall
           be used and shall be to the approval
           of the Engineer and shall be such as to
           cause no stain or discolouration on the
           surface of the concrete.

                        Centering and moulds shall
           be thoroughly cleaned before re-use.

                        Wires or bolts passing through
           exposed concrete surfaces for the purpose
           of tying together the two sets of
           shuttering shall be of a type which can
           be detached or broken at sufficient
           depth to permit patching with adequate
           cover.   The patching is to be to the
           satisfaction of the Engineer and he reserves
           the right to forbid the use of through
           ties whatever the circumstances.
                        Beam and slab shuttering shall
           be so erected that the shuttering on beam
           sides and slab soffits can be removed
           without disturbing the beam bottom boards.

                        Immediately before concreting,
           the shuttering shall be checked for line,
           level, tightness of joints, cleanliness
           and freedom from other defects by the
           Contractor.   If the Engineer so requires
           concreting shall not commence until the
           Engineer has inspected the shuttering and
           approved it.

FINISHES   3.10          Shuttered faces which, on
           completion of construction, will not normally
           be visible are described in the Bills of
           Quantities as rough. Rough shuttering shall not
           be required to satisfy any requirements beyond
           those of clause 3.09.

                       Shuttered faces which will be
           exposed are described in the Bill of Quantities
           as fair and shall give irregularities in
           finish no greater than is obtained from
           wrought thicknessed square edged boards arranged
           in a uniform pattern. Any surface
           irregularities such as fins or discolourations,
           shall, if required be made good to the
           Engineer’s requirements.
                       The Contractor^ shall ensure that
           any permanently exposed concrete surfaces
           are protected from rust staining, spillages
           and stains of any sort.
FIXING HOLES   3 .11         No holes or other cavities
AND CAVITIES    shall be cut in any concrete work unless
                approved by the Engineer.   The Contractor
                shall ascertain from the drawings etc.,
                from sub-contractors, or elsewhere,
                particulars of all bolts and all fixings
                and of all holes, pockets, recesses,
                chases and other cavities and before
                placing the concrete all bolts and
                fixings shall be rigidly held in position.


CONCRETE       3.12         The proportions of cement, fine
PROPORTIONS    aggregate and coarse aggregate shall be
               determined by weight.

                              All structural concrete shall
                consist of four parts of coarse aggregate
                2 0 mm graded  two parts of fine aggregate and
                 Sne part of cement all measured by weight,
                 except as otherwise indicated by
               the Engineer.

                            The quantity of water added
               to the concrete shall be such as to ensure
               compliance with the requirements of
               clause 3.13 (slump) and clause 3.14
               (strength of the concrete).

                            Concrete used for blinding
               purposes shall consist of twelve parts
               of an approved mixture of fine and coarse
               aggregate to one part of cement.


CONCRETE       3.13         Concrete shall be thoroughly
MIXING         mixed in approved machines and the time
               for mixing shall be not less than two
               minutes and shall be longer if necessary
               to give the required consistency and
               strength.

                            The weighing and water-
               dispensing mechanisms shall be maintained
               in good order.   Their accuracy shall be
               maintained within the tolerances described
               in B.S. 1305 and checked against accurate
               weights and volumes when required by the
               Engineer.

                            The weights of cement and
               each size of aggregate as indicated by
               the mechanisms employed shall be within a
               tolerance of - 2 per cent of the respective
               weights per batch agreed by the Engineer.
               The weight of the fine and coarse aggregates
               shall be adjusted to allow for the free
               water contained in them.   The water
to be added to the mix shall be reduced
by the quantity of free water contained
in the fine and coarse aggregates, which
shall be determined by the Contractor
by a method approved by the Engineer
immediately before mixing begins, and
further as the Engineer requires.

             Unless otherwise agreed by
the Engineer, concrete shall be mixed
in a batch type mixer manufactured in
accordance with B.S. 1305 or in a batch
type mixer e specimen of which has been
tested in accordance with B.S.3963
and having a mixing performance wit hin
the limits of Table 6 of B.S. 1305.    Where
appropriate the batch capacity, method of
loading, mixing time and drum speed shall
conform to the details furnished in accordance
with the requirements of B.S.3963 for the
mix which corresponds most closely to the
mix proportions being used.    The mixing
blades of pan mixers shall be maintained
within the tolerances specified by the
manufacturer of the mixer and the blades
shall be replaced when it is no longer
possible to maintain the tolerances by
adjustment.

             The mixing plant shall be
protected from wind and weather to the
satisfaction of the Engineer, and all
materials entering the mixer sha^l be at
a temperature of not less than 5 C.

             Before mixing is commenced,
the drum of the mixer is to be primed by
washing out with rich cement grout and
is to be thoroughly washed out when
mixing operations cease.

             The entire contents of the
drum shall be discharged before materials
for the succeeding batch are placed in
the drum.   Materials spilled from the
skips or other containers shall not be
used.   No partly set or frozen concrete
shall be re-mixed with water nor shall
excessively wet concrete be stiffened by
the addition of cement or aggregate.
Such partly set or wet cement shall be
immediately removed from the site.
CONCRETE      3.14         The slump of the concrete
SLUMP         shall be 50mm + or - 25mm except that
              where the Contractor wishes to pump the
              concrete the Engineer may be prepared
              to consider proposals for a greater
              slump allied to measures which will
              ensure the attainment of the required
              strength.   The slump shall be measured
              as the pouring of the batch commences
              and at a time not more than 2 0 minutes
              after the commencement of mixing.

                           The contractor shall have
              on site a B.S. slump cone and associated
              equipment and shall carry out slump tests
              as requested without additional reimburse­
              ment.


READY-MIXED   3 .15         Ready-mixed concrete may
CONCRETE      only be used with the permission of the
              Engineer but such permission will not be
              unreasonably withheld.    The Contractor
               shall submit full details of his
              proposals to the Engineer, stating the
              proposed source and arrangements for
              delivery and shall submit samples of
              the aggregate to be used for the
              Engineer’s approval.

                           When Ready-mixed concrete is
              used, the water shall be added to the mix
              not more than twenty minutes before
              placing the concrete commences.  Certificates
              stating the mix proportions, the actual
              weights of materials, type of aggregate,
              water cement ratio and quantities shall
              be submitted to the Engineer relating to
              each batch.   Test cubes shall be taken
              from each if required by the Engineer.

                           Each delivery of ready-mixed
              concrete must be accompanied by a delivery
              note stating the exact mix proportions
              and water content, and the time at which
              water was added- to the mix.

                            The concrete shall be carried
              in purpose made agitators, operating
              continuously, or truck mixers.    The
              concrete shall be compacted and in its
              final position within 30 minutes of the
              introduction of cement to the aggregates,
              unless a longer time is agreed by the
              Engineer.    The time of such introduction
              shall be recorded on the delivery note
              together with the weight of the constituents
              of each mix.
                        When truck mixed concrete is
           used, water shall be added under super­
           vision either at the Site or at the central
           batching plant as agreed by the Engineer
           but in no circumstances shall water be
           added in transit.   When concrete is mixed
           and water added at a batching plant no
           further water may be added in the truck
           mixer.
                        Unless otherwise agreed by the
           Engineer, truck mixer units and their
           mixing and discharge performance shall
           comply with the requirements of B.S. 4251.
           Mixing shall continue for the number and rate
           of revolutions recommended in accordance
           with Item 9 in Appendix B of B.S. 4251 or,
           in the absence of the manufacturer’s
           instructions, mixing shall continue for
           not less than 1 0 0 revolutions at a rate
           of not less than 7 revolutions per minute.

                        Where the Engineer or Contractor
           have cause to refuse to accept a batch of
           concrete then no further deliveries carried
           in the truck containing that concrete will
           be allowed until a period of 4 hours has
           elapsed.


TESTING    3.16         As and when instructed by the
OF CUBES   Engineer, the Contractor shall make, at his
           own expense, under conditions similar
           to those of the actual works, sets of
           concrete cubes.   For this purpose the
           Contractor shall provide sets of 150mm
           steel moulds and one mild steel rod 25mm
           square section and 380mm long.   The cubes
           are to be made and cured in strict
           accordance with the procedure recommended
           in the B.S. 1881.

                        The Contractor shall keep
           accurate records of the location of all
           mixes from which cubes have been taken.

                        The cubes shall be tested at
           such ages as the Engineer may direct, and
           for this purpose shall be securely packed
           and despatched by the Contractor in good
           time before the date of testing to a
           testing laboratory approved by the
           Engineer. The testing laboratory shall
           be one which has no substantial degree
           of common ownership or other commercial
           links with either Contractor or concrete
           supplier.




                  28.
                            The cubes shall be tested
               in accordance with the requirements of
               B.S. 1881 on a testing machine which
               complies with the requirements of Class
               B to B.S. 1610.

                            The Contractor shall arrange
               for the testing laboratory to despatch
               test certificates in respect of each cube
               tested directly to the Engineer.   The
               certificates shall be despatched to the
               Engineer so as to arrive at his office
               not later than the second day following
               the date of testing


CONCRETE       3.17         All concrete cubes shall
STRENGTH       reach a minimum compressive strength of
               28 N/mm^ at 28 days old.   If this
               strength is not achieved then the
               Engineer may direct the Contractor to
               remove such concrete to the limits
               defined by the Engineer and replace it
               with materials to his satisfaction and
               these operations shall be at the Con­
               tractor’s expense.

                            The Contractor will be
               reimbursed for the packing, carriage and
               laboratory costs of test specimens
               giving satisfactory results.


DISTRIBUTION   3.18         The concrete shall be trans­
OF CONCRETE    ported from the mixer to its final
               position in liquid-tight conveyors or
               barrows, and with the leastpossible
               delay.   Concrete which has not been
               placed in its final position within
               30 minutes after mixing commenced will
               be rejected by the Engineer.

                            All concrete conveyors,
               barrows and chutes shall be thoroughly
               washed out immediately mixing ceases
               and before re-use shall be primed with
               rich cement grout.


CONCRETE       3.19         Before placing concrete, all
PLACING        reinforcement moulds, shuttering and
               centering and all items to'be cast in,
               are to be cleaned of all dirt, sawdust,
               loose wire and wood.   Access holes shall
               be provided in formwork to facilitate
               cleaning at all inaccessible pockets and
               angles.
             No concrete shall be placed
without the authority of the Engineer
and any placed without this authority
may be cut out or otherwise dealt with
as the Engineer may direct.

             Except where otherwise
approved for slabs and bulky sections,
concrete shall be placed in the shuttering
by shovels or chutes, or other approved
implements, and shall not be dropped
from a height or handled in a manner to
cause segregation.   Accumulations of
hardened concrete droppings on the
reinforcement shall be avoided.    Concrete
shall be placed directly in its permanent
position and shall not be worked along
the shuttering to that position.

             Each layer of concrete,
whilst being placed, shall be thoroughly
worked and compacted into the moulds
and around any reinforcement, pipes or
other cast-in members of fixtures and
shall be consolidated by mechanical
vibration at not less than 1 0 0 0 0 cycles
per minute to form a dense mass and a
surface free from honeycombing and free
from water and air holes and other blemishes
and free from staining.   Particular care
shall be taken when working around
shuttering so as to produce a dense fair
surface.   Vibration shall always be
used except by permission of the Engineer
and the number of vibrators shall be
approved before work commenced.       As a
general guide it will be necessary to
provide one vibrator working for ten
minutes to fully compact each cubic
metre of concrete placed.    An adequate
number of vibrators shall be available
in reserve in case of breakdown.       Concrete
shall not be placed if in the opinion of
the Engineer, its consolidation is
detrimental to concrete already in
position.

              Any concrete, which, on being
stripped of the formwork, is, in the
opinion of the Engineer, insufficiently
dense or is in any other way unsatisfactory,
shall be cut out and replaced at the Con­
tractor’s expense to the limits defined by
the Engineer.
                       Unless otherwise approved or
          instructed concrete shall be placed in a
          single operation to the full depths of
          slabs, beans and similar members. Concrete
          shall be placed continuously until
          completion of the part of the work between
          specified or approved construction joints.
          At the completion of a specified or
          approved part a construction joint in the
          form and in the position hereinafter
          specified shall be made.


WORKING   3.20         Construction joints shall be
JOINTS    truly vertical or horizontal, as the
          case may be and shall be rebated or keyed
          to an approved profile and in an approved
          manner.   Vertical joints shall be formed
          by inserting temporary boards, corrugated
          horizontally where practicable and notched,
          slotted or otherwise fitted tightly around
          the reinforcement against which the
          concrete shall be rammed.   All joints
          must be made true to line.

                       The provision of all such
          boards shall be deemed to be included in
          the Contractor’s rates and shall not be
          measured as shuttering.

                       Construction joints in suspended
          slabs shall be made parallel to the main
          reinforcement where possible but where
          required to be at right angles to the
          main reinforcement shall be made vertically
          at approximately a distance of one third
          of the span away from the support.

                       Before placing new concrete
          against concrete already set, the old
          concrete face shall be cleaned and hacked,
          and scum and laitence removed. Immediately
          before placing the new concrete, the face
          of the old concrete shall be thoroughly
          wetted and a coating of rich neat cement
          grout shall be applied.   The new concrete
          shall be placed and vibrated against the
          prepared face before the grout sets.

                       All joints so formed must be
          watertight and the Contractor shall include
          in the rates for concrete all measures
          necessary to ensure the water-tightness of
          all joints.




                 31-
CURING        3.21          All concrete surfaces,
              except those covered by formwork, shall
              be cured by being kept wet at all tines
              during a period of seven days after the
              final set has taken place.    The
              concrete shall be kept wet by flooding
              and covering with polyethylene sheeting.
              As an alternative to this procedure the
              Engineer may allow the use of an approved
              proprietary curing agent applied in
              accordance with the manufacturers
              instructions.

                           Curing shall commence at the
              earliest possible time following placing
              of the concrete.

                           Should the Contractor fail
              to adequately comply with the requirements
              of this clause the Engineer may require
              the Contractor to remove all concrete
              inadequately cured and replace it at his
              own expense.


PROTECTION    3.22         All concrete shall be protected
OF CONCRETE   to the satisfaction of the Engineer
              against sun and wind by suitable covering
              or other approved means.

                           The Contractor shall take
              steps to maintain progress during very
              cold weather but no concrete shall be
              placed when the air temperature is below
              35°F (2°C) except when precautions
              approved by the Engineers are adopted. At
              least two maximum and minimum thermometers
              shall be provided by the Contractors and
              fixed on the site in suitable sheltered
              positions facing North, and shall be
              shielded from the direct rays of the sun.

                           All concrete shall be
              prevented from falling below a temperature
              of 2°C for a period of seven days after
              placing.   The Contractor shall properly
              and fully protect such concrete by
              artificial heat or other approved means.
              Particular attention is to be paid to
              protecting exposed faces and surfaces of
              concrete.   Under no circumstances is
              Calcium Chloride or an admixture containing
              Calcium Chloride to be used' in the concrete.




                        32.
                            If, in the opinion of the
               Engineer, despite any precautions
               taken by the Contractor, concrete has
               been damaged by climatic or other
               conditions, the Engineer may direct
               the Contractor to remove and replace
               such concrete at the Contractor's expense,
               to the limits defined by the Engineer.

                             The Contractor shall keep
               systematic records of concreting
               progress, materials and climatic con­
               ditions in a form to be approved by
               the Engineer.

                            The Contractors rates will
               be deemed to include for all necessary
               precautions called for in this clause.

               3 .23         Shuttering and centering
REMOVAL AND     shall be removed gently without jarring
STRIPPING OF   and only in the presence of a competent
FORMWORK        supervisor.   The Engineer shall be
                informed in advance when the Contractor
               will be removing shuttering.

                            The period of time which
               shall elapse from the time of completion
               of casting of any member before the
               removal of any formwork supporting it
               shall be as in the following table.


                                      Minimum period before
                Type of Formwork      striking •
                                      Surface temp, of conc.
                                      16°C        7°C

                Vertical formwork to
                columns, walls and
                large beams.          9   hours    12    hours
                Soffit formwork to
                slabs                 4   days      7 days
                Props to slabs       11   days     14 days
                Soffit formwork to
                beams                 8   days     14 days
                Props to beams       15   days     21 days

                            The Contractor must also satisfy
               himself that the concrete is sufficiently
               hardened.
REMEDIES TO         3.24           After removal of the
FINISHES        •   shuttering, no touching up of any kind
                    shall be attempted until the work has
                    been inspected by the Engineer.

                                   Any concrete which, on being
                    stripped of the formwork, is in the
                    opinion of the Engineer, insufficiently
                    dense, out of line, of unsightly finish
                    or having blemishes, shall be cut out and
                    made good at the Contractor's sole
                    expense to the limits defined by the
                    Engineer.
                                   Rendering over any surface
                    shall not be permitted.   Small areas
                    of honeycombing and isolated superficial
                    air and water holes may be good immediately
                    on removal of the shuttering, but only
                    on the written approval of the Engineer.
                                   Before completion, all exposed
                    faces shall be cleaned of all stains to
                    give a perfect surface to the complete
                    satisfaction of the Engineer.

                                   Ground slabs shall lj)e cast so
                    that the finished level is within - 5mm
                    of that indicated <j>n drawings and does not
                    vary by more than - 3mm in an area of
                    radius 3m.   The Contractor's attention is
                    drawn to the fact that these requirements
                    cannot normally be met if bay widths are
                    not restricted to less than 4m.


CRACK CONTROL       3.25           The Contractor shall always
IN SLABS            pour concrete in bays of suchdimensions
                    as to avoid shrinkage cracking occurring
                    within a bay.   The Engineer will require
                    concretedamaged by shrinkage cracking
                    to be broken out and replaced at the
                    Contractor's expense.   Except where
                    the use of long strip casting has been
                    approved by the Engineer, with appropriate
                    measures to control cracking at the
                    Contractor's expense, ground slabs shall
                    be poured in baysof not more than 30m^.
GROUTING IN   3.26             When each section of the
& UNDER       structural steelwork or handrailing has
STRUCTURAL    been erected plumbed, lined and levelled,
STEELWORK     the Contractor shall either puddle,
              or ram a 2 : 1 sand and cement grout,
              or mortar under the steel base plate
              or pour into the pockets provided a
              proprietary expanding grout as indicated
              on the drawings.

                             Where necessary a frame
              shall be provided around the work to
              prevent losses whilst the grout is
              being poured and the frame shall not be
              removed until the grout has set.   The
              consistency of the mix shall be such as to
              ensure that the space under the steelwork
              is completely filled.
                       SECTION 4

                  PAINTING GENERAL


MATERIALS     * 4.01        All painting materials described
                in this section are to be the products of a
                recognised paint manufacture to the approval
                of the Engineer.

MIXING AND      4.02        All paints shall be thoroughly
STORING         mixed before use unless there is a specific
                instruction to the contrary on the container.
                They shall be so stored as to minimise exposure
                to extremes of temperature.
THINNING        4.03        Thinning of paint materials, when
                necessary, shall be carried out with the type
                of thinner and in the proportions recommended
                by the manufacturers.

COATING         4.04         All coats shall be applied by brush.

                            Each coat of paint shall be allowed
                to harden before the next is applied. No paint
                shall be applied to surfaces structurally or
                superficially damp, and all surfaces must be
                ascertained to be free from condensation, frost,
                dirt, etc., before the application of each coat.

PRIMED AND      4.05        Primed or undercoated surfaces shall
UNDERCOATED     not be left in an exposed or unsuitable
SURFACES        situation for an undue period before completing
                the painting process.

EXTERIOR        4.06        No exterior or exposed painting
PAINTING        shall be carried out under adverse weather
                conditions such as extremes of temperature, or
                during rain, fog, etc.

INSPECTION      4.07       No priming coats shall be applied
                until the surfaces have been inspected and
                the preparatory work has been approved by the
                Engineer. No undercoats or finishing coats shall
                be applied until the previous coat has been
                similarly inspected and approved.

CONSECTIVE      4.08       No consecutive coats of paint are
COATS AND       to be of the same shade except in the case of
COLOURS         white. All colours and finishes are to be
                selected by the Engineer and provisionrmust be
                made for the execution of trial areas on the
                site if required.
               PAINTING STEELWORK

TOUCHING UP      4.09        The steelwork will arrive on site
ON SITE          with a coat of priming paint applied by the
                 Nominated Sub-Contractor.

                             All blemishes, erection damage are to be
                 thoroughly scraped and wire brushed to remove all
                 rust, dirt and contaminants. The surfaces are
                 then to be primed with one coat of Red Lead or
                 Chromate metal primer.

UNDERCOAT &      4.10        One coat of Alkyd gloss is to be
FINISH           applied over one coat of undercoat over the
                 prepared priming coat.

              PAINTING TIMBER

SURFACE          4.11        Clean the woodwork to remove dirt,
PREPARATION      grease etc. rub down or scrape smooth and dust
                 off. Apply coat of patent knotting compound
                 to all knots and leave to harden.

PRIMING         4.12        All surfaces are to receive one
                coat of Wood primer or Acrylic Primer Undercoat.
                The primer is to be well worked into all end
                grains. When the primer is hardened all cracks,
                nails holes, open joints and other imperfections
                are to be made good.

UNDERCOAT        4.13        Rub down primed surfaces with medium
                 grade waterproof abrasive paper, rinse and allow
                 to dry. Apply one coat of Alkyd undercoat.

FINSIH           4.14        After the undercoat has hardened apply
                 two coats of Alkyd gloss.
L L
                                                                        GENERAL ITEMS
                                                                                   Amount
      Number                  Item Description        Unit   Quantity      Rate
                                                                                    £       P

               The blank spaces in the appendix
               to the Conditions of Contract
               and Form of Tender will be filled
               in as follows

               Clause 10

               Amount of Bond (not required)

               Clause 23(2)
               Minimum Amount of Third Party
               Insurance.

               £250,000 for any one accident,
               number of accidents to be
               unlimited.

               Clause 43

               Time for Coi&pletion.
               For the whole of the works on
               or before August 197 9

               Clause 47(1)

               Amount of Liquidated Damages
                      £500/week

               Clause 49(1)

               Period of Maintenance 12 months.

               Clause 54(1) and 60(1)

               Vesting of Materials not on site,
               (not applicable).

               Clause 57

               Standard Method of Measurement
               adopted.
               CESMM substantially adopted.

               Clause 59A (2) (b) & (5) (c)

               Percentage for adjustment of
               PC Sums.
               As stated in Form of Tender.




                                                 36
-1
■                                            n m re i                 RAT. ITEMS
                                                                                   Amount
H   Number               Item Description           Unit   Quantity       Rate
                                                                                    £       P

             Clause 60 (2) (b)

1            Percentage of value of goods and
             materials included in Interm
             Certificate.             90%
1            Clause 60 (2)

             Minimum Amount of Interim
             Certificate           £1,000
             The cost of dayworks will be
             ascertained in accordance with
             the Daywork Schedule as set out
             and contained in this Document.

1            It will be necessary for the
             Contractor’s Insurance Broker to
             liaise with the Employers.

1            Insurance Company or Broker by
             arrangement to be made through
             the Engineer^ when complying with
             Clauses 20,^'i,22,23 and 24, of the
1            ICE Conditions of Contract.
             The prices entered in the Bill of

1            Quantities are, except insofar as
             allowance may be made, for such
             costs in General Items, to include
             provision, delivery, performance
1            completion and maintenance,
             together with profit, transport,
             cartage, labour, water, fuel and
1            plant charges, insurance, watching,
             lighting, pumping, transportation
             of work people to and from and

1            about the site and all other
             expenses of every kind whatsoever
             which may be incurred by the
             Contractor in connection with the
I            execution of the work or in
             complying with the Specification
             of Works, together with all genera!
1            risks, liabilities and obligations
             set forth or implied in the
             Documents on which the Contract is

1            based.
             The whole of the materials and
             workmanship shall be in accordance
1            with the Specification and to the
             entire satisfaction of the Engineei
             Samples of materials and manufactui ed
                                                    .
                                                                      r



1             articles shall be submitted to the
              Engineer for approval as required.


1                                 i          i

|                            39
I                                                     GENERAL ITEMS
                                                                            Amount
     Number              Item Description          Unit   Quantity   Rate
                                                                             £       P


              All work described in the Bill
              of Quantities is to be taken as
              new except where distinctly
              stated to the contrary and as
              including all labour, materials,
              packing, carriage, cartage, risk,
              moving, hoisting and fixing in the
              required positions and also the
              use of tools, implements,
              machinery and all other matters
              of things necessary for the
              proper execution and completion
              of the Works.
              The Bill of Quantities are to be
              read in conjunction with the
              Instructions to Persons Tendering
              Conditions of Tender,
              Specification of Works and the
              Drawings. /v ■



              The System of measurement adopted
              in the Bill of Quantities is
              generally in accordance with the
              Civil Engineering Standard Method
              of Measurement published by the
              ICE but this may not be so in
              every case and the method as
              expressed in the Bill of
              Quantities must be accepted.

              General directions and descriptions
              of work and materials given in
              the Specification of Works are not
              necessarily repeated in the Bill
              of Quantities. Reference is
              to be made to the Specification
              of Works for this information .
              Where the words as described'
              are used they mean as described
              in the Specification of Works.

              Provisional Sums and Prime Cost
              Items are to be dealt with as
              provided for in the Conditions
              of Contract.




                                            /

                                            40

-I
                                                            GENERAL ITEMS

                                                                            Amount
|   Number              Item Description            Unit   Quantity
                                                                             £       P


             The quantities stated in the Bill
1            of Quantities are given for the
             purpose of enabling the
             Contractors to make out their

1            Tenders on an equal basis and
             to enable the Employer to compare
             the same, but they are not to be
             taken as a guarantee that the
             total quantities billed will be
             executed or required.

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
                                                                      t




1
1                               t               i


1                                          41
                                                      GENERAL ITEMS
                                                                             Amount
Number               Item Description          Unit   Quantity        Rate



         Prime Cost Items which include
         Work on Site"by a Nominated
         Sub-Contractor

   1.    Structural steelwork for stair­
         cases, handrails, gates and
         strengthening members.               Sum IZ.ooo

   2     Labours.                             Sum        a so

   3     Other charges and profit.                       i/u.%




                    42                  To Collection Page       44
                                                         GENERAL ITEMS
                                                                             Amount
■   Number                 Item Description           Unit   Quantity
                                                                              £       P


             CONTRACTURAL -REQUIREMENTS
1     1      Performance bond (not required)          Sum

1 2          Insurance of the Works                   Sura

                                                      Sum
             Insurance of Constructional plant

1            Insurance against damage to
             persons and property.                    Sum

1            METHOD RELATED CHARGES

             These items shall be inserted
1            below by the tenderer in
             accordance with Section 7 of the
             CESMM distinguishing bewteen

1            Time-Related and Fixed Charges.

                        '.V ••




1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
                                                                        r



1
1                                 1               1

■               43                            To Collection Page        44
1                                                       GENERAL ITEMS
                                                                          Amount
    Number                Item Description       Unit   Quantity   Rate



             COLLECTION

             Page 42

             Page 43




                              44
                                             To Grand Summary
■■

                                                   REPAIRS TO R.C. MEMBERS
                                                                                         Amount
     Number                 Item Description          Unit   Quantity        Rate
■■




                Repairs to existing Internal
                reinforced Concrete Members as
                Indicated on drawings 1610/4
                an7TS-----------------------

                Columns

        1   ,   Repairs A, at level 0.3m
                above floor or landing.                m        26
        2.      Repairs B, at level 3.5m
                above floor or landing.                         12
        3.      Repairs C, at level over 5m
                above floor or landing.                m        15

                Beams

        4.      Repairs A, at level 0.3m
                above floor or landing.                m       4.5
                          'IV ^



        5.      Repairs B, at level 3.5m
                above floor or landing.                m        11

        6.      Repairs C, at level over 5m
                above floor or landing.                         37

                Slab Soffits

                Repairs C, at level over 5m
                above floor or landing.                m2      0.3




r1
                                  45           To Collection Page       46          JI
L
                                                        REPAIRS TO R.C. MEMBERS
                                                                                 Amount
    Number                Item Description              Unit   Quantity   Bate
-


             Repairs to existing external
             reinforced Concrete Menbers~as
             indicated on drawings iei6/4
             and 5

             Columns

             Repairs 1, at levels above
             ground as shown on Icey.                              1


       2.    Repairs 2, at levels above
             ground as shown on key                     m          1


       3.    Repairs 4, at levels above
             ground as shown on key                                1


             Beams

       4.    Repairs 1, at levels above
             ground as shown on key                     m          7

       5.    Repairs 2, at levels above
             ground as shown on key                     m          1


       6.    Repairs 3 f at levels above
             ground as shown on key                     m        15

       7,    Repairs 4, at levels above
             ground as shown on key                     m          6




             To Collection Below




             COLLECTION


             Page 45

             Page 46




                                 46          To Grand       Summary
L
                                                 EXIT AT EAST END OF SOMOR STMTO
                                                                                      Amount
    Number                    Item Description           Unit       Quantity   Bate
-


               New emergency exit at East end
               of South 1stand open seating shown
               on "drawing"T610733---------------

               Demolition

               Reinforced concrete wall thickness
               150mm to profile of terrace step
               exits.                             m                     6
       2.      Metal fence.                                 m         9.5

       3.      Move timber hut and reposition as
               shown on plan.                    |sum
               Provision of Concrete

               Prescribed mix for special
               structural concrete with Ordinary
               Portland Cement to BS12 and 20mm
               aggregate. -                                 m3          15
               Placing of Concrete: Unreinforeed

               Filling over existing terrace to
               form new steps and landings.                 m3          14
               Placing of Concrete: Reinforced

       6   .   Step exits not exceeding 150mm
                thick.                                      m3
               Formwork, fair finish

       7.      Plane vertical 0.1 - 0.2 m                   m           42
       8   .   Plane vertical 0.4 - 1.22 m                  m2           8
               R e i n f o r c e m e n t High yield steel
               bars to         4449 bond classificatioh
               type 2 .

       9.       Diameter 6 mm                                   t   0.05

      10.       Diameter 8 mm                                   t   0.10

      11.       Diameter 12mm                                   t    0 .10




                                    47              To Collection Page 49
                                                     EXIT AT EAST END OF SOUTH STAND
                                                                               Amount
 Number                   Item Description            Unit   Quantity   Rate

-1
              Concrete Accessories

              Finishing of Top Surfaces

     1    .   Smooth steel trowel finish
              including formation of pencil
              round arrises to edge of steps.          m2        25

              Inserts

     2    .   Fix 100 x 50 R.H.S post including
              formation of hole and subsequent
              grout up using Conbex expanding
              grout.                            nr

              Conbex?-
              Ghemical Building Products Ltd
              Cleveland Road, Hemel Hempstead
              Hertfordshire. (0442-4901)
                        A
     3.       Fix R.H.S handrails including
              Phillips Self Drill Anchors type
              S-16m as shown on detail.
              Number of fixings with 2 nr bolts
              each.                             nr                 8
              Fix 100 x 50 R.H.S post including
              breaking out, excavation, concrete
              work and reinforcement as shown
              on detail 2 .                      nr              10

     5.       Supply and fix new length of
              fence to match existing including
              breaking out, excavation,
              concrete work and site welding.   m

              Paint ing
              Alkyd paint one undercoat, one
              gloss coat.

      6   .   Metal section surface 48.3 C.H.S
              handrails.                               m          37

      7.      Metal section       surface 100 x 50
              R.H.S. posts.                            m          15

      8.      Metal surface existing and new
              fencing.                                 m        10.5




                                 48             To Collection Page 49
LL
                                                EXIT, AT EAST END OF SOOTH STAND,
                                                                          Amount
     Number                Item Description      Unit   Quantity   Rate



                        COLLECTION


              Page 47

              Page 48




                           •




                                  49          To Grand Summary
I                                                 TIMBER DOOR
                                                                               Amount
    Number                Item Description         Unit   Quantity      Rate



              New doorway and timber door
              shown on drawing 1610/24

      1   .   Demolish brickwork wall thickness
              2 1 5 mm
                    to form new opening
              including supporting existing
              gonduit and wiring.                  m2

      2.      Fix steel channel posts including
              excavation and concrete for
              foundation blocks and mortar                   p e /v~'
              filling to brickwork.                nr        2r

      3.      Provide and fix 2 leaf framed
              and braced door including all door
               furniture and ironmongery as
              shown on elevation and section.    nr

     4.       Provide and fix folding catch
              plate.                               nr         1


      5.      Provide and fix drop bolt ferrules nr           4

     6    .   One brick construction in vertical
              walls; thickness 215mm above door
              head channel including fair facing sum

              Replace concrete coping, refix
              conduit and wiring and barbed wire
              as original.                       sum

      8.      Alkyd paint one undercoat, two
              gloss coats on timber surfaces of
              doors.                               sum

      9.      Alkyd paint one undercoat, one
              gloss on steel surfaces of
              channels.                            sum




                                  50         To Grand Summary
I                                                       DAMAGED TERRACING
                                                                              Amount

I   Number                  Item Description       Unit     Quantity   Rate



               Remedial Work to areas of
I              damaged terracing shown on
               drawings 1610/25 and £<>-

I              Excavation

       1   .   Excavation of lightly reinforced

I              broken or damaged step units
               average waist thickness not
               exceeding 125mm exposed at the
               Commencing Surface for disposal.    m2           205
I              Filling and Compaction

I      2   .   2 0 mm graded crushed stone layer
               depth not exceeding 50mm under
               terrace slab.                       m2           205

I              Filling Ancillaries

       3.      Preparation of surfaces crushed
I              stone material.                     m2           205

               Provision of Concrete
I      4.      Prescribed mix for special
               structural concrete with Ordinary

I              Portland Cement to BS12 and
               2 0 mm aggregate.                 m3              26

               Placing of Concrete, Unreinforced
I      5.      Terracing                           m3            26

I      6.
               Formwork; fair finish

               Plane vertical width not exceedin

I              0.lm.

               Concrete Accessories
                                                    m           700



I              Finishing of Top Surfaces
       7.      Smooth trowelled and then brushed
I              including formation of arrises.         m2       205
       8   .   Repair with REEBAFILL mortar
I              small areas of terracing where
               edges are damaged.                  m             30


I
I
                                   51           To Grand Summary
 I                                                       STAIRCASE FROM SPION KOP
                                                                             Amount
                                                    Unit   Quantity   Rate
_L   Number                Item Description

              New Staircase from the rear of
              Spion Kop as shown on Drawing Nos.
 I            1610/27,28 & 29

              Demolition and Site Clearance
 1     1      General clearance shrubs and
              undergrowth.                          m2      150

 1     2      Trees of girth 500mm - lm             nr         6

       3      Trees of girth lm      - 2m           nr          2
 I     4      Reinforced precast concrete wall
              at bottom of slope                    m2         5
 I     5      Existing fencing at rear of Kop       m          5


 I     6
              Earthworks

              Excavation for foundations n.e. lm
              deep for disposal                  m3          10
 I     7      Excavation for foundations n.e. lm
              deep for disposal                  m3            8

 I     8      Excavation for foundations 2m - 3m
              deep for disposal                  m3            6

 I     9      General excavation to form profile
              of steps and slopes n.e. lm deep
              for disposal                       m3         200
 I     10     General excavation to form profile
              of steps and slopes lm - 2 m deep
 I     11
              for disposal

              General excavation to form profile
                                                 m3          90



 I     12
              of steps and slopes 2m - 3m deep

              Trimming to slopes 1 in 1.5
                                                 m3          25


              gradient                              m2       95
 I     13     Preparation of surfaces underside
              of steps and slabs in natural
 I     14
              material

              Filling and compaction behind wall m3
                                                    m2      140

                                                             30

 I     15     Filling ancillaries preparation of
              surfaces excavated material        m2           50

 1
 1                               t              i
                                52              To Collection Page 55
Jl                                                     STAIRCASE FROM SPION KOP
                                                                                      Amount
      Number                    Item Description        Unit    Quantity       Rate

- I
                   Provision of Concrete

  I        1   .   Prescribed mix for special
                   structural concrete with Ordinary
                   Portland Cement to BS12 and 20mm
  I                aggregate.                           m3        65

                   Placing of Concrete, Reinforced
  I        2   .   Foundations and ground slabs
                   n.e. 225mm thick.                    m3        53

  I        3.      Walls 150mm thick.                   m3        12
                   Placing of Concrete, Unreinforced
  I        4.      Surround to 150mm dia cable ducts
                   150mm thick.                         m3
  I                Concrete Ancilliaries


  I        5.
                   Formwork, Fair Finish

                   Plane vertical to face of steps
                   150mm high.                          m         320
  I      6     .   Plane vertical to side of stairs     m          38
                   0.2 - 0.4m.
  I      7.        Plane vertical to walls exceeding
                   1 .2 2 m                             m2         65

  I                Formwork, Rough Finish
       8   .       Plane vertical to foundations
  I                225mm high.                          m          75
       9.          Plane vertical to walls exceeding
  I   10   .
                   1 .2 2 m.

                   Voids 100mm x 150mm x 275mm deep.
                                                        m2

                                                        nr
                                                                   65

                                                                   86

  I                Reinforcement

                   High Yield Steel Bars to BS4449
  I                Bond Classification type 2

       11.         Diameter 10mm                            t     0.2
  I    12.         Diameter 12mm                            t     0.3

  I    13.
                   High Yield Steel Fabric to BS4483

                   Ref.   A252 nominal mass 3-4kg/m2     m2        108

  1                                                                        I
                                        53         To Collection Page
                                                        STAIRCASE FROM SPION KOP
                                                                             Amount
    Number                Item Description          Unit   Quantity   Rate


             Concrete Accessories

             Finishing of Top Surfaces

             Smooth trowelled and then brushed     m2       170
             including formation of pencil
             round arrises.

             Fix in 100mm x 150mm x 27 5mm
             pockets handrail posts supplied by
             Sub-contractor and grout in
             position and C.B.P. Conbex non
             shrink grout                       nr            86

                 Chemical Building Products Ltd
                 Cleveland Road,
                 He me 1 He mps te ad,
                 Herts. UP2 7DL

             Pipework

      3      P.V.C. pipe 50mm dia 150mm long
             through wall                          nr        25

      4      Hepduct Clay pipe 150mm dia in
             two halves around power cables        m           5

                 Hepworth Iron Co. Ltd.
                 42, Russel Square
                 London WC1B 5DA

             Painting

      5      Alkyd paint, one undercoat, one
             gloss metal handrailing   - 2.0«      m        330

      6      Alkyd paint, one undercoat, one
             gloss coat metal handposts ^ . 1>0    rm         86

             Waterproofing

             Visqueen 1000 under concrete slab     m2       140




I
                                  54            To Collection Page 55
 I                                           STAIRCASE FROM SPION KOP
                                                                        Amount
                        Item Description       Unit   Quantity   Rate

Jl   Number




                COLLECTION

              Page 52

              Page 53

              Page 54




                                55         To Grand Summary
                                                     SPION KOP EMERGENCY EXITS
                                                                               Amount
Number                   Item Description            Unit   Quantity   Rate


           New Emergency Exits at bottom of
           Spion Kop shown on drawings
           1610/30 and l6l0/3l'

           Demolition
           Reinforced concrete wall average
           thickness 135mm to form new
           openings.                                  nr

           Provision of Concrete

           Prescribed mix for special
           structural concrete with ordinary
           Portland Concrete to BS12 and 20mm
           aggregate.                                 m3

           Placing of Concrete, Unreinforced

           Landing as shown in section
           on drawing.                                m3

           Formwork: Fair finish

  4.       Plane vertical width 0.1         0. 2 m    m        3.3

  5.       Plane vertical width 0.2         0.4 m     m2       1.3

           Concrete Accessories

           Finishing of Top Surfaces

  6.       Smooth trowelled and then brushed.         m2       6.0

  7.       Render with 10mm REEBAFILL mortar
           exposed vertical faces of perimeter
           wall after demolition.              m2              0.8

   8   .   Render with 10mm REEBAFILL mort ar
           exposed horizontal face of
           perimeter wall after demolition.           m2       0.8

           Reebafill:-
           Chemical Building Products Ltd
           Cleveland Road, Hemel Hempstead
           Hertfordshire. (0442 - 4901)

           Inserts

   9.      Drill 25mm diameter holes 200mm
           deep in landing slabs.                     nr       16

  10 .     Supply and fix style 3 bolt
           Yl6 mm diameter, 200mm long
           including Base Pin grout.                  nr        16


                                56              To Collection Page        57
I                                                   SPION KOP EMERGENCY EXITS
                                                                               Amount
    Number                   Item Description         Unit   Quantity   Rate



             Bolts and Base Pin grout-:

             Celtite (Selfix) Ltd.
             Rough Close Works P.O. Box 7
             AIfreton Derby DE5 7AD
                  (077383 4941)

             Painting

             Alkyd paint, one undercoat, one
             gloss coat

     1   .   Metal section surface gate frames        nr        8

     2.      Metal gates including mesh               nr        4

     3.      Metal mesh                               m2      10




             To Collection Below




                     COLLECTION


              Page   56

             Page       57

I
I
1
I
I
I
                                    57          To Grand Summary
                                         NORTH STAND - PRECAST STEP UNITS
                                                                        Amount
                     Item Description         Unit    Quantity   Rate
Number



         New precast concrete step units
         and barriers in the North Stand
         shown on drawing- 1610/52

  1.     Mass concrete step units 150mm
          x 343mm x 47Cham long, mass not
          exceeding 250kg, including
          drilling for locating pins and
          bedding on sand/cement mortar.       nr        126

 2.      Unbolt and remove to store at
          the rear of the stand the
         existing wooden tip-up seats.         nr        126

 3.      Remove existing mass concrete
         step unit for disposal.               nr           9

 4.      Fix R.H.S. barrier unit including
         Phillips Self Drill Anchors type
         S-16m as shown on detail 1.           nr

         Phillips Drill Co. (U.K.) Ltd
         Queenslie Industrial Estate
         Glasgow G33 4BL
             (041-774-2267)

 5.      Alkyd paint one undercoat, one
         gloss coat metal barriers.           nr




                            58          To Grand     Summary
                                                        WEST STAND ESCAPES
                                                                                 Amount
                          Item Description              Unit   Quantity   Rate
Number


         New Escape routes from West
         Stand on drawings 1610/33,34
         35 fc s e~------------ -------------------

         Demolition
         Reinforced concrete wall average
         thickness 100mm, 840mm high
         along front of stand.                           m       16

   2.    Reinforced concrete slab thickness
         160*im along front of stand                     m2    6.4

   3.    Brickwork wall thickness 225mm
         including reinforced concrete
         capping beam 225 x 225,
         rectangular hollow section
         framed with supporting frame. All
         at North end of stand.            sum

         Reinforced'»concrete wall,
         thickness 1 1 0 mm including pressed
         metal flashing and vertical metal
         side sheeting and rails. All at
         South end of Stand.                            sum

         Excavation of Foundations

         Excavation of mass concrete slab
         maximum depth not exceeding 1 0 0 mm
         exposed at the Commencing Surface
         for disposal.                                   m2      5.5

         Excavation of material maximum
         depth 0.5 - lm for disposal
         Commencing Surface underside of
         existing slab.                                   m3

         Excavation of ancillaries
         preparation of Surfaces existing
         material.                                        m2     5.5

         Provision of Concrete

   8.    Prescribed mix for special
         structural concrete with Ordinary
         Portland Cement to BS 12 and 20mm
         aggregate.                                       m3    10.2

         Placing of Concrete Jflass

         Bases thickness 300 x 500mm                      m3     0.3




                                 59                   To Collection Page 61
I                                                         WEST STAND ESCAPES
                                                                               Amount
    Number               Item Description          Unit   Quantity   Rate


             Placing of Concrete, Reinforced

       1     Bases thickness exceeding 500mm      m3        2.5

       2     Ground slab over bases thickness
             150 - 300mm                          m3        0.4

             Suspended slab thickness 160mm
             including 1 2 0 x 1 0 0 upstand      m3        9

             Formwork: Fair Finish

       4     Plane horizontal width 0.4 - 1.22m m2          16

       5     Plane vertical width not exceeding
             0 .lm                              m           16

             Plane vertical width 0.2 - 0.4m      m2        4

             Reinforced: High Yield Steel
             Bars to BS444& bond classification
             type "2"

       7     Diameter 10mm                                  0.2

       8     Diameter 12mm                                  0.4

       9     Diameter 16mm                                  0.3

             Concrete Accessories
             Finishing of Top Surfaces

       10    Smooth trowelled and then brushed     m2       5. 5

       11    Smooth steel trowel finish            m2       13

       12    Smooth steel trowel finish
             including formation of round arris^
             on top of upstand                              17

       13    Render with 10mm Reebafill mortar
             exposed vertical faces of
             perimeter wall after demolition       m2       0.4

             Inserts

       14    Supply and fix 80 x 80 x 10 mild
             steel plate with high yield 8 mm
             diameter anchor bar including site
             welding as shown on Detail 1
             drawing 1610/35                    nr          8




                                60             To Collection Page 61
                                                 WEST STAND ESCAPES
-


                                                                              Amount
    Number                 Item Description          Unit   Quantity   Rate
L

     24      Fix and cast on mild steel holding
             down bolts 24mm diameter, 750mm
             long with 1 2 0 x 1 2 0 washer plate.    nr       8

             Painting
             Alkyd paint one undercoat t one
             gloss coat

      25.    Metal section surface south end
             staircase, gangway, handrailing
             gate etc.                               nr         1

      26.    Metal mesh at south end                 m2       24

      27.    Metal section surface north end
             gangway, handrailing, gate etc.         nr         1

      28.    Metal mesh at north end.                m2     8.6




              To Collection Below




                        COLLECTION


             Page 59

             Page 60

             Page 61




                                  61          To Grand      Summary
                                         SOUTH STAND - GANGWAYS EXIT STAIRCASES
                                                                           Amount
Number                Item Description            Unit   Quantity   Rate


         Alterations to Gangways and Exit
         Staircases from South Stand as
         shown on Drawings 1610/37,38 fc 39

         Demolition
         Remove existing handrail including
         wall mounted fixing brackets and
         take to store in South Stand for
         re-use by the Nominated
         Sub-Contractor.

         Miscellaneous Metalwork

         Fix handrail bracket type 1 into
         position including all drilling
         and bolting.                             nr      33

         Fix handrail bracket type 2 into
         position including all drilling
         and bolting.                             nr      58

         Fix handrail bracket type 3 into
         position including all drilling
         and bolting.                             nr      22

         Fix brickwork support column type
         1 into position including all
         drilling, bolting and grouting.          nr      15

         Fix brickwork support column type
         2 into position including all
         drilling bolting and grouting            nr

         Fix brickwork support column type
         3 into position including all
         drilling bolting, grouting and
         timber packs.                            nr

   8     Fix 100mm x 50mm x 5mm thick R.H.S.
         handpost to floor including all
         drilling, bolting and grouting.     nr            12




                            62                To Collection Page 63
Lm
                                               SOUTH STAND - GANGWAYS AND EXIT STAIRCASES
                                                                                   Amount
     Number                 Item Description              Unit   Quantity   Rate
m*



              Painting

              Alkyd paint, one undercoat, one
              coat gloss.
                                                           m
        1.     Metal handrailing.                         m         165
       2.      Metal handrail fixingbrackets
              type 1,2 and 3.                              nr       113
       3.      Metal brickwork support columns
              types 1,2 and 3.                            nr          25
       4.      Metal handrail posts                       nr         12




              To Collection Below




                        COLLECTION
              Page 62

              Page 63




-I                              63                  To Grand Summary
                                               ALTERATIONS TO EXIT FROM SPIGN KOP
                                                                                   Amount
    Number                  Item Description              Unit   Quantity   Rate


              Alterations to exit from North
              side of Spion Kop shown on
              drawing 1610/40

              Excavation

      1   .   Excavation of mass concrete slab
              thickness not exceeding 1 0 0 mm
              exposed at the commencing surface
              for disposal.                                m2       27

      2.      Excavation of lightly reinforced
              step units average waist thickness
              not exceeding 125mm exposed at the
              commencing surface for disposal.             m2

              Filling and Compaction

      3.      2 0 mm graded crushed stone layer
              depth not exceeding 50mm under
              slab and terrace.                            m2       33

              Filling Ancillaries

      4.      Preparation of surfaces crushed
              stone material.                              m2       33

              Provision of Concrete

      5.      Prescribed mix for special
              structural concrete with Ordinary
              Portland Cement to BS12 and 2 0 mm
              aggregate.                                   m3       2.4

              Plaining of Concrete, Unreinforced

       6.     Ground slab    not exceeding 150mm           m3       1.6

       7.     Terracing.                                   m3       0.8

              Formwork, Fair Finish

       8.     Plane vertical width not exceeding
              0 .lm                                        m       10.5

              Concrete Accessories
              Finishing of Top Surfaces

       9.     Smooth trowelled and then brushed
              including formation of arrises on
I             steps.                                       m2         33


i



                                    64                To Grand Summar;
I                                                                                  Amount
    Number                 Item Description               Unit   Quantity   Rate




             GRAND SUMMARY

             GENERAL ITEMS                     Page 44

             REPAIRS TO R.C.MEMBERS           Page   46

             EXIT TO EAST END OF SOUTH
             STAND                     Page 49

             TIMBER DOOR                       Page 50

             DAMAGED TERRACING                 Page 51

             STAIRCASE FROM SPION KOP Page 55

             SPION KOP EMERGENCY
             EXITS                             Page 57

             NORTH STAND - PRECAST
             STEP UNITS                        Page 58

             WEST STAND ESCAPES                Page 61

             SOUTH STAND - GANGWAY
             EXIT STAIRCASES                   Page 63

             ALTERATIONS TO EXIT
             FROM SPION KOP                    Page 64



             GENERAL CONTINGENCY ALLOWANCE


             ADJUSTMENT ITEM




                                 65                   Total Tender Sum
J                                                       DAYWORK
                                                                            Amount
                         Item Description        Unit   Quantity     Rate
    Number
                                                                             £       P



             The rates quoted below are to
             include for the allowances and
             conditions set out in the Daywork
             Schedule on pages 67 and 6 8


             Chargehand or Working Foreman                         per
                                                                   hour

             Craftsman                                             per
                                                                   hour

             Labourers                                             per
                                                                   hour


             Allow profit on other charges for
             materials delivered to site.


             Plant
             Percentage addition (if required)
             on Plant as scheduled in Section 3
             of the Schedules of Daywork
             carried out incidental to Contract
             Works referred to in Clause 52(3) •
             of the I.C.E. Conditions of
             Contract.




                                66

4
Provisions and Conditions attached to the foregoing Daywork
                         Schedule


            That the time of Gangers or chargehands working
    (i)     with their gangs is to be paid for under
            appropriate items, but the time of foremen and
            walking gangers is not to be included but is to
            be covered by Site Supervision and Staff.


   (ii)     That overtime when chargeable under the Contract
            and previously authorised in writing by the
            Engineer is to be paid to the workmen - thus,
            if a man works one hour overtime for which he
            is paid for l£ hours the Contractor is to be
            paid l| hours for such a man.


  (iii)     That the rates for plant are only to apply to
            plant which the Contractor has available upon
            the site.


   (iv)      That the rates for materials are to cover delivery
             at the usual points at which materials are
             received on the site and not distribution to the
             individual sites where daywork is in progress,
             the cost of such distribution being chargeable
             in addition.


    (v)      That the daywork rates are to cover the use of
             such Contractor *s wagons and temporary tracks
             as are already in position on the site of the
             work to be done by daywork, unless such wagons
             and tracks are used exclusively for daywork,
             then they are to be paid for.


   (vi)      That the cost of watching and lighting specially
             necessitated by daywork is to be paid for
             separately.


   (vii)     That daywork charges will only be accepted for
             work previously authorised in writing by the
             Engineer to be carried out as daywork.


  (viii)     That craftsmen*s rate will only be paid for
             skilled work.


    (ix)     The labour rates will apply to all the General
             Contractor^ sub-contract labour.



                             67
1   .   Labour
        The rates quoted are to include for wages, bonus
        or other incentive payments, travelling allowances,
        payments in respect of time lost due to inclement
        weather, overtime, other than overtime authorised
        by the Engineer, all payments allowances and
        expenses due in accordance with the rules and
        decisions of appropriate wage fixing authorities,
        all statutory charges, National Insurance and
        Graduated Pensions, Normal Contract Works, Third
        Party and Employers* Liability Insurances, Annual
        and Public Holidays with Pay, Non-contributory
        Sick Pay Scheme, Industrial Training Levy,
        Redundancy Payments Contribution, Contracts of
        Employment Act, Site Supervision and Staff, Small
        Tools, Protective Clothing, Head Office charges
        and Profit, Subsistence or Lodging Allowances and
        periodic travel allowances.

2.      Materials
        Percentage addition required on the cost of
        materials delivered to Site.  (The cost of materials
        means the invoiced price of materials delivered
        to site without the deduction of any cash discount,
        not exceeding 2\%) .


3.      Plant
        Percentage addition (if required) on Plant as
        scheduled in Section 3 of the Schedules of Daywork
        carried out incidental to Contract Work referred
        to in Clause 52(3) of the I.C.E. Conditions of
        Contract.


4.      Supplementary Charges
        Will be paid for as defined and scheduled in Section
        4 of the Schedules of Daywork carried out incidental
        to Contract Work referred to in Clause 52 (3) of
        the I.C.E. Conditions of Contract.




                    68
              SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB LTD.


         CONTRACT FOR CIVIL ENGINEERING WORKS CONNECTED

          WITH THE CONSTRUCTION OF NEW EMERGENCY EXITS

        ALTERATIONS TO EXISTING STAIRCASES AND REPAIRS TO

        EXISTING REINFORCED CONCRETE MEMBERS AND TERRACING


To:   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.,
      Hillsborough,
      Sheffield S6 1SW.



GENTLEMEN:
     Having examined the Drawing, Conditions of Contract,
Specification and Bills of Quantities for the construction of
the above-named Works, we offer to construct, complete and
maintain the whole of the said Works on conformity with the
said Drawings, Conditions of Contract. Specification and Bills
of Quantities for the sum of


or such other sum as may be ascertained in accordance with the
said conditions.
     We undertake to complete and delivery the whole of the
Works comprised in the Contract within the time stated in
the Appendix hereto.

     Unless and until a formal Agreement is prepared and
executed, this Tender, together with your written acceptance
thereof, shall constitute a binding Contract between us.

     We understand that you are not bound to accept the
lowest or any Tender you may receive.




                            7


                                69
                              APPENDIX



Amount of Bond    (10)                                         Not required

Minimum amount of third party
insurance (23(2))                                              £250,000

Time for completion (43)
The work shown on the following drawings to be
substantially complete before 11 August 1979.
1610/23,25,26,30,31,32,33,34,35,36 & 40.
The remainder of the work shown on drawings                    Please enter date
1610/4,5,24,27,28,29,37,38 & 39 to be completed                be low
as soon as possible after 11 August.

Liquidated damages for delay (47)                              £ 1 0 0 0 /week

Period of Maintenance (49(1))                                  52 weeks

Standard Method of Measurement                                 CESMM substantiall
Adopted in Bill of Quantities (57)                             adopted

Percentage of adjustment of
P.C. Sums (59(2)(b) and 5(c)

Percentage of value of goods and
materials on site included in                                        90
Interim Certificates (60(2)(b))                                                  ____ 3

Minimum amount of Interim
Certificate (60(27))                                           £ 1,000




                                          We are, Gentlemen,

                                          Yours faithfully,




Date ..          . . I %7 X




                                     70
