                                                                                               MIR.15


 OTHER D O C U M E N T FOR M                                                    ^   Ar
                                                                          ----------- 1-------— ---------- —    Number
                                                                                                                            ot      o   i


 T itle            I slU *-*   /tP - >
                                                                                                         N 2 t 3 c v
 (Include source and any docum ent num ber i f relevant)


 Receiver's instructions - urgent action - Vps^lo             ^             -         / t a /c     7 ^

                ^2^:                                &/                                                                       Receiver


                                                                                                                            j t v      *?
 Document registered/indexed as indicated                                                                                     Indexer

 No(s) o f actions raised

Statement reader's instructions          C
                                             d^JZXL.                                                                     Statement Reader



Indexed as indicated
                                                                                                                             Indexer

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken




                                                                  &4lbth&            ,
When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                     GJD/AM3

Edinburgh
                                                      4 May




Bear. Sir


■ t H i J Mtw a i - w t m y . iQfto

I «i grateful to you for writing and the information that you included
in your latter will be of great interest to ray investigative team.

It may be that we shall be in touch with you again to take up the
points that you h a w wade.

Thank you very much for writing,


fours faithfully




Chief Constable
                                                       EDINBURGH


                                                       22nd April, 1989




Dear Mr Dear,

             I am writing to you as my wife and I were witnesses to the scene
outside Hillsborough stadium on 15 April. We arrived at Sheffield railway
station at 3.17 p.m., on the train from Manchester Piccadil 1v , and we were met
there by a friend,                   who stays near              We left the
station in his car at about 3.ZU, ipound for his house and driving, therefore,
along                        About five minutes later we drew near the stadium
and began to see supporters walking towards us, away from the stadium. The
traffic slowed down and eventually we vere stopped altogether for perhaps 5-10
minutes, just opposite the main entrance to the ground nearest to the city
centre, before we vere diverted away to the right. During some of this period we
were, in fact, blocking the ground entrance, and an ambulance that was trying to
enter the ground was only able to do so after a policeman on duty had managed to
manoeuvre us out of the way.

     I would like to stress two or three points about this. Firstly, this
policeman outside the gate was the only one we saw - apart from police cars
passing us - until reaching the point of traffic diversion, and he was so casual
and non-urgent about it that I can only assume he had no idea what had happened.
Secondly, traffic leaving Sheffield city centre at 3.20, about 15 minutes after
the game had been abandoned, was allowed to continue along Pennistone Road right
up to the stadium, although it was obviously going to delay ambulances and
police cars coining from the city centre. There was clearly no emergency plan in
operation. Thirdly, none of the fans caning out of the ground, moving straight
towards us as we sat in the jam, seemed to be drunk; on the contrary, most of
than were visibly shaken and silent, so much so that we did not like to ask them
what had happened.

         I hope this account is useful. Since we had just arrived by train, we
can be pretty sure about the times mentioned above.




                                               Yours sincerely,




Copy to Football Supporters' Association.
                                                                                       MIR.15


OTHER D O C U M E N T FO R M                   Date and time raised                                   ^Number


Title
 itle
                                                                                                si   3>°icl
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                       Receiver
                                                         iJik         b      ■(tfkA/fj
                                                                                                                       Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

                                                                                                                Statem e nt Reader
Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                       Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be talc&n                                                                          O /M         S IO




Further action No(s)                                                                                                   Indexer



When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
J MERVYN JONES IMSc                                  FURNIVAL HOUSE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                            Furnival Gate
                                                     Sheffield S1 4QN
 H IL LS B O R O U G H IN Q U IR Y T E A M
                                                     Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 7 5 9 9

WEST M IDLANDS POLICE HQ                             SM ITH D O W N LANE POLICE STATION
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                               Liverpool L7 3PR
Colmore Circus Queensway                             Telephone: 0 5 1 -7 0 9 7 1 9 0 /7 2 3 1
Birmingham B4 6NQ
Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5      Your Ref:

NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
                                                     Our Ref:
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2                      Date:        21 June 1989




E d in b u rg h



Dear Sir

RE HILLSBOROUGH - 15 APRIL 1989

I am grateful to you for writing and the information that you included in your
letter will be of great interest to my investigation team.

It may be that we shall be in touch with you again to take up the points that
you have made.

Thank you very much for writing.

Yours faithfully




J Mervyn Jones MSc
Assistant Chief Constable
Hillsborough Inquiry Team




     PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
                            1




                                                        EDINBURGH


                                                        22nd April, 1989




Dear Mr Dear,

             I am writing to you as my wife and I were witnesses to the scene
outside Hillsborough stadium on 15 April. We arrived at Sheffield railway
station at 3.17 p.m., on the train fran Manchester Piccadilly, and we were met
there by a friend,                  who stays near              We left the
station in his car at about 3.20, bound for his house and driving, therefore,
along                    I. About five minutes later we drew near the stadium
and began to see supporters walking towards us, away fran the stadium. The
traffic slowed down and eventually we were stopped altogether for perhaps 5-10
minutes, just opposite the main entrance to the ground nearest to the city
centre, before we vere diverted away to the right. During sane of this period we
were, in fact, blocking the ground entrance, and an airbulance that was trying to
enter the ground was only able to do so after a policeman on duty had managed to
manoeuvre us out of the way.

     I would like to stress two or three points about this. Firstly, this
policeman outside the gate was the only one we saw - apart from police cars
passing us - until reaching the point of traffic diversion, and he was so casual
and non-urgent about it that I can only assune he had no idea what had happened.
Secondly, traffic leaving Sheffield city centre at 3.20, about 15 minutes after
the game had been abandoned, was allowed to continue along Pennistone Road right
up to the stadium, although it was obviously going to delay ambulances and
police cars coming from the city centre. There was clearly no emergency plan in
operation. Thirdly, none of the fans caning out of the ground, moving straight
towards us as we sat in the jam, seemed to be drunk; on the contrary, most of
them were visibly shaken and silent, so much so that we did not like to ask than
what had happened.

         I          hope this account is useful. Since we had just arrived by train, we
can be pretty sure about the times mentioned above.




                                               Yours sincerely,




Copy to Football Supporters' Association.
                                                               DURATION
Band 1    Graham Beecroft, Sports Editor - first               2.33
          report from Hillsborough commentary.

Band 2    Graham Beecroft speaks to football                   3.01
           supporters on pitch.

Band 3    Graham Beecroft at the gate after the match.          .40

Band 4    Kenny Dalglish, Liverpool Manager,                   1.56
           interviewed by Gerald Sinstadt.

Band 5    Notts Forest Chairman's reaction                      .40

Band 6    Graham Beecroft speaking to the chairman             3.10
          of the Football Association, Graham Kelly.

Band 7    Liverpool Chairman John Smith interviewed            1.04
          on the afternoons disaster

Band 8    Peter Robinson, Liverpool Chief Executive            1.44
           interview with Alan Green at Hillsborough.

Band 9    The MP for Liverpool Garston, Eddie Loyden,           .30
           is calling for a full inquiry into the
           tragedy, and will raise questions in the
          House of Commons.   Mr. Loyden was at
          Hillsborough and has praised the actions
           of Liverpool fans who went to the aid
           of the injured supporters.

Band 10   At police headquarters in Sheffield, the             1.50
           Chief Constable of South Yorkshire,
           Peter Wright, has been fielding a barrage
           of questions about his forces handling
           of the crowds at Hillsborough.    He said
           several thousand fans arrived late..and a
           gate at the Liverpool end was opened by
           a police officer to prevent trouble.
          However, he d i d n 1t accept that this led
           to a crush on the terraces.

Band 11   News at 6p.m. The Chief Executive of                  .20
          Liverpool, Peter Robinson, saw much of
          what happened and was deeply shocked.

Band 12   16.4.89. Questions are now being raised              1.11
           about why the incident happened and who was
           res;)ons Lble .Dr . John Ashton is a senior
           lecturer in Community t i e a l x u Liverpool
           University..he was at Hillsborough with
          his children, and says the situation with
           the emergency services was chaotic.
           Dr. Ashton says accountability for the
           disaster must lie in part, with the
           Football Authorities and Senior politicians.

Band 13                           hasbeentalkingtosupporters   3.02
          w h o 've just returned from Hillsborough
          to the Rocket Pub at the end of the M62 on
          Merseyside.
                                                        DURATION
Band 14   15th April, Phone-in Programmes               4.49
          9p.m. - 1.00 a.m. Interview with
          Graham Beecroft.

Band 15   Phone-in Programme - Another of the           2.37
          Liverpool fans at the g a m e ,f
          who saw what happened... he was in the
          Lepping Lane end of Hillsborough but
          was away from main crush.      Our reporter
          spoke to him just after he arrived back
          on Merseyside..he first asked what
          happened before the game.

Band 16   15th April - The engineer responsible         2.35
          for the safety of the Hillsborough
          Ground said that the crush barriers
          exceeded minimum safety standards and
          underwent regular checks.  He told
                        that there must have been
          half a ton ot pressure on each person
          trapped against the barrier that gave way,
