 R. 296
                   FILE
                   No.

          Greenhill Road                                 2nd May

From .....Chief. Ingp.ec.tQE..F.SRGUSOJJ              Div. Ref. No..

          The Chief Superintendent

      Subject.    Kutual Aid Commitment - South Yorkshire Police
                  ______Saturday. 15th April, 19^9_____________

                   Herewith attached are the duty reports, as discussed,
          from "the officers who attended at Sheffield on the above date.




                                                  Chief Inspaexor
          South Yorkshire Police
                                                                          POLICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                                          SNIG HILL
                                                                          SHEFFIELD S3 8LY
                                                                          TELEPHONE (0742)768522
                                                                          TELEX 547996



               ALL COMMUNICATIONS SHOULD BE ADDRESSED TO
               "THE CHIEF CONSTABLE"
                                                           “I
                                                                          YOUR REFERENCE
              The Chief Constable
              Merseyside Police                                           OUR REFERENCE         OPS DR/SM
              PO Box 59
              LIVERPOOL                                                   DATE                  4 April 1989
              L69 1JD

     l:                                                    0)
                                                                                    MERSSYSfDE POLICE
                                                                                          DOS SECTION
                                                                                           1 4 APR 1989


                                                                                      ADMINISTRATE ON
                                                                                      greenhill r o a d

               Dear Sir

               FA CUP SEMI-FINAL - SATURDAY 1
               MUTUAL AID - HORSES

               Further to a recent telephone conversation between a member of your mounted
               staff and my Inspector Hand-Davis, I wish to confirm my mutual aid request
               on behalf of the Chief Constable in connection with the' above eveftt:

               Mounted Officers                       12

               The kick-off tine is 1500 hours and the officers should report to Niagara
               Police Stables at 10 am. tfeals will be provided.

               Your assistance in this matter is greatly appreciated.

               Yours faithfully




               Assi^tjint Chief Constable
        *"'    (Operations)
                                                                      i‘:.1 {1
                                                 MERSEYSIDE           * \.r . . I

! MERSFYP.IOF              PO! m e
                                                  m    b
;lias                                                       13 APR 1989
          10APR1989
                                                      O PER ATIO N AL
      Ui ’L I A I . 'I , i.
                                                    SUPPORT DIVISION
  S U P l ’O ^ T      i !VICiOf-i
                                                                  Insp Hand-Davis               Barnsley
                   THE OFFICER DEALING WITH THIS CORRESPONDENCE                      XTENSION

          ADM /1
                                                                         P
                          SATURDAY 15th APRIL 1989
                                                                     N«t
                                 Personnel
                                                                                    X
SOUTH YORKS                                  MERSEYSIDE

Inspector ^-and-Davis                         Inspector V/ilkinson                P.5.   1710 x>tson
?.S. 176** -homas                             P.S. 1952 Smith'                    P.W.   156 Main
?.s » 399 Sorsby                             P.C. 1300 Grunhill                   P.C.   790 Terry
P.C. 2613 Lindsay                             P.C. 1696 Stanbridge                P.C.   1226 %i;,is
      2550 Gillott                            P.C, 58Mf Halpin                    P.C.   ^59 H<>nes.
      3186 V;ilson
      1^98 Swain
                                              P.C. 3920 Evans
                                              P.C. 4365 Edge                                 I!
      3>B7 Henwood                            P.C. 1*886 Rarey
      2316 Scott                              P.C. 50kj> Fry
      2h?2 *.;heatcroft                       P.C. 5855 Kiamer
      1105 Hum a n                            P.C. 6278 Lunt
      357 V'oodward                           P.C. 7081 Hadford
      7 ^ Blades
Scare                                        Scare
r.C. 2183 Kaye                               P.C. 4                  ]I**VY "Tu
                                             P.C. 2089 Deus.
   Station

P.C. 2383 Kinchcliffe
P.C. 1692 Woodward
P.C. 2087 Hunt.

 P.C. 5 60 Marshall
              arshall 1
 P.C. 11*63 Allen     7 Notts
              ntloy.— J-------
-r-T^V-6 3 -Bentley




Barnsley v Birninshara




                          Humberside.
                   5
                                                                                                      &a-                                HBUUJS&       %0‘
Shaft'fa/d Wednesday E C .                                                                    3&'?-3*¥9-                                 f/OS-

  Hif/sborouqh Ground
                                                                                 FIRST'AtO
          — niAtASS*
\                                                                                  ROOM

                                                                                                   POLICE
                                                                                                                                   \
                                                                     Gymnasium

                  $Sr&-
                                                 11
                                                                                                                                                                    y»
                                                                                                                                                             L*'1

                                                             N O R T H STAND

                                                                                                                                                       & &



                                                                                                                                       \v \ w \   ■»
          fir /
              !                                                                                     ►iH

                                 STAND


                                         tAtt,                                                      Ic
                                                                                                                    jljli
                                                                                                    7



                                                   F Q           Q     SO UTH STAND

                                                  .\ j s         ' 2                   J,
                                                      H" M M-
                                                                       Ik.
                                                                                                   ^ rS &                   papk
                                POLICE                OFFICIAL                               CAR
                               CONTROL
                                                                                               Re s t a u r a n t

    IS.                                                      DIRECTOR
                                                             entrance




          S.      TURNSTILES
                                                                                      Wo^O.
                       f t I
                                                                               \
Shct/hJd Wednesday F.C.                                                            X '\
 I Hi/Jsborouqh Ground

X                                                                            Gymnasium
                                                                                         FIRST'AlO
                                                                                          ROOM

                                                                                                          POLICE
                                                                                                          ROOM

                                                                                                                              v
                                                                                                                                    v

                                                                                                                                          \'
                                                                                                                                               »5«-


                                                                                                                                                   -jflr©
                                                                                                                                    -<0 \ "   ,
                                                                                                                                  \      \ tt&*


                                                                       N O R T H STANO
                                                                                                                                                   t*   s   \
                                                                                                                                               \

                                                                                                               J ill . i® - \\ TtO
                                                                                                              11 V •it-i . \V \ v \ x *J>
     & /                                                                                                             A   .:'

                                 WEST                                                                         ffi l!
                                                                                                                                  ,i g
                                                                                                                               mi »,
                                STAND                                                                                                ■i
                                                                                                                                     H
                                                                                                                                   - iwnr,
                                                                                                                                                                \
                                                                                                                   !*H1T"';              N"'




                                                                                                                                                                    \
                                                         F      Q      Q       SO UTH STAND




                                POLICE                   0TF1CIAL                                    c»              u
                               CONTROL
                                                                             i — - fz-a.
                                                                                   ■— —— ton.innouu RESTAURANT
                                                                       Dwecrons
                                                                       ENTRANCE


           URNSTILES                                                     s>xx>^
 y ^ v                                   < c 7*. - r->       -\r fcA       6</«s«V<f .
                                                                                                                                                                    /------
             Halifax Road




                    -Tfe M I




A6101 to
MANCHESTER
          WILKMACP.114

vy
kut                         FILE                                                                          Form 104
                            No.
                                                                                             DIV. -.QSI>.MOUNTED
      Station ...Mounted..Dapar.tment..........                                             2.4.th..Apxi,l.... 1 9 ..39
      F ro m ......... X O S P S P .t.Q T . . H i A W n « m .............................   M v.Ref.N.............. ..
      To.... Chi ef^ Super i.ntenden t _OSD....



                                  MUTUAL AID COMMITMENT - SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
           Subject:-
                                                          Saturday 15th April 1989



          At 0600 hrs on Saturday,                                     15th April,               1989, the following


          officers paraded for duty at the Stables, Greenhill Road,


          to fulfil a mutual aid commitment to South Yorkshire


          for the semi-final between Liverpool and Nottingham


          Forest.


                                  Inspector Wilkinson                                                        \
                                  Sergeant                  1952 Smith
                                  Constable                  1300 Grunnill
                                                             1696 Stanbridge
                                                             2089 Deus                             Driver/Spare Rider
                                                             3844 Halpin
                                                             3920 Evans
                                                             4365 Edge
                                                             4886 Narey
                                                             5043 Fry
                                                             5855 Rimmer
                                                             6278 Lunt
                                                             7081 Radford
                                                             1998 Tewksbury                        Driver/Spare Rider



          The contingent departed at 0715 hours and arrived at


          Nlagra Stables, Sheffield, at 1000 hours.
B.384                                               Form IMA


                            -     2   -




On arrival    we received apacked lunch and at 1030 hrs


received a    briefing by Inspector Hand-Davies, I/CMounted


Deployment and were handed the briefing notes.           We were


told ^to be ready for deployment at 1130 hours and that my


officers would receive a hot meal in two phases; half the


contingent at 1430 hours and the second half at 1530


hours.   This was to ensure that there was a mounted


presence outside the ground at all times.



At 1130 hours all mounted officers were addressed by the


Chief Superintendent I/C Operation and the contingent was


then shown    the geography of the immediate area of the


ground by Inspector Hand-Davies.          Personnel were then


deployed as per the attached briefing sheet.


             Inspector Hand-Davies          (South Yorkshire)


             Inspector Wilkinson
             Constable 5043 Fry
                       5855 Rimmer
                       6278 Lunt
                       7081 Radford


to patrol area from ground to along Halifax Road to


Railway Station and generally escort those arriving by
H .3M                                          Form 104A


                           -   3   -


coach, car and train to the Lepping Lane end of the


ground.


          Sergeant    1952 Smith
          Constable    1300 Grunnill
                       1696 Stanbridge


               &       1 Sgt & 2 Cons, from South Yorkshire


to supervise queues at the Lepping Lane entrance to the


ground.


          Constable 3920 Evans
                      4365 Edge
                      4886 Narey


               &      1 Con. from South Yorkshire


to supervise turnstiles leading to South Stand in official


car park and cover arrival of team coaches.


          Constable 3844 Halpin


               & 1 Con. from South Yorkshire


to cover possible "flashpoint" Halifax Road, Penistone


Road.



During my patrol of Halifax Road I noticed many supporters


sitting on grass verges drinking alcohol from cans, long


queue at an off-licence and the public house in Halifax
B.384                                           Fonn IMA


                           -   4   -


Road near to the railway station was full at 1230 hours.


The weather was fine and warm and there appeared to be a


carnival atmosphere.



At about 1400 hours the contingent detailed to meet those


arriving by train (including myseirj collected some 500


Liverpool supporters and walked them the half mile to the


ground.



On arrival   (approximately 1415 hours) the turnstiles were


busy but the 500 had no difficulty in gaini-pg. access.


There were supporters in the near vicinity blocking


pavements on each side of the bridge.     These mounted


officers on the escort were initially employed encouraging


those people to make their way into the ground, if they


had tickets or leave the area.     There was no hostility and


most moved when requested.



At about 1430 hours it became apparent that the crowd


outside was increasing.   Large numbers of people were


coming down Lepping Lane from Catchbarh Lane,    (the
R. 384                                          Form IMA

                            -   5   -


opposite direction from which we had been told to expect


the Liverpool supporters) and started to push towards the


turnstiles.     I shouted to officers in Lepping Lane to slow


the flow as the compound and immediate area behind was


full.     Constable 1300 Grunnill and 1696 Stanbridge placed


their horses in the immediate area of the turnstiles in


an effort to relieve the pressure on those at the front.


The crowd had grown at this time to about 3000.



Other mounted officers used their horses to slow the flow
                                        '      *«      *
of persons from Lepping    Lane into that compound. There


appeared to be no reaction to requests 'not to move


forward’ and In fact horses were being pushed in an effort


to reach the turnstiles.    At one point, attempts were made


to close the wrought iron gates to relieve the pressure


but on each occasion     it was pushed back.   At one point I


saw what appeared to     be a can being thrown through the


air.     It narrowly missed Constable Stanbridge but its


contents scattered over him and those around him. I


remember thinking "Thank goodness he was wearing his
R .384                                            Form lOtA


                             6


reinforced hat".



Eventually we were able to form a complete line of horses


from building line to building line, but even then, people


were attempting to push between and under the horses with


a complete disregard for their safety.   Those that had got


past the line continued to push and all requests to be


patient were ignored.



There was a brief time when one horse, from fear, moved


out of line and there was a surge towards the. turnstiles.


This was quickly filled but as I looked over at this point


and I saw the gate on the left of the turnstiles open.        I


assumed that it had been breached.   A short time later the


gates were closed and the crush appeared to subside. A


matter of minutes later the remainder of the crowd entered


the ground and I, with my officer 'stood to* near to the


Directors Car Park.



At about 1505 hours I heard over the radio that there were


problems inside' the ground and were given instructions to
R .384                                      Form lOtA


                           -   7   -


take part of my contingent to Penistone Road opposite the


ramp.    This was in order to deploy onto the pitch if the


need arose.



We remained at this location until it was decided to


evacuate the ground.   Mounted officers were then deployed


in two's in the general area of the stadium as all foot


officers were deployed inside.



At approximately 1820 hours mounted officers were 'stood


down' and returned to Niagra for debriefing-and


refreshments.



The Merseyside contingent left South Yorkshire at 2000


hours and were dismissed from the stables at Greenhill


Road at 2300 hours.




                           Inspector Wilkinson
R.342*                                            FILE                                                                                                   Form 104
'Ar'                                              No.                                                                                        o .s .d .     m>
              aov                                                                                                                    Uif«
                                                 GREENHILL ROAD                                                                      19th April 1989
                    S ta tio n                 ,                                                                                           ;........19.
         a?         _                           Sergeant 1952 Smith
                    F ro m ......................................................................................................   D ir. Ref. No.
                    ■j.o                       The Chief Inspector Mounted




                           Subject*-                                       MUTUAL AID CO'.-J'ITMENT - SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                                     SATURDAY 15th APRIL 19©9



                                           On Saturday 15th April 19*9 I was engaged,
                      together with other members of the Merseyside Police Mounted
                      Department, in giving 'Mutual Aid1 to the South Yorkshire Police,
                      on the occassion of the F.A.Cup Semi-Final being played between
                      Liverpool F.C. and Nottingham Forest F.C. at Hillsborough Football
                      Club, Sheefield. I was riding Police Horse No.10, NIMROD.
                                           The Merseyside Police contingent arrived at
                      Sheffield at 1000hrs, and after refreshments and briefing by the
                      South Yorkshire Police Mounted Inspector, Inspector EAND-DAVIES,
                      we were deployed at 1130hrs.
                                           I was detailed to patrol in company with
                      Sergeant I76I4 THOMAS of the South Yorkshire Police Mounted. We
                      had responsibility for the LEPPINGS LANE end of the ground, and
                      in particular the turnstiles which were to be used by the Liverpool
                      F.C.Supporters. Assisting us at this venue were Constables 1300
                      GRUNNIL and 1696 STANBRIDGE of the Merseyside Police, and Woman
                      Constable 3^7 HENW00D of the South Yorkshire Police Mounted
                      Department. Sergeant THOMAS took me .and my colleagues on a short
                      •tour' of the Football Ground to aquaint us with the geography of
                      the ground and then Sergeant THOMAS and t went around' the surrounding
                      streets in order that I would have some knowledge of the area.
                                            At this time, about 1200hrs there were groups
                      of youths, Liverpool supporters, in the area of the ground and the
                      surrounding streets, many of them drinking alcohol. There were
                      however no signs of disorder and the mood was one of good humour.
                      We passed a couple of Public Houses and Off-Licences which were
                      being well attended, but again with no signs of disorder.
                                            We returned to LEPFINGS LANE to supervise the
                      arrival and entrance of the Liverpool supporters. The turnstiles
                      at the LEPPINGS LANE end of the ground give access to those
                      supporters entering the NORTH STAND, WEST STAND, and TERRACE area
                      below the WEST STAND. The front of the turnstile area is divided
                      into three sections by the use of iron railings and gates, and an
                      iron wall between the entrances to the WEST STAND and the TERRACES.^
                       (Please see attached sketch plan which I have prepared. This plan is
                      not to scale but gives an indication of the layout of the area.)
                      There is a total of twenty three turnstiles, with seven of them
                      providing acces to the TERRACE area, which I understand holds 10,000
                      people. The layout of the front of the turnstile area is such that
                       the gateway leading into the confined( sectioned off) area is narrower
                       than the distance across the actual turnstiles, thus creating a
                       'funnel' leading to the turnstiles.
                                              From 1300hrs to about li+OOhrs there was an
                       intermittent flow of supporters into the ground, with no build-up
                       at the turnstiles. The number of supporters in LEPPINGS LANE itself
                       was increasing, but many of them were reluctant to go into the ground,
                       despite numerous request from us, and other Police Officers. Many
                       of these supporters were sitting on the pavement, on walls and grass
                       verges, drinking, but again no disorder was taking place.
                                                                                                                                                         over/
    R. 384                                                       Form lOiA



                  About li^OOhrs we made a concerted effort to get
 supporters to go into the ground. Some did, but others chose to
 remain outside, and these people were moved away from the area of
 the turnstiles to allow easier access for those who wished to go
 into the ground.
                  About 1i|l5hrs a party of some 500 Liverpool supporters
 arraived at the ground, under escort from other Mounted Officers.
 $hese supporters entered the ground without problem, but shortly
 after the volume of people~~began to increase around the turnstile
 area. I noticed that entry through the turnstiles was slow, in
 part due to the fact that supporters were being searched prior to
 entering the ground. At this point there were, to the best of my
 knowledge, 9 Police horses in the area of the turnstiles and a
 further two Police Horses in LEPPINGS LANE trying to clear people
 from the roadway and adjoining areas. The crowd volume quickly
built up and a crush began to develop around the turnstiles, in
particular those giving access to the TERRACE area. The mood of the
 crowd at this time was one 'high spirits', what may be described as a
carnival atmosphere prevailed, with many people singing and chanting,
but all good-humourdley.      Constables GRUNNILL and STANBRIDGE entered
the confined area in front of the TERRACE turnstiles and began to
organise the crowd into orderley queues. I stayed outside the
confined area, supervising the entry of supporters into the NORTH
and WEST stands. Suddenly there was a large influx of supporters
into the turnstile area, and a serious crush began to develop.
Many of these supporters had arrived at the turnstile area from
the opposite direction from which we had been told to expect them,
and some of them where obviously tinder the influence of alcohol.
Serious crushing was now taking place and a line of horses was
placed acrooa the front of the turnstile area to prevent further
access to the turnstiles. Constables GRUNNILL and STANBRIDGE .
remained within the confined area of the TERRACE turnstiles an5 1
slowly were able to regain some order. A gap of about 10 feet
then developed between the supporters in the confined area and the
line of horses outside the confined area, and I saw the iron gates
at the entrance to the confined area shut. Despite there now being
space at the rear of the supporters at the turnstiles and despite
the loud and repeated appeals of the Mounted Officers, the crowd
at the turnstiles refused to move back and reduce the crushing. At
this point, one of the horses in the line of horse became agitated
and moved out of position, leaving a gap of about 10 feet in the
line of horses. The crowd which had been held back now surged
forward, forced open the iron gates and rushed into the back of the
people at the turnstiles. I saw people fall to the ground in the rush
I saw people ducking under the horse to gain access, and although
there was nowhere for these people to go, other them into the backs of
the people in front, they continued to surge forward. By this time
Constables GRUNNILL and STANBRIDGE had removed their horses from the
crowd, because of the serious risk of injury to people in the crowd.
The crush became so dense that it was now a physical impossibility
to put horses back into the crowd.      I saw young children being
passed out*-over the heads over the crowd, and other people being
pulled out over the side barriers, ^espite vehement pleading from
the mounted officers the crowd would bot take heed and the crushing
intensified. The mood of the crowd had now changed to one of panic,
with some hostility. I began to fear for the lives of people in the
crush, and felt that unless some drastic action were taken,, then
       "ould ondoubtedly be lost.     At that pAint I saw the exit gat*

                                                                over/
  R.384                                                          Form 104A


 for patrons of the NORTH STAND was open and supporters were going
 through. I first thought that the gate had been forced and moved
 to secure it, but quickly realised that it had been opened on
purpose.( This gate is marked 'A* on the attached sketch) The gate
was only open for a matter of two minutes and was then closed again.
The immediate effect of opening this gate was to reduce the pressure
on the NORTH STAND turnstiles. I returned to the area of the
TERRACE turnstiles and saw that the bulk of the crowd had now gone.
I was informed that both exit gates from the WEST STAND and the
TERRACE area had been opened to allow people into the ground. I
cannot be sure of what time this occurred, but would estimate it
to have been some 5 to 10 minutes before kick-off. Ve then began
to move- the remaining people, who were without tickets, away from
the ground. The turnstilesvere then closed and at about I505hrs
I heard a radio transmission to the effect that there was crowd
trouble inside the ground. A short time later an ambulance
arrived at the TERRACE exit gate and I saw casualties being brought
from the ground.
                 I was then instructed to remain in the area of the
LEPPINGS LANE end of the ground until further instructed. We
remained there until the game was abandoned, and then patrolled the
surrounding area of the ground until stood down at about 1$l5hrs.
                 I have been a Mounted Officer for 7 years and in
that time have attended more than 300 football matches, including
giving 'Mutual Aid' at Hillsborough in Januray 1988 at a match
between Sheffield Wednesday and Everton. In that time I have
neverseen so many people in the streets, consuming alcohol, before
a match, nor have I ever been confronted by a crowd of football
supporters so unruly and unwilling to listen to reason. I have
never before seen experienced Police Horses, such as were present
at this incident, reluctant to go into a crowd of pepple.    ,




                                     P.S.Smith   Sergeant 1952
R. S42                                             FILE                                                    Form 104
                  vV                                                                              O.S.D.    MTD
                 rxV                               No. __________
                                                                                             Dll
                                             GREENHILL ROAD                                  19th April 1989
                       S ta tio n ,                                                                              19
         eSt'*         _                    Constable 1300 GRUNNILL
                       From ................................................                DiT.Ref.No.
                       T o ...... The. Chief Inspector Mounted




                             Subject:-                               MUTUAL AID COMMITMENT - SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                                SATURDAY 15th APRIL 19©9


                                             On Saturday 15th April 19*9 I was amongst a party
                            of Merseyside Police Officers giving Mutual Aid to the South
                            Yorkshire Police on the occassion of an F.A.Cup Semi-Final, being
                            played at Hillsborough Football Ground, between Liverpool F.C. and
                            Nottingham Forest F.C.
                                             At 1130hrs that day I commenced my deployment in
                            LEPPINGS LANE in company with Constable I696 StanbridF;e of the
                            Merseyside Police. Other officers in LEPPI! GS LANE were Sgt 17&U
                            Thomas of the South Yorkshire Police, Sgt 1952 Smith of the
                            Merseyside Police and Woman Constable 3®7 Henwood of the South
                            Yorkshire Police, ^ur main responsibility was the turnstiles at
                            the LEPPINGS LANE end of the ground, which at this time were quiet.
                            Together vith Constable Stanbridge I went for a patrol around the
                            surrounding area of th=, ground to aquaint myself with the geography
                            of the location. Outside a public house called the PARK HOTEL I saw
                            a large crowd of Liverpool supporters, drinking.
                                             From approximately 12U5hrs to 13U5^rs I was engaged
                            in keeping clear the entrance to the turnstile area, encouraging
                            people with tickets to go into the ground, and those without
                            tickets to go away from the ground.                 v '■     *
                                             About 13i+5hrs I, together with Constable Stanbridge,
                            moved my horse to within the confined area of the terrace turnstiles,
                            to encourage people to move into the ground and use all the turn­
                            stiles. At this time the crowd were orderly.
                                              About 1MOhrs I noticed that the crowd had begun to
                            increase and spread out around the turnstiles. This was due in part
                            to the fact that supporters were being searched prior to going into
                            the ground, but mainly due to the slowness ofthem going into the
                            ground. Constable Stanbridge and myself took our horses into the
                            crowd immediately in front of the turnstiles and began to work our
                            way through the crowd, towards the turnstiles, asking supporters to
                            ease back and relaese the pressure on the people st the turnstiles,
                            many of whom were being crushed against the wall. We began to
                            succeed, in part due to the fact that some supporters recognized
                            us from working on the KOP at Liverpool, but mainly due to the
                            steadfastness of the two Police Horses who were withstanding
                            increasing pressure and tension. After about 5 minutes, there was
                            a massive surge from the back of the crowd, and my horse was pushed
                            even nearer to the wall. He became agitated and I ve.s able to turn
                            him and allow him to face the bulk of the crowd, which helped to
                            calm him. Despite loud appeals to the crowd from myself and others,
                            the crowd refused to ease back. Many people in the crowd were
                            appealing for help but the crush was now so intense that it was
                            becoming impossible for the horse to move. I felt the horse become
                            agitated again and realised that the pressure of the crowd was forcing
                            his feet from the ground. I decided for the sake of safety to
                             these supporters to remove my horse from the crush, which I did
                            with some difficulty. I took my horse to side of the crowd, near to
                             the back to try to ease the pressure. I could see children being
                            passed out of the crush over tr e heads of the crowd and others
   R. 384                                                    Form 104A



being pulled gut of the crowd up onto the top of the metal wall
dividing the Terrace turnstile area^from the Stand turnstile area.
  also saw that people were crawling underneath my horse, which in
his agitated state was a very dangerous thing to do. I could see
a foot Constable trying to close the iron gates ate the entrance to
the Tearrce turnstile area, but without success, 1 moved my horse over
towards him and was able to move some of the corwd sufficiently for
him to close the gates.   ^onstable Stanbridge and I then moved
back into the contained turnstile area and attempted to move the
crowd back into the gap which now existed at the back of the crowd
at the turnstiles, between them and the iron gates. Some people
did movelback, but most chose to ignore us and continued to push
forward. At this point there was a sudden large influx of people,
the crushing intensified and I was forced to the side of the crowd.
I again asked my horse to go into the crowd, but he became stubborn
and apprehensive about doing so. I have never known him to behave
like that in the sixteen years he has been a police horse. I did
eventually manage to get him to go back into the crowd. At this
point I noticed people moving away from the back of the crowd and
moving to the right of the Terrace turnstiles, in the direction of
the side passage leading to the club car park. The immediate effect
of thsi was to ease the pressure on the crowd. Afetr a while people
began to make their way back into the crowd and at this point I saw
the exit gate for patrons of the VEST STAND open and people were
being allowed in. It was open for a short time only, and then
closed. The remaining supporters, of which there were not now many,
passed thriugh the turnstiles in an orderly fashion. Some time later,
I cannot be sure how long, we were ordered to close the turnstiles,
which we did. I cannot recall hearing the customary noise,from
inside the ground, which greets the start of the game, and it was only
when I heard a loud-speaker appeal to fans to ease the brushing, that
I realised that there was a problem inside the ground.
                We were then instructed to patrol the surrounds of
the ground, and at about l8 l0hrs we were stood down and returned
to the horse-boxes.
                I have been a Mounted Officer for 31 years and in
that time have only once been confronted by a crowd of people so
un-cooperative and unwilling to listen to reasson, and Jhat was on
the owassion of a football match between Scotland and Wales, played
at Anfield in 1977* IV horse is a very stable and brave horse and
I have neber before known him to show apprehension as he did on
this occassion.



                                         ••• •4 N ••••••
                                         P.N.Grm^)Lll
                                         Constable 1300.
                     FILE                                                                                         Form 104
                     No.
                                                             DIV.
S tatio n .. Mounted_ D e p a r t m e n t ................Thursday ^27th April ^89 ^

From........... A . P . SJ?. S t a n b r i d g e             DiT.Ref.No.....................................................

To................ CWi?f. .SviJR^rijrjtenden-t..............................




     Subject:- .               MUTUAL AID COMMITMENT - SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                          SATURDAY 15th MAY 1989
                                                                                                   »



                               At 0600 hours on Saturday 15th April 19.-9 •» 1
    paraded for duty at the Stables, Greenhill Road, as part of a
    mutual aid commitment to South Yorkshire.

                               At 1130 hours that day I was deployed with
     Sergeant Smith, Constable Grunnill and two South Yorkshire
    Kounted officers to the Lepping Lane end of the football ground.
     My instructions were to generally patrol the area of the turnstiles
     and encourage Liverpool supporters with tickets to enter the
     ground and those without to leave the area.

                                Initially the turnstile area was quiet so I with
     Constable Grunnill patrolled the surrounding area in order tp
     acquaint ourselves with the geography and likely trouble spots.
     During my patrol I saw a large crowd of what I presumed to be
     Liverpool supporters drinking outside a local public house.

                                We returned to the area of Lepping Lane turnstiles
     at about 121+5 hours and were engaged in the area outside the blue
      perimeter gates encouraging people with tickets to go into
      the ground, and those without to move on.

                                 At about 1U10 hours the queues were starting to
      build up and it was at this point that Constable Grunnill,
      who was in the confined area in front of the stiles, indicated to
      me that he needed assistance with the queues.

                                 I entered the the confined area which was tightly
      packed.           I was aware that some had been drinking and could see
      those at the back pushing towards the turnstiles.                                                         It is
      important to point out that both Constable Grunnill and myself
      were riding experienced Police Horses.                                                                            —
 R. 384                                                              Form 104A




             I made my way with Constable Grunnill through the
crowd and attempted to ease the situation by advising those
who were pushing to ease back.      I could see persons at the front
being squashed against the stiles.       These requests even at this
stage were ignored.

             For a short time we appeared to have the situation
under“control, but at this time both myself and Constable
Grunnill were facing the turnstiles and unaware of what was behind
us.
             I suddenly felt a massive push from the rear causing my
horse to be pushed forward.      I looked back and saw a massive
crowd of fans.   To me they all appeared to be shouting and pushing
their way towards the turnstiles.     I shouted a warning to move
back as those at the front were being crushed, but they took
no notice.
             Children and adults were screaming that they were being
crushed snd I feared for their safety.         I saw children being passed
over heads to safety away     from thechaos.

             At this point    my horse began to panic go I moved out
                                                        -•       •
of the crowd to avoid an accident.       I saw young people being
lifted to the top of the barrier between the terracing turnstiles
and the West Stand turnstiles.

             I continued to appeal to people to stop pushing but
all requests seemed to be     ignored.   The areas outside the
compound had become full and persons in those areas appeared to
be in a state of agitation.

             I remember seeing Constable Grunnill and a foot
officers attempting to close the blue perimeter gates.         Both
gates were eventually closed.

             A short time later there appeared to be a massive
push from outside, the gates were pushed over, and the confined
area became a mass of hysterical, screaming fans.
R.384                                                              Form 104A




             At this point I noticed a concertina gate to the
 right of the terrace turnstiles was open and fans were allowed
 through.      This appearedto be a great relief as some fans
 moved away from the backand relieved the pressure on those at
 the front.
             I also   remember   a concertina gate between theVest Stand
 and the terrace      turnstiles open and some fans entered that
 way.      The remainder passed through the stiles in an
 orderly fashion.       A short time later the turnstiles were
 closed.
            I remained outside the ground at the Lepping Lane
end and then patrolled generally until I was stood down to
Niagra at about 1820 hours.                     ___




                                             Consxanle 1696 OSD
                                             M. Stanbri'dge
   208 9HILL.117


                    FILE                                                                Form 104
                    No.                                              DIV. ..OSS.MQUH-TED DEPT
Station ...G x e ^ n h j. 1.1. .Ro a d ........................     Z 6 j t h .A p £ i .l       »..89

From......... P.QXl M ftW .e.. ZQA 9..               .M VS          D ir.Bef.N o.

To.....IInspec
         nspector     1 11kki1nson....
               tor##WWi_      nson



         . -            MUTUAL A I D . F . A . CUP SEM I-FINA L
    S u b jec t:-       HILLSBOROUGH - SHEFFIELD




              At 0600 hours on Saturday,15th April,                                  1989, I paraded
   at the stables Greenhill Road for duty to be performed at
    Sheffield for the football match between Liverpool F.C.
   and Nottingham Forest F.C. at Hillsborough.                                              I left the
    stables and drove the horse box Fill YBG to Sheffield at                                               j
    0715 hours, arriving at South Yorkshire Police Mounted
    H.Q. at 1030 hours.
                                                                                                           I
              Whilst the other Merseyside officers attended a
    briefing, Constable 1998 TEWKESBURY and myself tended                                               to j
                                             * <■  ,                                                      I
    the horses.


              At 1130 hours I saw the mounted contingent leave th
    stables for the football                              ground.   Iremained at the
    mounted H.Q. and prepared the horse boxes for the returr
    journey.             At about 1500 hours, Constable Tewkesbury who
    had been patrolling with the South Yorkshire Dog sectio:
    returned to the horse boxes and made me aware of the
    situation at the ground.


               Listening to the personal radio it became obvious
    that the situation was worstening and at about 1515 hov
    I went on foot to the ground with Constable Tewkesbury
    We went to the kop end where most of the horses were
    deployed.               I entered the ground via the ramp at Penist
    Road on two occasions to relay information on the
    situation inside the ground to Inspector Wilkinson and
    mounted contingent in Penistone Road.
R.384                                                   Form 104A


                            -   2   -


        I remained at the ground and assisted in crowd and
traffic control after the match had been abandoned,
returning to the horse boxes at about 1715 hours.


        I left the mounted H.Q. at 2000 and drove back to
Liverpool arriving at the stables, Greenhill Road at 2230.
I wen± off duty at 2300.




                                        Constable 2089 'H' DEUS
                   3844HILL.114

•v
R.342                        FILE                                       Form 104
         Oov                 No.
                                                            BLYf »pgP-,»M9WSTED
               Station ..Haunted.Departmeat..........       2.4Mi..Apr.iJl.... »..§9

     *
               From     Qp.mtabJ.9..33M ..8a Jj?Jjp         KT.iwf.No........
               j0       Chief In spec tor Moun ted ....



                   ~     ,     MUTUAL AID SHEFFIELD SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                   Subject:-   --------------------------------------
                                   Saturday 15th April. 1989
               _




                        At 11.30am on Saturday,       15th April,   1989, I was
                   deployed, by Inspector Davies of the South Yorkshire
                   Police, to patrol the Halifax Road area of Sheffield in
                   company with Constable 357 mounted of South Yorkshire
                   Police.


                        Many Liverpool fans were entering Sheffield, along
                Halifax Road, to attend the Hillsborough football ground,
                on the occasion of the F.A. cup semi final, between
                Liverpool F.C. and Nottingham Forest.           The majority of
                   fans I had seen, were drinking outside of a*public* house
                at the top of Halifax Road.           As we patrolled the road I
                noticed that large numbers of fans were queuing outside
                   the gateway supermarket.       During this period I noticed
                   that the staff of the supermarket came outside and dropped
                   three of the four roller shutters.        A s the fans left the
                   supermarket most were carrying between 4 and 8 cans of
                beer each.          They then lay on the grass outside Halfords
                and on the verges of Halifax Road where they were
                consuming the beer.


                        As the time progressed the fans proved themselves for
                   the most part good natured.        It was a carnival type
                   atmosphere.       Some of the fans were arguementatlve, but
                   these were always persuaded, by other members of their
                   group, to quieten dwon, and there were no incidents of any
                consequence that I was aware of.


                        At sometime around 2.00 pm the special train arrived
                at the local station across the road from where I was, by
R.384                                                Form IMA


                            -   2   -


Halfords.     The escort of 4 mounted officers waited until
all the fans had alighted and reached the road before they
went to the ground.


        Once the road was cleared of fans from the train, we
requested the fans in the Halfords area to make towards
the ground.     This they did with no arguements; the
majority being good natured.


        We followed them along Halifax Road towards the
ground.     The personal radio's were permanently being used,
there was little chance of being able to interrupt the
communications traffic.


        When we reached the roundabout at the bottom of
Halifax Road, there was a radio message calling for all
mounted personnel    to go straight to the Leppings Lane end
of the ground to assist with the crowd.      Both 357 and
myself went straight there, following a large group of
Liverpool fans as we went.      As we approached we could see
that the area inside the iron gates was packed sol idly !by
fans pushing up to the turnstiles.      My side of the gates
was a space, and then a cordon of police horses keeping a
large crowd of fans from pushing up and into the iron
gates.     I do not know at what time I arrived at the
ground.


        The Mounted Inspector was in the horse cordon.      He
motioned to the two of us to move through the crowd and
bolster the cordon.     I then rode my mount through the
crowd.     I shouted to those in front of me to make way,
but they refused to do so until my horse was pushing them
to either side.


        The crowd were shouting abuse at the police officers
and were trying to push through the cordon to reach the
iron gates. I joined the cordon behind the Inspector.            The
cordon was positioned from the corner of a shop, by the
R.384                                                  Form 104A


                            -   3   -


gate 15 the West Stand, to the roads edge.        At this point
there-were fans crawling underneath the horses and also
pushing through any gaps that they could make.        After a
short while the gate to the West Stand was opened and the
fans pushed through and around the cordon and ran straight
through that gate and gained entry to the ground.   Some
were also climbing the wall on the right hand side of the
turnstiles to gain entry over the top of the turnstiles.
The Inspector instructed me to stop the fans going over
the wall.     At this point the crowd inside the iron gates
had thinned out allowing me easy access to the wall.          I
then stopped any other fans from climbing the wall.          I
then turned my attention to the crowd at the turnstiles
and got them into two orderly lines for the end two gates.
As the noise around the ground was so intense I could not
tell whether the game had started or not.


        We then withdrew and as the problems became evident I
prevented any more supporters from going into the ground
at that point.     If they had tickets, or not.


        At this point we were stood in readiness to go into
the ground if required.     By this time fans were being
brought out and cardiac massage and artificial
rescusitation were being administered by police
officers and others.     We then went back into the road and
kept the roadway clear for emergency.


        After a few minutes the crowd on the bridge in
Leppings Lane became thicker and very aggressive towards
us so we made back to the ground where we met up with more
mounted men, under the command of a South Yorkshire
Sergeant we all withdrew then to a side street where we
stood to, awaiting instructions.


        As the fans left the ground a large number of them
moved in our direction.     Some were exceptionaJly abusive
towards us.
R.384                                               Form IMA


                               4


        Neither I or any of the other mounted officers
replied as we felt that this might antagonise the fans.


        Approximately one hour passed and amongst all the
other radio messages came a call that there were
supporters fighting in the park nearby.     We all made our
way towards the park but within a couple of minutes a
message said that all was quiet at that location.        We then
continued to patrol around the ground until approximately
18.30 hours when we returned to the Niagra complex.




                                   Constable 3844 HALPIN..
               3 9 2 0HILL.114

      ■


    R.342                    FILE                                             Fora 104
                             No.                                   DIV. ..OSD.MOUNTED
            Station...Gxaenhi 1.1.itoad.....                      / W . t h . A P X j . i ................ 1 9 . . 8 9

            From........C9.T)fct.a.W f t . 3     p.. EVANS.       DiT.Ref.No.
            j0.... JDu ty S e rg ea n t........



                                  MUTUAL AID SHEFFIELD 15.4.89.
                Subject


!                        With reference to the above, I report that on
               Saturday 15/4/89, I paraded at 06.00 hrs to perform duty
                in accordance with the proposed mutual aid transaction in
                respect of the semi-final round of the F.A. Cup
                competition beween the Liverpool and Nottingham Forest
                football clubs.                 This fixture was to be held at the
               Hillsborough football ground, Sheffield, the province of
                the South Yorkshire Police.


                         After standered preparatory procedures, I travelled
               with fellow officers and respective horses by Police
                transport to the Niagra recreation facilities, Sheffield.


                         Our arrival at 10.00 hrs was followed by a
                refreshment period and then a briefing administered by
                Inpsector Hands-Davies of the South Yorkshire Mounted
               Department.              Myself, together with Constable 4365 Edge,
                Constable 4886 Narey of this force and Constable 2613
                Lindsay of the South Yorkshire Mounted were detailed to
                cover the Directors Car park at the Hillsborough ground.


                         I subsequently paraded at 11.30 hrs with mounted
                colleagues and we took up our respective about the
                football stadium.


                         At 14.10 hrs myself and the three other mounted
                officers assisted with the arrival of the Liverpool team
                coach, by organising the crowd which had gathered in
                anticipation.                  At 14.20 hrs we repeated the process upon
                the arrival of the Nottingham Forest team coach.
R.384                                                           Form IMA
                               3


We were eventually able to move the crowd as far as the
perimeter railings and to close the gates incorporated in
that fence.     In this position it was possible to dictate
the flow of fans by restricting the numbers allowed
through the perimeter fence. As we continued this
process, I saw behind me that the exit gate I had used
earlier was now open and fans were once again gaining
access, all be it in reduced numbers.


        Shortly after this, about 14.50 hrs the turnstiles
were shut, and we began to disperse the remaining crowd.
Together with a contingent of mounted officers.                I was
directed to stand to at the ramp area of the ground in
Penistone Road.     We remained static until the game was
officially abandoned, when we instructed to patrol the
perimeter of the ground, by Inspector Hand-Davies.                   This I
did in company with Constable 7081 Radford, until we
received instructions to stand down at 1800 hrs.


        I eventually went off duty at 2300 hrs at Greenhill
Road.




                                   • ♦ »v   » * * » • « • • * •♦ * r *** •
                                     Constable 3920 EVANS.
     4 3 6 5 H I L L .114


                    FILE                                                             Fora 104
                    No.
                                                                          DIY. .-OSD.MOUNTED
Station . . . M o u n t e d . . D e p a r t m e n t ................     2 4 .th .A p x U         19 .. £ 9
From                 $X AW f t . A 36 5.. EP.Qfc..............           £Hv.Rcf.No. ..........
To             C h i e f _I n s p e c t o r _Mou n t e d _



                         MUTUAL AID. SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
     S u b je c t
                              LIVERPOOL v NOTTINGHAM FOREST



               I have to report that on Saturday,                                 15th April,           1989,
     I was part of the Merseyside Mounted Department which was
     sent as Mutual Aid to assist South Yorkshire Police.


              At 1200 hours on Saturday,                               15th April,      1989, I was
     deployed by Inspector Hand-Davies of the South Yorkshire
     Mounted Department,                        to patrol the area of the Directors
     car park at Sheffield Wednesdays ground Hillsborough Park;
     the occasion being the F.A. Cup semi-final, Liverpool v
     Nottingham Forest.                         The other mounted officers in this
     area were Constables 3920 Evans, 4886 Narey-and Constable
     2613 Lindsey of the South Yorkshire Police.


               I accompanied Constable Evans in half section and we
     patrolled the car park.                               This area had been allocated to
     Nottingham Forest supporters, although there were some
     Liverpool fans amongst the crowd who were waiting for the
     team coach to arrive.                            These fans were very well behaved.


               At 14.10 hours the Liverpool team arrived by coach,
     myself and Constable Evans positioned our horses near to
     the players entrance, so as to keep the fans away from the
     doorway,           to allow the teams free access.                              After they had
     alighted,            the coach moved away, Constable Evans and I also
     moved away from the players entrance.


               At 14.20 hours the Nottingham Forest team coach
     arrived.             Once again Constable Evans and I positioned
     ourselves by the players entrance in front of the coach.
R.3&4                                                      Form IMA


                             -   2    -


        Throughout my presence in the area, fans were
arriving in a good natured,orderly fashion, and without
arrest.     All turnstiles in the car park had been allocated
to Nottingham Forest supporters.


        -About 14.30 hrs, as the result of a radio message
together with Constable 4365 Edge, I went to the Leppings
Lane end turnstiles, which had been allocated to Liverpool
supporters.


        Upon arrival I saw large numbers of fans running
through an exit gate into the ground.          I formed the
opinion that this gate had been forced by supporters in an
effort to gain easy access.          In view of this I used the
horse to stem the flow of fans and shouted to nearby foot
officers, who in answer to my request, eventually secured
the gate.      It was then necessary to use the horse in an
effort to reduce the subsequent congestion.           Mounted
                                          '        *> ’    $
Officers present slowly moved back the fans, towards
Leppings Lane.     At this point I could see that there was a
severe compression of people queuing at the turnstiles,               I
attempted to use the horse to ease the crush, but as
people parted I found my way blocked by a horizontal bar
at waist height.      This served to exacerbate the situation,
by restricting any lateral movement of people in a
congested situation.      I shouted at people at the rear to
ease off, but my directions were ignored or answered with
abuse.      In view of the non-cooperation, I was obliged
again to use the horse together with other mounted
officers to try and reduce the pushing and resultant
crush.     As we continued this process, I could see that the
crowd was in angry and very agitated state,           it was
impossible to gain any cooperation.           Entry via the
turnstiles was significantly slower than one would expect
in an all ticket game.      At one point a small boy of about
4 years was passed to me from the crowd and I was able to
pass to safety near the rear of the crowd, he was
obviously terrified and in a distressed state.
R.384                                               Form I(HA
                               3


We were eventually able to move the crowd as far as the
perimeter railings and to close the gates incorporated in
that fence.     In this position it was possible to dictate
the flow of fans by restricting the numbers allowed
through the perimeter fence. As we continued this
process, I saw behind me that the exit gate I had used
earlier was now open and fans were once again gaining
access, all be it in reduced numbers.


        Shortly after this, about 14.50 hrs the turnstiles
were shut, and we began to disperse the remaining crowd.
Together with a contingent of mounted officers.     I was
directed to stand to at the ramp area of the ground in
Penistone Road.     We remained static until the game was
officially abandoned, when we instructed to patrol the
perimeter of the ground, by Inspector Hand-Davies.      This I
did in company with Constable 7081 Radford, until we
received instructions to stand down at 1800 hrs.


        I eventually went off duty at 2300 hrs at Greenhill
Road.




                                    Constable 3920 EVANS.
           48 8 6 H I L L . 115


n.a                     FILE                                                    Fora 104
                        No.
                                                                   DIV. ..OSD. MOUNTED
      S tation .. .GX&entU, U . .RQ3.d.........................    2 ? .th .A P X j.l   19...8 9
      Fran... Con st ab 1e .488 6 .NARE Y...                      Div.Ref.No.
      To          Chief Inspector Mounted



                            MUTUAL AID - SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
           Subject
                            LIVERPOOL v NOTTINGHAM FOREST - 15.4.89



                   I have to report that on Saturday,                       15th April,      1989,
           I was a member of the Merseyside Mounted Police Department
           sent as mutual aid to assist the South Yorkshire Police,
           in the football match, Liverpool v Nottingham Forest.


                   I paraded for duty at the stables at Greenhill Road
           at 06.00 hrs, after completing my stable duties and
           grooming police horse No 23 Normandy, I boxed up and
           travelled to Sheffield.


                  We arrived at the South Yorkshire stables "Niagara"
           at 10.00 hrs, we were given refreshments and invited to a
           briefing, given by Inspector Hand-Davies.                             Instructions
           were given regarding seating arrangements, colour of
           tickets and our positions of which we were to work that
           day.


                   I was to work alongside Constables 3920 Evans and
           4365 Edge of our force, Constable 2613 Lindsay of the
           South Yorkshire force was in charge.                         We were instructed
           to patrol the area of the Directors Car Park rear of the
           south stand and also to cover the arrival of both team
           coaches.


                  At approximately 11.30 am all mounted officers
           paraded for duty and walked from Niagara stables to the
           football ground at Hillsborough.                       All officers were again
           paraded in the Directors car park and from this position
           all were dispersed to their various positions around the
           ground.
R.384                                                  Form IMA


                            -   2   -


Constable Lindsay and my section Constable Evans and Edge
walked around the ground, Constable Lindsay showing us the
Hillsborough Park area which we were to patrol after the
game.


   — He later returned to the directors car park and we
awaited the arrival of both teams coaches.  During the
afternoon a large number of both Liverpool and Nottingham
Forest fans gathered in this area.        It appeared that all
fans of both teams were in good spirit and well behaved.
On arrival of the team coaches both teams were seen into
the players entrance without incident.


        At approximately 14.25 hrs and as a result of a radio
message, myself-and my colleagues were directed to the
entrance gates in Leppings Lane.        On arrival at Leppings
Lane I approached the area from the directors car park,
along past the south stand to a temporary barrier.
                                                  <•    •

        I saw that on the other side of this barrier was a
vast crowd of people.     The crowd were fighting and pushing
from the main road, "Leppings Lane", towards the blue iron
gates and on In-to the turnstiles.        I estimated this crowd
to be In the two to three thousands.


        I then pushed my horse Into the crowd, due to the
excessive noise and atmosphere the horse began to spin
around.     My horse kicked out a number^ftimes this caused
some of the crowd to move away along towards the temporary
barrier and the river.


        I saw that the mass of the crowd which was pushing
from outside in the main road was in fact crushing,
children, men and women at the turnstiles.        I then managed
to move my horse into the crowd and along with other
mounted officers I placed him alongside the large blue
iron gates,    this action helped to close them and stop the
advancing crowd.
                                                     Form IMA
R.384
                            -   3   -


        Having split the crowd we were still left with the
situation of a still very large crowd to our rear.      This
crowd was still pushing up towards the'turnsti1e s .    This
group of people could not move either to their left or
right due to the construction of a steel barrier to the
left and a steel rail to their right.     I saw that a number
of people were being pulled out from the front of the
turnstiles,    they were being crushed.


        Due to the fact that the steel tube railing which ran
from the turnstiles out towards the main blue iron gates,
it was impossible to move people away to the right      of the
gates,    it was also impossible to move horses into this
crowd.


        I suddenly became aware that gate "C" on attached
map, was open and people were being moved down from the
rear of the turnstile crowd and moved into the exit gate.
Although a great number of people entered into the*ground
by this gate it was only as far as I could see people from
the turnstile crowd.     The big blue iron gates were kept,
closed despite the fact that the outside crowd were still
pushing to get past them.


        After the turnstile crowd had been cleared, I saw
that the outside crowd were allowed slowly into the
turnstiles, by this time gate "CH was closed.     The
remainder of this crowd entered the ground via the
turnstiles.


        I remained in the Leppings Lane area, engaged in
moving a number of Liverpool fans away from the ground
because the turnstile had been closed.     I had occasion to
speak to a number of youths all were from Liverpool and
none had tickets to enter the ground.
     I had on one occasion to speak to a male of about 30
years, he was being moved away from the Lepping_Lane gates
by South Yorkshire foot officers.       As he walked backwards
towards my horse he threw his arms into the air, this
caused my horse to spin around.     After getting control of
my horse I attempted to speak to this youth, however, as I
approached him he again threw his arms up.                     This caused my
horse to rear up and as he landed he caught this male on
his left leg, he fell to the ground and was pulled away by
another person.


     I then saw this male walking towards the bridge in
Lepping Lane where he punched a stone wall and continued
to shout and swear.


     I went to him, I asked if he was injured and did he
need any assistance, he said, "WHY DON'T YOU FUCK OFF YOU
BASTARD".   I considered that he had been drinking,
however, due to the present crowd situation,' on this
occasion aft arrest would be ill advised.                 I was unable to
obtain any information from this person.


     I was then instructed by Inspector Hand-Davies to
follow him into Penistone Road.     We stood too expecting tc
be used should there be a pitch invasion.                      Later we were
to hear of the disaster over personal radios.


     Having been witness to the crowds sometimes hostile
actions, in respects to there efforts to gain entry to the
turnstiles, I firmly believe that the opening of the exit
gate definitely saved life at the turnstiles.


     At no time during my tour of duty did any person
complain to me about any injury sustained by police
horses.


                                  • «   ....................

                                  Constable 4886 I.A.NAREY
                  vX




.^WtJLc. If&sCi
                        504 3 H I L L .117


R.342                              FILE                                                                             Form 104
                Oov                No.
                                                                                          DIV. ..OSD.MOUNTED
            &         Station ...Grae.nh.ill..Road........ ......                        21th. Apxil                            » ..JB9
        £
                      From     .qpJOfitAt.I f t . .5 P.4 ?.. £.-.?RY.   ..............   K r.B e f.N o ......................
   &
                      To..... Chief ^Super intendent O •S •D •



                        „ .. ,          MUTUAL AID - SOUTH YORKSHIRE - 1 5 . 4 . 8 9 .
                        Subject:-       ---------------------------------------------------------------------



                               I am Constable 5043 'M' Stephen Frank Fry of the
                        Merseyside Police currently serving with the Mounted
                        Department.


                               On Saturday,            15th April,             1989, I was deployed with l:
                        members of the Department to cover the F.A.Cup semi final
                        between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest football clubs at
                        Hillsborough Park, Sheffield.


                               About 1030 hours I attended a briefing with the othe:
                        members, who were present were members from Nottingham an
                        South Yorkshire Mounted Department.                                    The btiefin'g was
                        conducted by Inspector Hands-Davies of the South Yorkshir
                        Mounted Department.


                               I was detailed to work with Inspectors Hands-Davies
                        and Wilkinson and Constables 5855 RIMMER, 6878 LUNT and
                        7081 RADFORD.            Our brief was to cover the arrival of the
                        special train and escort of the passengers to the gates i
                        Leppings Lane, we were also briefed to oversee the
                        approaches to the ground via Halifax Road and Leppings
                        Lane.


                               The entire Mounted Deployment paraded at 1 1 3 0 hours
                        We rode out in troop onto Halifax Road then Penistone Rot
                        to the club car park where we split Into the detailed
                        sections for the                pre match duties.


                               The sectionI was detailed to                                continued through the
                        club car park to                the Leppings Lane entrance.                                     Inspector
                        Hands-Davies pointed                  out the exit gates that we would be
R.384                                                   Form IMA


                            -   2    -


supervising at the end of the game.        We continued onto
Leppings Lane and onto_Halifax Road to: the railway station
where we were further briefed as to the grouping and
movement of the train passengers to the ground.


        At 12.10 hours we split into half section (twos) to
patrol Halifax Road until the arrival of the special train
between 13.45 and 14.15 hours.


        With Constablie 7081 Radford I made my way along           )
Halifax Road away from the ground.        I saw that there was a
steady flow of coaches and pedestrians making their way to !
the ground.     However there were several groups moving away I
from the ground visiting the "GATEWAY" shopping centre and
off licences on Halifax Road.        There were queues outside
the off licences and I noted that more of the supporters
heading towards the ground were carrying cans and bottles
of beer.     They were in good humour.          •»     »

        I made along Halifax Road to the junction with Wilcox
Avenue.     There I spoke to a South Yorkshire foot Sergeant,
he told me that a pub nearby was full of supporters who
had been arriving from the direction of the ground on
public transport and taxis.         This location was about 2
miles from the ground.


        From Wilcox Avenue Constable Radford and I returned
along halifax Road towards the ground.        I saw that the pu
the 'White Horse' appeared to be shut however the tables,
chairs and walls around the pub car park were full
shoulder to shoulder with supporters drinking beer from
bottles and cans.     The off licence opposite still had a
queue outside as I observed on my way up Halifax Road.
Closer to the ground the grassed areas around the
'Gateway' shopping centre was being used like a ’picnic’
site with groups of supporters eating, and drinking
alcoholic beverages from cans and bottles.
R.384                                                  Form IMA


                            -    3   -


        At 13.45 I returned to the railway station to await
the arrival of the special train.        On arrival the mounted
section along with the foot officers grouped the
passengers together on 'bloc’ escorted the supporters to
the Leppings Lane entrances.


        After arrival at the ground Constable Radford and I
moved back along Leppings Lane to the chip shop, from
there we moved slowly along covering the football and
roadway encouraging supporters to move on towards the
ground.     Having swept large numbers of supporters to the
entrances in this manner.       I took position about 50 yards
away from the entrances towards Halifax Road encouraging
supporters to move off the roadway onto the footpath to
allow the passage of vehicular traffic.        Constable Radford
was about 25 yards beyond me engaged in similar duties.


        There was now a steady flow of supporters towards the
entrances.
        A short time after taking this position Constable
Radford and I were called by radio to return to the
turnstile entrances as the situation was becoming
difficult to manage.


        On arrival I saw large numbers of supporters inside
the wrought iron perimeter gates, there was some crushing
but I could see Constable 1300 Grunnill and 1696
Stanbridge in the area close to the turnstiles
endeavouring to control the supporters entrance to the
turnstiles.     The situation was being frustrated by more
supporters flooding into the area.        I positioned myself
across the left hand perimeter gateway of the terrace
turnstile entrance to stop the flow.       A large crowd
quickly gathered against the horse by those further out.
All were demanding entry to the turnstiles and some were
making determined efforts to pass me. I constantly
appealed for the supporters to WAIT and BACK OFF.          GIVE
THOSE INSIDE A CHANCE TO CLEAR THEN YOU MAY GO.
R.384                                                  Form I (HA
                               4


These appeals went largly unheeded and supporters
continued to push against the horse and indeed some tried
to beat him out of the way.


        A gap of 8 to 10 feet opened up between myself and
the back of the crowd close to the turnstiles.        I called
to them also to BACK OFF, repeated calls were unfruitful 1
and even though no pressure was directly on them those at
the back continued to push towards the turnstiles.


        Similar efforts were made by other mounted officers
at the other gateways some of the wrought iron gates were
shut a short time but continued pressure caused them to
reopen.


        Eventually the pressure from outside the perimeter
was too great, my horse was forced sideways by the
pressure into the turnstile area.       I was forced to turn
and ride out of the gates.     I again endeavoured to slow
down the flow of supporters. * With other mounted officers
I moved across the perimeter gates leading to the North
and West Stand turnstiles.     Similar conditions existed in
this area but was less severe than in the west stand
terracing entrance.     I continued to appeal to the
supporters to 'back o f f ’ but there was a clear
determination to enter the ground.


        A nose to tail cordon of horses was formed across th
entire Leppings Lane entrance area.        I was at one end
closest to the shop adjacent to the north stans entrance.
A crowd quickly built up on the road side of the cordon
and we were very soon under pressure from the supporters
trying to enter the ground.        Those closest to the horses
were forced against them by those behind.        I repeated
requests to BACK OFF, GIVE THOSE INSIDE A CHANCE, TAKE I!
EASY, WAIT.     These requests still had a negligable effec-
Supporters continued to make very determined efforts to
pass the horse.
R.384                                                  Form 104A


                            -   5   -


Passing under his neck and belly between his legs ever,
squeezing between his tail and the shop front.


        Some members of the crowd beat my own horse on his
muzzXe, face, neck and flanks, and seemed to be enjoying
the situation.


        A very slow relief of the pressures around the
turnstile was becoming apparent but was still critical,
the pressure outside the line continued to grow with
groups of supporters occasionally breaking through the
cordon of horses.     My requests to WAIT AND GIVE THEM A
CHANCE and so on were increasingly met by complaint ana
abuse.     Trying to reason the crowd had no apparent effec
they did not want to be reasoned with and continued to
make very determined efforts to pass the line of horses
despite the fact there was still no where to go.


        I continued to check the state of the crushing ir. t
area immediately around the turnstile where for a long
time little relief was apparent.        There was however a
sudden and rapid reduction of the crowd around the
turnstiles,    this was coincidental with a relief of
pressure outside the horse cordon.       A few supporters
remained in the area of the- turnstiles and very few ou:
Leppings Lane.     I fell into a line of other mounted
officers close to the fence between the river and club
park entrance.     At this time there were several radio
messages and I saw a large number of foot officers run
into the ground via exit gates, I was not aware of the
nature of the emergency.


        I was instructed to then move out onto Leppings L:
to clear those supporters who had not entered the grou
away, I moved slowly away over the river clearing
supporters in a 'sweeping' manoeuver for about 200 yar
I turned around and returned to the entrances in order
repeat the manoeuver.
  R.384                                                                                            Form 104A


                                                              6


  On my r e t u r n           I    saw a f o o t          c o r d o n had b e e n made.            Close      tc
  the     line       I    saw C o n s t a b l e        Narey r e m o n s t r a t in g w ith         a man        :
  front        of    the      foot       cordon.            Th e man t h r e w h i s        h a n d s up
  disturbing              the h o rse.              The h o r s e s     reared      slightly        catchir.
  t h e man on h i s               leg    kicking           hin    to    the ground.             A passerby
  assisted           t h e man t o h i s             feet,        he    limped over         to    the bridg
  parapet           and punc he d             the    stonework.             He made no c o m p l a i n t
  o r c o mme n t         t o me.         I    took a s t a t i c         position        outside       the
  foot     cordon.


           Inspector              Hands-Davies               and I n s p e c t o r W i l k i n s o n    took
  several           mounted o f f i c e r s            including myself                 around onto
  Penistone              Ro a d t o      stand       by     in    the event        of    disorder       on t h
. pi t c h .


           At       th e an nounce d abandonment o f                         t h e game I w e n t w i t h
  Inspector Wilkinson                         back     to    L e p p i n g s Lane       to oversee         the
  departure              of   Liverpool             Supporters.            When t h e b u l k o f
  supporters              had c l e a r e d         the     g r o u n d we c o m m e n c e d t o ' p a t r o i
  the area.               There were            radio        calls      of disorder          but    I did
  not     see       any.          I continued             to patrol        until        1 8 3 0 h o u r s when
  th e mounted c o n t i n g e n t                  were      s t o o d d o wn .




                                                                                   ZL
             5855HILL.114


ft.34                        FILE                                                                       Form 104
                             No.
                                                                                    DIV. ..Q5D.MOOWTED
        S tation .. .G.re.enh.i 1.1.. Ro a d...................                    2 Q .th.A P JC i.l         »..£9

        From.........£<?/)     A W £.. A&5 ?.. RJMttSR                             Div.Ref.No.
        t0           The S e r a e a n t        ’ M‘ D u t y




                                MUTUAL AID - SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
             Subject
                                F . A.    CUP SEMI FINAL -                  LIVERPOOL - V - NOTTINGHAM
                                FOREST




                     At      06.00       hours       on S a t u r d a y ,      15th A p r i l ,         1989.        I
             paraded         for     duty      at    the    stables         Greenhill            Road a s       a member
             of    a mutual          aid contingent                to a s s i s t     South        Yorkshire
             officers         at     the p o li c in g        of    the     F.A.      Cup s e m i - f i n a l
             football         match between L iv e r p o o l                   and N ot ti n g h a m F o r e s t .


                     At      10.00       h o u r s we a r r i v e d       at    the     Niagra          sports           ground
             where at          10.45      hours        a briefing           wa s     held     by I n s p e c t o r
             Hand-Davies.                My d u t i e s     were,        in company w i t h o t h e r
             officers,          to    escort        Liverpool            supporters           fl^om t h e * f o o t D £ ; ;
             special         train       to    the ground.


                     At      11.30       hours       Inspector           Hand-Davies             fam iliarised
             myself        and o t h e r       officers           with    the      geography of             the
             Hillsborough             Stadium.             We t h e n     left       the     area of        the          grounc
             a n d ma d e o u r wa y a l o n g H a l i f a x              Road w h e r e          the     train          wa s
             due    to     arrive.            I wa s    instructed             to patrol           the area of
             Halifax         Road     i n company w i t h C o n s t a b l e                6278 Lunt.                I    saw
             that    the vast            majority of              Liverpool          s u p p o r t e r s were
             consuming          intoxicants             from c a n s .          They were           sitting              on     the
             grass       verge       outside         the H alfords             store       and s u r r o u n d i n g
             area     in     H alifax         Road,     they were w e ll               b e h a v e d and        in good
             spir i t s .


                     At      14.00       hours       the    football           special        arrived           in
             H alifax        Road,       carrying          approximately               550       supporters.                  The
             fans    alighted            from th e         train      and w e r e        grouped          together              on
             the    pavement          in H a lif a x        Road.        I positioned              myself        at        the
             head of         the     escort         with    Inspector           W ilkinson.
R.384                                                                                                 Form 1(HA


                                                    -     2      -


         Mr.       Wilkinson          mo v e d o f f          and I        followed a fter             a
suitable           gap.        We p r o c e e d e d       down H a l i f a x           Ro a d t o w a r d s      the
Lepping        Lane       end o f        Hillsborough.


         At    14.15          hours      the     escort          of    Liverpool             supporters
from t h e         special         train       arrived           at    the Leppings                L a n e e n d or
the     ground          and     they were d i r e c t e d              towards           the    turnstiles.
I saw a v e r y           large        group of           people w aiting                   to e n te r     the
ground,        th e y were not                in q u e u e s ,        but       just    a    i a r g e mass        of
people.            Fans       outside         the       turnstiles              were clim b in g           the
walls     and       fences         into       the ground.


         In L e p p i n g s        Lane       large       groups           of    supporters           were
standing           on    the pavements                  consuming a lc o h o l,                they were           in
g o o d h u mo u r       snd w e l l        behaved.             C o n s t a b 1e Lunt          a nd m y s e l f
were d i r e c t e d          by I n s p e c t o r       Hand-Davies              to    ciear       these
croups        of    people         from t h e p a v e m e n t s             and d i r e c t e d       towards
the ground              turnstiles.             Mo s t        fans     responded             to our
requests,           while        others        needed          to     be    told       t^o,. o r    three
times.         F a n s who w e r e d r i n k i n g w e r e                  told       to    stop     and put
the     cans       do wn w h i c h       they d id.              Constable             Lunt     a n d I made
system atic             sweeps        along      each pavement                   in    turn moving            fans
towards        the       turnstiles.                Th e a r e a we c o v e r e d w a s b e t w e e n
the     turnstiles              in Leppings              Lane and           the       traffic       lights         at
Catchbarn           Lane.          All      Liverpool            supporters              approached           from
Catchbarn           Lane c o n t r a r y         to our b r i e f i n g .                However a s          we
cleared        an a r e a        of    fans      it      was     immediately                filled     by
arriving           supporters.                Liverpool              supporters             in Leppings
Lane w e r e w e l l           behaved,          I only          had c a u s e         to    speak w ith           one
supporter           regarding his                behaviour.


         At    14.30          hours      it    was b e c o m i n g a p p a r e n t             that     the
situation           outside           the     turnstiles              was b e c o m i n g
uncontrolable                  due     to     the       n u mb e r o f      supporters             attempting
to    enter        the    ground.             I mo v e d       towards           the     turnstile          area
and     took       up a p o s i t i o n        against           the       bridge        wall      in L ep p in cs
L a n e u s i n g my h o r s e           to    stem        the       flow of          people along            the
pavement.               I was      joined        immediately                b e h i n d by C o n s t a b l e
R.384                                                                                                  Form lok/C'i


                                                             3


Radford         .     I beckoned C onstab le                           Lu n t who wa s         further          up
Leppings            Lane       t o c o me down a n d a s s i s t .                    We p o s i t i o n e d     af
iine     of     ncrses          in a cordon                 across        the'front           of    t h e gate/-
leading         to    the       turnstile              area.


         Th e a r e a          immediately              in       front     of     the    turnstile           was
c r a mme d f u l i        of    people,           oniy          the heads         and s h o u l d e r s        of
the p eo p le         could         be    seen.             The n o i s e       i n L e p p i n g s L a n e was
very     loud        a n d I am u n a b l e             to r e c a l l        h e a r i n g any r a d i o
message         from       the      time      I    took part              in s e t t i n g     up t h e
cordon.


         Th e p e o p l e        we w e r e h o l d i n g              back       with       th e cordon
seemed        to have oniy               o n e a i m w h i c h wa s               to get       into       the
ground        at     any c o s t ,        th ey were              both abusive               and'threatenino
and w e r e a l l          pushing         forward.                In o r d e r       t o communicate
with     them I had               to     shout         at    the       top of      my v o i c e .         Fans
were     crawling              between        the h o r s e s           iegs      in order          t o by p a s s
the     cordon        and       join      t h e main c rowd                 i n fron%, , o f        the
turnstile.                It    was      impossible               to    reason with            the p eo p ie          i r.
the     crowd.            A La n d R o v e r wa s b r o u g h t                 up t o       the cordon
fitted        with        P u b lic Address                 equipment           an I n s p e c t o r
attempted            to    communicate w ith                      t h e crowd         to get        them t o
mo v e b a c k       from the            turnstiles,               his     pleas        fell       on d e a f
ears.         After        s o me      time       it    seemed          that      t h e c o r d o n wa s
taking        effect,           th e crowd began                   to     thin.         S u p p o r t e r s were
allowed         to    trickle            through            in    the c e n tr e        of    t h e c o r d o n and
I permitted               fans      to pass            one a t         a t i m e b e t w e e n my h o r s e
and     the     bridge w all.                 I    then heard               the    tanoy at           t h e ■ground
appealing            to Liverpoo                                              pushing         f o r w a r d and
those      at       the    back o f                                             mo v e b a c k a n d
relieve         the pressure               on      the' f r o n t .           I wa s      then      instructed
by I n s p e c t o r       Hand-Davies                 along with             Constables,             Grunniil.
Halpin        and Lunt            to c l o s e         the       turnstiles           on L e p p i n g s     Lane.
I   took      the     t wo o u t e r m o s t           turnstiles,              the     turnstiles           were
closed        a n d we s t o o d w i t h               the h o rses           hindquarters              to   the
turnstiles.                Shortly         after            we c l o s e d      the     turnstiles           people
started         to    emerge           from a g a t e             situated         around          the c o rn er .
R.384                                                                                          Form 104A

                                                -      4     -


Many o f          them, w e r e    beitig c a r r ie d       out,         it    wa s o b v i o u s   that
many of           them w e r e     seriousiy           injured           a n d s o me o f     t hem we r
dead.           As    t h e y were c a r r i e d       out       they were         iike     ' Ra c D e i ;
and a p p e a r e d         to h a v e    no f e e l i n g       in    their      limbs.


          We t h e n        went   out      into      Leppings           L a n e w h e r e we r e m a i n
u n t i f" we w e r e        instructed          to p a tr o l         the     ground p e r i m e t e r
until          we w e r e    stood       down a n d r e t u r n e d          to Niagra.


          At      18.30      hours       we w e r e    stood          down a n d r e t u r n e d     to
Niagra^/             At   23.10    hours       I c o m p l e t e d my t o u r o f           duty     at    t
s t.5 1 i s G r e e n h i i ; Roac; .
        ■!($




                                                                  #     ______________________

                                                                  Constable          5 8 5 5 RIMMER
                      62 7 8H I L L .117
v V/

 R342                                  FILE                                                                                   Form 104
            aOV                        No.
                                                                                                     DIV. .^»fep..MG»UM.TED
        &         S tation . ..Gcesnbi 1.1..Road.............                                       27. tb. .Apz; i .1......... 19 .. 8 9
                  From........ £QJ1        ftWe.. p.Z .7.§ . ..'       .XUWa ............           D ir. Ref.No.......................
                  j 0 ............ Chi e f . _I n s p e c t o r _M o u n t e d .............




                                            MUTUAL AI D -               SOUTH YORKSHIRE -                            15.4.89.
                      Subject



                                At     06.00        hours        on Saturday,                    15th April.                   1989.         I
                      p a r a d e d on d ut y            in the M o un t e d              Department,                    Greenhiii                Road.
                     My dut y was               to assist             the S outh               Y o r k s h ir e M o u n t e d
                      Department              in the p o l i c i n g of                  the F . A.           Cup        semi             finai
                      b et we en       L iverpool             and N o t t i n g h a m Forest                     at H il ls bo r ou g h
                      Football            ground,          Sheffield.


                                At     approximately                  07.30         hours         we     left          the       stables           for
                     Niagra,           the M o u n t e d D e p ar t me n t                for S outh Yorkshire.


                                At     10.0G hours               arrival            at    Niagra,             at       10.45 hours
                     attended             briefing            by I n p s e c t o r        Hand-Davies*,,                      We w ere            firs:
                     briefed on phase                      one.         In c h a r g e of my unit w e r e
                      Inspectors              Hands-Davies                and W i l k i n s o n             the       other           officers
                     were C o n s t a b le s             5043      FRY,        5 8 5 5 RIMMER,                and        7 0 8 1 RADFORD.
                     It     was      our duty            to    escort          the Liverpool                     fans          from th e
                     train         station          in H a l i f a x         Road,        to      Leppings               Lane.


                                At     11.30        h o u r s we        left        Niagra          and was              s h o wn -the
                      layout         of    Hillsborough                 football            ground. ■ A f t e r                      that
                     together             with      Constable             5 8 5 5 Ri mme r we p a t r o l l e d                            the area
                     of     the      football           ground p a y in g p a r t i c u l a r                       attention                tb
                     Halifax           Road


                                I c o u l d -see           large        n u mb e r o f          Liverpool                fans walking
                     around          drinking            from c a n s          of    alcohol.                  I also            saw l a r g e
                     n u mb e r o f        fans       purchase            tins       of        alcohol           from t h e Gateway
                     super market                 in H a l if a x         Road.           Th er e was               also         a        large
                     n u mb e r o f         fans      sitting           on     the       grass         embankment.outside
                     Halfords             w h i c h was        next       to    Gateway,               consuming                  the alcohol
                     t h e y had          just      bought.
R.384                                                                                              Form 104A


                                                  -      2     -


T here were          no d i s t u r b a n c e s         and    the     fans wer e weii              b e ha v e a
it wai        sir.'iiar to a carnival                        atmosphere.


         At    1400 hours             the      foctbail            special       train arrived,
c ar r y in g a p p r o x i m a t e l y        500      fans.        T he y w er e d ir ec te d           fro;,
the     train     s t at io n o nt o           the p a v em e nt         in H a li fa x Road.                 As
the esco rt s m o ve d off                  I took           the p os it i on       to the rear of
the escort.              A g ai n     these       s up po r te r s w e r e weii              b e ha ve d and
no d i s t u r b a n c e s     on r ou te         to the gr ou nd             entrance,            at
L e pp in gs    Lane.


         At    approximately                14.15 hours we a r r i v e d at Leppings
Lane,     the s up po r te r s            from the            f o o t b a l 1*s p e c ia l    m oved
towards        the turnstiles.                    At     this       time     I could         see a       iarce
mass     ot peop le t ry in g               tc get           tnroucn       tne    inriibu :es .               2
c ou l d also        see s u pp o r t e r s          ci imbir.g up           the wall         into the
ground.         I n s pe c to r       Hands-Davies                 i ns tr u ct e d myself          and
C o n s t a b l e F.immer         to clear            tne area of L iverpool                    fans who
were h a n g i n g       a r o u nd    i n groups on                the p£vem<yn,t and,in                 the
road.         Were      ever      I looked            I c o ul d see p e o p l e d ri nk in g
alcohol        from t i n         cans.


         Myself         and C o n s t a b l e        Ri mme r s t a r t e d       to     clear      the
pavement        and r oa d o f            supporters             asking       them t o        go    into
the     ground.          Mo s t     did     mo v e      towards        the    turnstiles,               but
quite     a    lot      ignored        our      requests            and n e e d e d      to b e* to ld
several        times       t o mo v e o n .             Those       that     were      d r in k in g were
requested         to put          do wn     their        drinks        and go       towards         the
turnstiles.              We c o n t i n u e d         this     exercise          clearing          t h e area
between        the      entrance          of    Leppings            Lane,     and      the    junction
with     Catchbarn           Lane,        I noticed            that     almost         all    the
supporters           were coming               from t h e          direction        of    Catchbarn
Lane,     when       I wa s       informed            that     t h e y would be coming                   from
Halifax R oad.


         At    s o me    time       t h e r e wa s       a small         d i s t u r b a n c e whe n
Nottingham F o rest                 fans       c a me    into       Leppings        Lane,       from
Catchbarn         Lane.
R. 384                                                                                            Form IMA


                                                 "       3    -


          These youths             w e r e d i s p e r s e d and           left      the area.


          At    approximately              14.35 hours              it was          b e c o m i n g appare:.-
that      the s i t u a t i o n at         the       t urnstiles was                becoming
uncontrollable.                   I moved        towards           the     t ur ns ti le s      to heip
the other m o u n t e d            off ic er s.            By this        time       the cr owd had
spilred out            into L e p p m g s           Lane.          It was        just     a sea of
people         squashed          together,           it took        some       time     to get my
horse      through          the    crowd        to the other m o u n t e d                officers,
with      the other m o u n t e d o ff ic e rs we                    formed a co rd on                of    7
horses across               tne    entrance,             which      ieaas       towards         the
turnstiies.            The       idea    b e i ng       to stop any m o r e r e a c h i n g                the
turnstiles            due    to    the     solid mass of                 s up po r te r s     a l re ad y
trying         to get       into       the ground.             In L ep pi ng s          L ane     there was
a police         i?.ndrover            firhed wit h public                  a d dr es s     system.             I
could      see an I n s p e c t o r           s t a n d i n g on     the bonnet             asking         the
crowd      ^o stand b a c k             and    stop pushing.                   Nobody       seemed         to
take any notice                  and    soon w ith ail              the noise           the     I nspector
coil 1d not          be heard.           I was als o ask in g                  the-'orowd
                                                                                   •» (•          t»o
                                                                                                   * wa i:
until      the o ther            fans    h a d got         into     the g r o u n d .         Some
listened         others          kept    on p u s h i n g a g a i n s t         the horse,               they
seemed         Intent       in    getting        into        the ground a t             any c o s t .       They
started         to    force       there       wa y p a s t     the h orses            some c r a w l i n g
under      the h o r s e s        others       forcing         gaps       between         each horse.
They      simply            ignored everything I said.


          It   wa s     at       t h i s time       I    saw t h e b l u e      gates       for     gate'A :
the North Stand open,                     I could            not    tell       if    t h e y had been
f o r c e d open or          opened       from          inside.      This       gate      rem a in e d open
for      approximately             five       minutes,         I    then       saw t h e      gate       being
closed.          I could          now s e e      that        th e crowd a t           the     turnstiles
w a s now t h i n n i n g         out,    the       c r o w d on     the o th er          side      of     the
cordon were             a llow ed to           t r i c k l e past        the    horses        and     towards
the      turnstiies.              At     no    time did            I see       any o t h e r      blue      gate
open .
R. 384                                                                                  Form lOiA


                                              -    4     -


         I could now hear               the P.A.         system from        inside          the
football        ground a s k i n g         tne Liverpool           supp or te rs      to stop
pushing        forward and r e l i e v e            the pressure         from    the        frcr.t .


         I was       then    i n s tr u ct e d by Inspector H a n d s - D a v i e s               to
ciose     the turnstiles,               and       to remain outside            them     in
c o mp a ny with C onstables,                 1300.      3844 and 5355.            Whilst
there     I then h ea rd           the P . A . s y s t e m asking        the Liverpool
supporters           to    leave     the    footbali          pitch-     This m e s s a g e was
r ep ea te d    several          times.       At    this      stage    I saw o th er mounte:
o ff ic er s    and       foot   men b e i n g      sent      round to the N o t t i n g h a m
Forest        end so they c o u id get                 into    the ground.


         After       some    time     I s t ar t ed      to see Liverpool             s u p p o r t e r ■-
cone out        of    the g ro un d        cr yi ng ana screaming.              -I then           saw
suppo rt er s being c a r r i e d out                  some conscious          others
unconscious.              The e m e r g e n c y vehicles were now a r r i v i n g at
the ground,           we m o v e d    our horses out of                the way     and
p o si t i o n e d o ur s el v es     in L ep pi n gs Dane.               'V            t


         After seeing             I n s p e c t o r H an ds -D a vi e s we wer e
instructed           to patrol        the a rea around             the ground.


         At    18.30 h ours          I returned          to Niagra,       to box        the
h o rs e s up and a t t e nd a de-briefing.




                                                             Constable 6278 LUNT.
    708 1HILL. 117


                    FILE                                                                       Form 104
                    No.
                                                                            DIV. .-OSI>.MQU&rED
Station ...Moan£,ed.Depar.t men t....                                      Z7.th..Apa:i.l             19   ..£9
From....... P.9.H 9A A W. %. 7. QAk        . RW3F.QRP.                     D ir.R ef.N o.
j 0 ...........C h i e t S u j d e r \ n t e n d e n t




                        M U T UAL A I D - S OU TH Y ORKSHIRE P OL I CE
    Subject
                                   SATURDAY.              15th APRIL,           1989.




              On Saturday,                15th April,             19S 9,     I was on dut y gi vi ng
    mutual        aid      to the South Yo rk sh ir e Police at                               the F.A.       Cup
    semi-final             b ei ng p l a y e d betw ee n Liverpool                          F.C.   and
    N o tt in g ha m Forest              F.C.       at Hi 1 isborough               football         club,
    Shef f ie l d .


              After r e f r e s h m e n t s              and a briefing by Inspector                        Hana-
    Davies.           We w er e e v e n t u a l i y deployed at                       11.30 hours.


              I was d e t ai l ed             in c o mp an y with            I n sp ec to r Wilkinson.
    Inspector H an d -d a vi e s                  and other m ou n te d o ff ic e rs                  c.f the
    M e r s ey s id e Police.                We w ere d ep loyed               to escort           the special
    football           train,        w hi ch was due             to a rr iv e at             1400 hours.


              A fter a brief                f am il i ar i sa t io n of the                 football       ground.
    Inspector H a n d - Da v ie s                 led our party              towards          the r a il wa y
    station.            Whi l st       awaiting             the train,         Constable           5043 Fry
    and I made a patrol                          of the Halifax R oa d area.


              A    large nu mb er                of e ar ly arrivals on H a li f ax R o a d                       were
    Liverpool            supporters.                M a n y of     these w e r e a l r e a d y d r i nk i ng
    alcohol          from tins cans,                     an d were c a r r y i n g u n o p e n e d cans             of
    beer.         As C o n s t a b l e Fry and I passed a g a t e w a y supermarket
    on Halifax Road,                    I c ou ld         see people          leaving         the shop
    c ar r y in g tin cans of beer.


              A public h ou se                   on Hali fa x Road near                     to the
    supermarket              was     c l os e d          h ow e ve r on the for ec ou rt and car
    park were m an y p e o p le d r i n k i n g                    from tin cans of beer.
 R. 384                                                    Form 104A
                                    -     2   -




          Approximately       1355 hours that afternoon the special
football         train arrived.     After they alighted,        I assisted
to escort         the Liverpool    supporters to .the football           ground
via Leppings Lane.             Without    incident.


          I was then    instructed to patrol          the Leppings Lane end
of th-8 ground by Inspector Hand-Davies,                 as there seemed tc
be more supporters arriving behind the supporters escortec
off the train.


          Constable 5043 and I began encouraging people to go
into the ground         to prevent       congestion of the roadway ana
footpath.


          I positioned myself approximately 30 yards away from
the turnstiles along Lfeppings Lane in an attempt                      to funne.
supporters        towards     the ground along the footpath,           and
keeping them out of the roadway.                  Leppings Lane was still
quite busy of         local   buses,     and general    traffic.


          My attention was       then drawn to the turnstiles at
Leppings Lane.         Constable Fry and I went           to assist other
mounted officers.             I could see that there was a large
number of supporters            in the compound between        the
turnstiles and the perimeter gates.                   Supporters at      the
rear were pushing,            in order to force there way closer               to
the turnstiles.


          I moved into the crowd rear to the perime ter gates                       in
an attempt        to relieve pressure at the front.             I was
continually calling to people to stop pu shing which was
obviously ignored.            The pressure of the crowd was so
intense that on several occasions my horse was pushed of
b a 1a n c e .


          I then saw the perimeter gates being closed,                 with
assistance from Constable               1300 Grunnill.     I then saw a
foot officer placed on the gates.
R. 384                                                          Form 104A
                                    3
         I continued to ask supporters to stop pushing,             but
pressure was still        being exerted,     this time on the
perimeter gates.       Many supporters were shouting for the
gates to be opened.         Some were being aggressive.


         I then noticed     the perimeter gates were opened,           and
the crowd ran to the back of the supporters              inside the
compojjnd and      immediately forced more pressure on the
turns! i 1es .


         Eventually a cordon was formed beyond the perimeter
cates by the poiic e horses,        in a nose to tail        formation,
across the entrances using a controlled entry                into the
compound.     At   this point   supporters w<=j.e     w*.^
between,     and underneath     the horses    in an attempt     to gain
access to the compound.


         Eventually the pressure eased, and most people had
entered the ground.         Before the kick-off      I noticed the
turnstiles had been closed.          Together with other mounter,
officers I began      to didperse supporters        frdfru'-aroumi the
turnstiles,      and the compound.


         I       was then   instructed to take a position on the
opposite side of the ground near to the main exit gate on
Penistone Road.       I remained there until        the match was
abandoned and then patrolled the Halifax Road area                in
company with C ons tab le 3920 Evans,         until being stood down
at approximately      1820 hours.




                                             onstable?
                                             onstabl   708 1 RADFORD
         1998HILL.114


*                         FILE                                                                                  Fora 104
                          No.
                                                                                       DI,y-,--QSH.:hQW J E D
    Station . . . G i e j e n b i l . l . .R oajd..............................       ...................                1 9 ..

    From .......... C.QJ1 g .t & 1 ? .U .. A 9.9 & . X ?.W te£ l?M F .Y .                                   ..........
    To             C h i e f _I n s p e c t o r           H9un ted_^




         Subject*-             MUTUAL AID. FA CUP SEMI FINAL
             —                 HILLSBOROUGH. SHEFFIELD



                   On Saturday,                    15th April,                    1989, I paraded at the
         Mounted Department at 0600 hours.                                            My duty was to drive
         Horse Box                                   to Sheffield.                   On arrival, at
         approximately 1030 hrs, at the South Yorkshire Mounted
         Department Headquarters, I attended and fed the horses
         whilst other officers attended a briefing.


                   At approximately 1230 hours I went out on patrol in a
         Dog Section van with Inspector Phoenix of that section and
         2 other Constables.                              We patrolled an area of about one
         square -wid-e immediately surrounding the football ground,
         Hillsborough.                     I noticed that many supporters were
         drinking from beer cans and carrying beer packs as they
         made their way towards the football ground.                                                            On one
         occasion we stopped a group of* Liverpool supporters who
         were walking along the footwalk carrying pints of beer.
         They were cautioned and advised to return the glasses to a
         nearby public house.                               They were observed to do this.
         Whilst on patrol we visited two public houses and the car
         parks of these premises were full of supporters drinking
         and sitting on perimeter walls.


                   At 1400 hours we went the railway station in Halifax
         Road to assist in escorting a group of approximately 500
         Liverpool supporters                               who arrived by special train.                                         This
         went off without Incident, the supporters being quiet and
         well behaved.


                   At approximately 1430 hours I heard a radio message
         saying there was crushing at the Leppings Lane turnstiles.
R.384                                                     Form 104A


                            -   2     -


        We went to this location and I went on foot to the
turnstiles at this location, where I could see the horses
amongst a large crowd.  A line of horses was placed along
the front of the gates at this point and I assisted in
preventing non ticket holders gaining access to the
turnstiles.     Many people were walking around and at one
point' I saw a man, who was very drunk, fall under the
horse No 23 "NORMANDY" ridden by Constable 4886 Narey.


        I heard on my personal radio that there was serious
crowd problems at the Liverpool end of the ground.           At
this time ambulances and fire tenders had started to
arrive along Leppings Lane.         I then returned,   in the Dog
Section van to the horse boxes at the South Yorkshire
Mounted Department.


        As a result of what I heard on the radio I returned
to the football ground, on foot, with Constable 2089 Deus,
who was the other driver with the Merseyside,.Mounted
Department.    We went to the Kop end of the ground where we
knew the main group of police horses were deployed.            I
remained at this point until after the match was abandoned
and most of the crowds had cleared the area of the
football ground.     I then returned to the horse boxes on
foot.


        I later drove the horse box back to Liverpool
arriving back at 2230 hours.




                                      Constable 1998 TEWKESBURY
