                            fO L /)7 /ll/s r


01H ER DOCUMENT FORM                           Date and time raised   iq a <3( Cfica                       Num ber


Ti,*                        kr)\fa^AK.\hnroA t                    Hale                                           X f a c jj
(Include source and any documen number if relevant)

Receiver's instructions - urgent action —Yes/No                                                                              Receiver


                                                                                                                              Indaxar
Document            ^d/indexed as indicated

No(s) of ai       raised
                                                                                                                          Statement Reeder
Statement reader's instructions




Nn(sl   of/actions raised                                                                   ---------------------------
------—                                                                                                                              SIO
Examined- further action to be taken

                                                                                                                          <k
                                                                                        1      i   U v.. ;>ii*             isai
Further action No(s)                                                                               _

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                 Vincent Hale & Co.
                                       Solicitors

Telephone: (0742)                      Nash House             Vincent Hale Solicitor
Office 325842                        140 Upperthorpe          Consultant:
Home 345214                              Sheffield            Gerard Vincent Hale B.A. (Hons.)
Fax    325644                            S6 3NF



      Our ref:        VH/DB                            13 March 1990
      Your ref:       JMJ/VSC


      Dear Sir,

      Hillsborough Disaster - Superintendent Roger Marshall

      Thank you for your letter of 2nd March and for keeping us
      informed of progress which is indeed helpful.

      We shall be pleased to hear from you again in due course with a
      proposal for a date and time for a preliminary discussion.

      Yours faithfully,
      VINCENT HALE




      J. Mervyn Jones MSc
      Assistant Chief Constable
      Hillsborough Inquiry Team
      P.O. Box 52,
      Lloyd House,
      Colmore Circus Queensway,
      BIRMINGHAM B4 6NQ




             4- ^ 0     I 0-lO   v             HcJU-
J MERVYN J O N E S M S c                                           FURNIVAL HOUSE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                          Furnival Gate
 HILLSBOROUGH IN Q U IR Y T E A M                                  Sheffield S1 4QN
                                                                   Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 3 1 5 4 6
                                                                   Fax:        0742 731483
W EST M IDLANDS POLICE HQ
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                              M e d ic o Legal C entre
                                                          JSS2D
Colmore Circus Queensway                                           Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 6 1 0 5
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                                  Fax:       0742 726247
Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5
                                                                    Your Ref:     V H /D B
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA                                                   Our Ref:       DH
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2
                                                                    Date:          1 5 M ay 1 9 9 0


       Mr V Hale
       Vincent Hale & Co
       Solicitors
       Nash House
       140 Upperthorpe
       Sheffield
       S6 3NF


       Dear Sirs

       HILLSBOROUGH - SUPPLY OF PHOTOGRAPHS & VIDEOS


       Enclosed herewith are three videos requested by your Company.

       The cost of the videos inclusive of VAT are as follows

                                                                  Quantity Supplied

                 1 x 4   hour video tape          £3.85           1 tape            £3.85
                 1 x 3   hour video tape          £2.27           1 tape            £2.27
                 l x l   hour video tape          £1.94           1 tape            £1.94


                                                                  Total           £8.06



       The cheque should be made payable to West Midlands Police, Hillsborough Inquiry
       and forwarded to Nechells Green Police Station.

       Yours faithfully




             \
       M J Foster
        Ttet Chief Superintendent




                                                   Nechells Green Police Station
    PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
J MERVYN JO N E S M S c                                FURNIVAL HOUSE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                              Furnival Gate
                                                       Sheffield S1 4QN
 HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY TEAM
                                                       Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 7 5 9 9

WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                SM ITHDOW N LANE POLICE STATION
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                 Liverpool L7 3PR
Colmore Circus Queensway                               Telephone: 0 5 1 -7 0 9 7 1 7 5
Birmingham B4 6NQ
Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5        Your Ref:

NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
                                                       Our Ref:
Fowler Street                                                           MJF/SA
Birmingham B7 5DA
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2                        Date:
                                                                        7 June 1990




    Vincent Hale & Co
    Solicitors
    Nash House
    140 Upperthorpe
    Sheffield
    S63NF




    Dear Mr Hale

    HILLSBOROUGH - SUPERINTENDENT ROGER MARSHALL

    I reply to your letter of 6th June and our telephone conversation this
    morning.

    The issues you raise are complex but we will reply to you as soon as
    possible on the points raised.

     If I can be of further assistance I can be contacted direct on


    Yours sincerely




    M J FOSTER
    DETECTIVE CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT




     PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
                     Director o f Public Prosecutions                        D epu ty Director a n d Chief Executive
                                    Allan Green Q.C.                         D. S. Gandy CB QBE




                                             Director o f Headquarters Casework
                                                        C. W. P. Newell



                                                                                   Crown Prosecution Service
        Messrs Vincent Hale & Co
        Nash House                                                                 Headquarters
        140 Upperthorpe
        S h effield                                                                4/12 Queen Annes Gate
                                                                                   London
        S6 3NF
                                                                                   SW1H 9AZ
                                                                                   Telephone 071-222-7944
                                                                                             Ext.




Your Ref:                                   Our Ref:                                           Date:

                                                  PGK.3341.89                                     8 June 1990




        Dear Sirs

        HILLSBOROUGH
        SUPERINTENDENT MARSHALL

        Your two le tte r s dated the 6th June 1990 and addressed to Chief
        Superintendent F oster o f the West Midlands Police have been passed to me
        for con sid eration and reply.

        You should understand th at the criminal in v e stig a tio n in th is case is
        being conducted at the req u est of the D irector o f Public P rosecutions.

        The in v estig a tio n , which is almost com plete, must run it s fu ll course. The
        D irector can then reach a d ecision based on a ll th e availab le inform ation,
        as to whether criminal proceedings should be commenced against any of
        th o se persons, not only p olice o ffic e r s, who were in vo lv ed or resp on sib le
        for the in cid en ts which took place.

        The q uestion o f d iscip lin ary action must await any d ecisio n on criminal
        proceedings.     In any event, d iscip lin a ry proceedings w ill be m atters for
        d ecision by the Police Complaints A uthority and the South Yorkshire
        Police. D isciplinary action is not a m atter fo r th e Director o f Public
        P rosecutions.




F ax 071 -222-4751                                 Telex 94 5 3 1 0 CPS HQ                                        Britdoc D X 2 3 2 8 Victoria
                                        - 2 -



You have asked to be supplied with th e names and ad d resses o f the
so lic ito r s rep resen tin g the three com plainants. I have asked Chief
Superintendent F oster to pass on cop ies o f your le t te r s to each o f the
so lic ito r s in v itin g them to contact you should th ey wish to do so. I
should say th at the withdrawal o f th e com plaints w ill not bring the
current in v estig a tio n to a halt.

I tru st th at th is le tte r has served to exp lain the p o sitio n in th is case
and to clarify m atters for you.

Yours fa ith fu lly


      I_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ A



M G Kennedy
P olice Complaints D ivision
                                   Vincent Hale & Co.
                                         Solicitors

Telephone: (0742)                        Nash House                Vincent Hale Solicitor
Office 325842                          140 Upperthorpe             Consultant:
Home 345214                                Sheffield               Gerard Vincent Hale B.A. (Hons.)
Fax    325644                              S6 3NF



           Our ref: VH/DB                             12th June, 1990
           Your reft PGK.3341.89


           Dear Sir,

           Hillsborough - Superintendent R. Marshall

           Thank you for your letter of 8th June which does indeed serve to
           explain the position and clarify matters.

           No doubt the fault was mine. Although I was obviously aware
           that criminal proceedings were under consideration, I had
           mistakenly thought that we were initially dealing with the
           Police Complaints Authority and an internal disciplinary hearing
           - not with the Crown Prosecution Service and criminal
           proceedings.

           I hope you will appreciate and accept that I had no intention of
           writing to you on the lines of the letters to which you are
           replying. They were directed to and couched in a form which I
           hope is appropriate to the lay-complainants in the disciplinary
           proceedings.  I am sure you are already taking .into account most
           of the factors I mentioned and that my observations to you in due
           course may therefore be much shorter.

           Could I please correct any suggestion that I asked for the names
           and addresses of the complainants' solicitors. A careful
           perusal of my letters will show that I did not so presume.  I
           asked for my observations to be passed to them, which is of course
           the only proper course and one which I am gratified to see that
           you have adopted.

          I would like to persevere in my attempt to persuade the
          lay-complainants to look at this matter from a factual rather
          than an emotional point of view.  I will then continue to deal
          direct with Chief Superintendent Foster as regards the criminal
          investigation which I believe would benefit from being considered
          separately from the complaints procedure.


          Yours f a k t
          VINCENr-^

          M.G. Kennedy Esq.,
          Crown Prosecution Service,
          4/12 Queen Annes Gate,
          LONDON
          SWIH 9AZ            X
                                                                        J le J jjL * )   c
Coi?J o/s f                        yincent Hale & Co.
                                         Solicitors

Telephone: (0742)                        Nash House                Vincent Hale Solicitor
Office 325842                          140 Upperthorpe             Consultant:
Home 345214                                Sheffield               Gerard Vincent Hale B.A. (Hons.)
Fax    325644                               S6 3NF



           Our ref: VH/DB                             13th June, 1990
           Your ref: PGK.3341.89

           Dear Sir,
           Hillsborough - Superintendent R. Marshall
           Since I wrote to you yesterday, events have moved very quickly.
           I can appreciate that the enquiry team wishes to make speedy
           progress and Superintendent Marshall has therefore agreed to try
           to complete his interview on Tuesday next the 19th inst.
           At the same time, I understand that the Chief Constable does not
           wish to send my letters to the complainants' solicitors but would
           prefer to let me have their names and addresses so that I can
           contact them direct.
           Obviously, it will not be possible to obtain their considered
           response before the 19th and it will therefore be necessary to
           reverse the order in which I had hoped to proceed and deal with
           the criminal investigation first, followed by the complaints
           procedure. It is also obvious that, as the interim report of Mr
           Justice Taylor has already placed blame on the police and
           stigmatized senior officers as evasive and defensive, any finding
           that there is insufficient evidence for criminal charges would
           be bound to provoke a hostile reaction from the complainants and
           would have to be justified.
           I therefore believe that the pressure on the Director of Public
           Prosecutions to follow the interim report will be very great. I
           do not doubt that his office requires him to be able to
           withstand that pressure and make an objective decision but the
           circumstances are unusual. There has already been a "trial* -
           albeit a trial at which Superintendent Marshall was not cautioned
           or separately represented - which has in the eyes of the
           complainants found the police guilty and the fans completely
           innocent of any part in the deaths. Although rare, there have
           been enough cases of injustice apparently being done in the name
           of the law to make me very cautious indeed of taking anything for
           granted.
          I am prepared to advise Superintendent Marshall to answer
          questions and assist the present enquiry on the 19th inst provided
          I can be assured that the evidence to which I refer in paragraph 7
          of my main letter of 6th June is before the Director and that he
          will be taking it into account when reaching his decision.
          However, a simple assurance would not be sufficient, as there is
          so much room for misunderstanding and error. For example, it
          could be said afterwards that of the three thousand or so
          statements, most related to acts on the ground after the tragedy
          occurred and are relevant only to the rescue services and
          facilities at the ground.
Would it be possible to say that there is a substantial body of
evidence on file from householders, shopkeepers and licensees in
the vicinity of the ground relating to the behaviour of fans in
the hour or two before the match right up to 3.0 pm and to
acknowledge that most of that evidence was not made public at
the Taylor Enquiry. I assume that the Director had no
responsibility for selecting the evidence placed before the
Enquiry and will be able to say that the purposes of that enquiry
were different from the present enquiry and that the evidence may
well have been selected with different criteria in mind.
The only alternative, if the enquiry is to proceed on the 19th
inst, is for Superintendent Marshall himself, as a prelude to
answering any questions, to refer to that large body of evidence
as a factor which has not been taken into account previously and
to make it clear that whatever actions he took on the day were
taken in the face of a hostile crowd substantially affected by
drink and not in respect of a well-behaved and orderly crowd as
implied in the interim report. Unless this aspect is made clear,
any rejection of the solutions implied by the complaints cannot
properly be understood. I simply cannot advise Superintendent
Marshall to answer questions on the assumption that he was dealing
with a crowd whose condition and behaviour were as described or
implied in the interim report.
It then remains to be seen whether any dialogue with the
complainants' solicitors will be fruitful. Unless agreement can
be reached, there is bound to be a furore whichever way the
Director decides. If he decides that a prosecution is unlikely
to succeed before a jury, there is little doubt that the
complainants will arouse the media once again with their partisan
view.
If the Director in effect supports the interim report, I regret
that we shall be unable to let the matter rest. There is so much
feeling locally that the police had a raw deal that I anticipate
substantial public interest which will support the police and will
not be in the complainants' interests.
I myself would much prefer to try to reach an accord in advance
with the complainants which would avoid the worst excesses of
mutual recrimination. If that is not to be, we shall have to take
events as they arise.
Yours
VINCEN

M.G. Kennedy E s q . ,
Crown Prosecution Service,
4/12 Queen Annes Gate,
LONDON
SWIH 9AZ




                              Page - 2
                                   Vincent Hale & Co.
                                        Solicitors

Telephone: (0742)                       Nash House              Vincent Hale Solicitor
Office 325842                         140 Upperthorpe           Consultant:
Home 345214                               Sheffield             Gerard Vincent Hale B.A.   (Hons.)
Fax    325644                              S6 3NF
     Our ref: VH/DB                           7th August 1990
     Your ref: MH/J0NES/Y89V261

     Dear Sirs,
     Hillsborough Disaster
     We thank you for your letter of 27th July and are obliged to your
     client, alone of the complainants so far, for instructing you to
     spend some time and effort on the matter and to be objective in
     some areas. However, it was not possible to delay the inquiry
     and we have made virtually all our submissions.
     It would not be appropriate for us to continue corresponding
     with you as it is clear that your client's knowledge of the
     circumstances is minimal compared with that of the investigating
     force which has now spent considerably more than the original 31
     days amassing further evidence and re-considering all the
     original evidence.
     It is beyond dispute that serious misjudgements do occur,
     frequently, even at the highest judicial level - although in this
     case our view is that the errors were largely corrected in the
     final report. It is not necessary for us to adopt a contentious
     attitude, as you suggest, towards counsel and others. They did
     their best in unusual circumstances and we do not allege
     conspiracy or malice.
      We are sorry to see that despite the greatest possible care on our
      part, we have still somehow managed to give offence to your
      client.   Our client has asked us to assure Mr Jones that,
                           he appreciates the loss which has been
      suffered and he does not wish to do anything to increase that
      sense of loss but he must defend himself and cannot accept your
      opinion as to where the major responsibility lies.

                     /

      Yours fait hf ur 1^ - ^
      VINCENT HALE ,
      Brian Thompson $ Partners,
      Solicitors,
      Richmond House,
      Rumford Place,
      LIVERPOOL L3 9SW
                                 Vincent Hale & Co.
                                           Solicitors

Telephone: (0742)                      Nash House                   Vincent Hale Solicitor
Office 325842                        140 Upperthorpe                Consultant:
Home 345214                             Sheffield                   Gerard Vincent Hale B.A.   (Hons.)
Fax    325644                           S6 3NF

     Our ref: VH/DB                                     7th August 1990
     Your ref: MJF/VSC
     Dear Sir,
     Hillsborough Disaster - Superintendent Roger Marshall
     We enclose, for the sake of completeness of your file, a copy of
     a letter received from the solicitors for Mr. Jones and a copy of
     our reply.
     We must just point out that their letter is based virtually
     entirely on the interim report and they have therefore missed the
     point of our original letter.
     If we were going to be contentious, we would be scathing of their
     suggestion that all that was required was for a policeman to go to
     the crowd and ask them to 'hang back'. Even now, words almost
     fail us at the naivety of the suggestion. Returning to our
     'motorway' analogy, dealing with perfectly sober people, there is
     abundant evidence that warnings, including flashing lights and
     plenty of previous experience are almost always ignored and that
     Multiple deaths frequently occur.
     We are sure we need hardly remind you of the evidence of the steps
     that were taken, and were ignored, on the day in question.
                 /
     Yours faitfii
     VINCENT HAtl



     Detective Chief Superintendent M.J.     Foster,
     West Midlands Police,
     Hillsborough Enquiry Team,
     Nechells Green Police Station,
     Fowler Street,
     BIRMINGHAM
     B7 5DA
