OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and time raised                            ’dumber
                                                                                                          l ^ a R ’S'

Title
(Include source and any document1number
                                 number i f relevant)


                                     o n -^ ^ N o
Receiver's instructions — urgent action             \Ls2JL\
                                                                                                              Receiver


                                                                                                            U * u f\
                                                                                                                Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated                *'> ,

No(s) of actions raised                                                                                         Z 5V
                                                                                                               menjrneai
                                                                                                          StatemenyReader
Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                             4-% >s
Examined - further action to be taken                                                                     O/M           SIO



Further action No(s)                                                                                            Indexer

                                                                                                                la EL-?. I s a
When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                                                                      X
To: Mr Colin Moynihan
    Minister for Sport


Copies to: Secretary,   The Football Association
           Secretary,   Liverpool Football Club
           Secretary,   Nottingham Forest Football Club
           Secretary,   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
            Irvine Patnick, OBE,MP.        House of Commons




Dear Mr Moynihan,

I attended and witnessed the awful and tragic scenes at Hillsborough yesterday.
I hope what I have to say may be of some value to you in your capacity as
Sports Minister. I would like to divide this letter into three short sections;
f ir s t, a description of what I witnessed; secondly,questions which should
be raised and lastly, my suggestions as a life-long follower of football.

The police on duty were, in njy opinion, woefully inadequate in both number
and their effectiveness at crowd control.I have spent ten years serving in the
Rc^al Wlitery Policetwo of which were served in Northern Ireland whre I
gained a great deal of experience in crowd control.
The police I spoke to could not even tell me where a certain club official
car piafk was, consequently I was driving around the ground ju st adding to the
alreacty Alarmingly large crowd. On arrival, by foot, at the Leppings Lane
end of the ground 1 was shocked to find only eight turnstiles open to service
the whole of toe North Stand as well as the West Stand. The time was now
I4.35h« and the crowd was solid from the turnsti 1es entrance backing into
the road, a distance of about ten yards.It took ine ten minutes to eventually
gain access to a turnstile.
Oncetfee (rtherside of the turnstiles I walked to the le ft for the North
Sl^nd seating areas. As I looked back I could see the situation was becoming
more desperate with hundreds of people arriving by the minutelSttil bhly three
mounted policemen were attempting to control the crowd      outside. I then tookny
seat in the stand. After kick-off i t became clear that     far too many peoplewere
confined in too small a space in the West Stand.
                                   - ■.* ■j.JvA   c 'v -   *-.■
                                             --------




                                                                   are:
              - why should Liverpool FC, with a far greater following than Nottingham Forest*
                be allocated less tickets?              I
              ■ why was the least supported club allocated the larger standing area?
              - last year's sem1-f1nal was controlled by s tric t marshalling at least fifty
              yards from the turnstiles. What happened this year?
              - why was there no early announcemnt made* to keep both Liverpool and
              Nottingham Forest fans Informed?
              "Why were the firs t aid services at the ground under-manned and under-equipped
              for a major sporting event such as this?


              Finally, I wouldjike to comment that, In my opinion, a match of this
              signlflcance^id Importance should be played at a larger stadium. Could the
              semi-finals not b r staged at Wembley on alternate Saturdays?
              I further feel that if the perimeter fences are not to be taken down at grounds
              around the country, small gates should be built into the structures every three
              feet or so, with a steward assigned to each gate throuhout the match.


               In conclusion, I think after an incident like this i t is very easy to point
              the finger and apportion blame. This is not my aim - I have just tried to
-■■rV-   •'
              t^TT
                 ** you
                    JVU what
                      -V
                        "    I saw and raise a few prctical suggestions.
                                                                                                                                                             ■   'IT




                                    Yours sincerely




                                                                     ■■■■■ :                   ■

                                       :'i- ■■■

                                                                   ... ...
w m m

                                                                                                                             -             :..........


                                                                                                                                                         '
                                                                                                   :: -                     " ■        ■
                                                                               - :i.   v - -       :■ •   ■■■'   ■■■■• ■■         ■   -


                                                                  rxS

                                                                                                                                                                       “
