                       Sheffield Archives Ref: R x -j^ j f j                                 .15


OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                  Date and time raised   il'S la a    p m i ^)             Number


T itle   K jL ^ & a /                                                   Ar*\ISUlO cn Cg                                        A K ?C (
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)


Receiver's in stru ctM A ^w cfM K le t ion
                                                                                                       fixpH
                                                                                                                            Receiver
 P- Sc-non 6 C_b J
                                                                                                                           3 1
                                                                                                                              Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated
                                                                                                                                 rr>
No(s) of actions raised
                                     7 T     z j q   S
                                                                                                                        Statem ent Reader
Statement reader 's instructions                             J                   (jU L             . f l/ b
                                                                                                                          S W 6
                                                                                                                              Indexer
Indexed as indicate!
_____________ S .
No(s) of actions raised                                                                                                    4%/S
Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                   O/M            SIO




Further action No(s)
                                                                                                                              ie I |p#
                                                                                                                                  sB    M
When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                                                                                 • i.
                          ST. JOHN AMBULANCE
                         A Voluntary Organisation o f the Order o f St. John
                          County of South & West Yorkshire

                                        BARNSLEY AREA

                                                                                'Area Commissioner:
President:
                                                                                 G. Hardeastle J.P.
Mrs. L. Fairclough

                                                                               22 April 1989
                 Report of events on 15 April 1989 at Hillsborugh
                 foofBSIT'Srognl ’g H e m i l # ..
                 By P Schofield (A.S.O.) Mrs A Brown (Div. Nursing
                 Officer - Barnsley Division) Mr C Pratt (Ambulance
                 Member - Stairfoot Division)

     At around 3.15pm on Saturday 15 April, I (P Schofield) was
     at home and switched on the television to watch the foot­
     ball match:at Hillsborough. It was immediately apparent
     that a large scale disaster had occurred, though little
     hard information was reported. Believing the Barnsley Area
     ambulance may be able to assist, I travelled to Oakwell
     football ground, knowing that I would be able to muster a
     crew from the members present.

     Arriving at Oakwell at .pproximately 3.30pm, I informed the
     Senior Officer Div Supt Mrs Hardcastle of the circumstances,
     and she acceeded to my request for Mrs A Brown and Mr C Pratt
     to accompany me to Sheffield.

     We three then travelled to Cudworth and transferred to the
     Area ambulance. Using lights and sirens we made best speed
     to Hillsborough encountering standing traffic at the junction
     of Doe Royd Lane and Halifax Road. Police traffic controllers
     waved us to the "wrong" side of the dual carriageway, thus
     avoiding the traffic and we procceeded to the traffic island
     at the junction of Penistone Road Nth and Leppings Lane. Traffic
     Police there directed us towards the Leppings Lane entrance
     of the football ground, where we joined a queue of waiting
     ambulances, the time being approximately 3.55pm. After some
     five minutes, Police instructed us to go to the other side
     of the ground, where, we were told, the injured had been
     taken.

     With Police motorcycle escort, we drove via Parkside road
     to the east side of the ground where Police directed us to the
     internal access road, leading to an access point between the
     south and west stands. The ambulance was reversed to the access
      ramp and made ready to receive•casualties. The three of us made
      our way onto the pitch and although there were numerous people
      obviously suffering from shock and exhaustion, we were informed
      by Police that all casualties had been removed to the Sports
     Hall.
Returning quickly to the ambulance we drove back to the PenistarK
toad entrance, turning left toward the Sports Hall. There we
Joined another queue of waiting ambulances, and as we stopped
behind us arrived the Barnsley Bitriet Major Incident ambulance.
If® gave 'assistance in carrying their equipment to the Sports Hall
wiere we were informed that all Injured had been dispatched to
tao;»-pitals in the'.area, 'and that all that was .required/was a large
quantity of body bags for the numerous bodies laying on the floor
of 'the hall, -these -being temporarily'covered''by--an assortment-of -'
plastic bags, coats and jackets.

Not being able to help, we carried the equipment back to the
ambalance and we believe the Barnsley SYMAS ambulance then returned
to Barnsley. A senior ambulance officer asked us and several other
ambulances to make our way to the bus depot on Herries Soad South
and stand by there, to await the eventual removal of the bodies.

On arrival at the bus depot a few minutes later, another ambulance
officer asked if we could establish a First Aid Station there,which
we duly did. There were large numbers of fans at the bus depot
awaiting transport, some of whom were obviously intoxicated, many
of whom were very subdued by the events, and some distressed and
tearful. Mrs A Brown and Mr C Pratt offered help and sympathy to
those who aproached, whilst I went back to the ground to contact
Mr Wells of Sheffield Area. Having reported to Mr Wells and it
being evident no more could be done, I returned to the bus depot.
At 5.15pm we were directed     back to the Sports Hall entrance where
a senior ambulance officer     said that we could stand down as the
disposal of the dead would     be done by six SYMAS ambulances for
adminastrative reasons. He     thanked us for our help and we then
returned to Barnsley.



P SCHOFIElif (A.S.O.)

                                                             /) *
A BROWN ( Div. Nursing Officer)


C PRATT ( Ambulance Member)


 cc Mr                   Area Secretary - Sheffield)
 cc Mr                   ( Area Commissioner - Barnsley)
 cc Mrs                 i-v. Supt. Barnsley Quadrilateral)
 cc-Mrs                    (Div. Supt. Stairfoot Division)
