                                                        Jon Ndubuisi EKWUBIRI
                                                        Pc 2153
                                                        South Yorkshire Police
                                                        Main Street
                                                        Rotherham. TN 828182 .



I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police presently stationed at
Main Street Police Station at Rotherham.
At 8 .30am on Saturday 15th April' 1989 I reported on duty at Main Street Police
Station and reported to my Serial Sergeant, Sergeant ^f06 Dixon of C3 sub-division.
Along with the rest of my serial I was conveyed to the Hillsborough Football Ground
where I was subsequently briefied in the North Stand at approximately 10.15am.
Following briefing in company with the rest of my serial I attended at the junction
of Halifax Road and Southey Green Lane and commenced Public Order Patrol in company

with Pc 2763 Ley at approximately 11.20am.
Even though the scheduled kick off time was over three hours away there were
numerous Liverpool suppoters in the area and the Off Licence situated at the
above junction was doing a roaring trade, so much so that fans had to be locked
out until up too fifteen fans at a time were allowed to purchase their respective
items and then leave the shop to allow the fans waiting outside to enter.
The Public house situated at the aforementioned junction was also very busy with
the beer garden packed with Liverpool supporters who although were very vocal
were quite well behaved. Throughout the following three hours the crowd began to
swell with supporters making their- way to the ground. The atmosphere was good and
the fans were in good spirits. It was also evident that large amounts of alcohol
had been consumed by many fans, many fans could be seen to be earring three to four

of beer as late as 2 .30 pm.
At approximately 2.50pm-fcy serial and I proceeded to make our way back to the ground

even at this late hour fans were still making their way to the ground although a
little hurriedly.
Whilst making cur way to the ground -Sergeant Disron informed us that our presence
was needed inside the ground although it wasn't clear at this time as to the reason
why. We arrived in the stadium at a-oproxiaately 3 »10 pm and were immediately deployed
to watch the Nottingham Forest fans at the Spion Kop end.on the playing surface
perimeter. Cnee inside the ground I could see that numerous supporters had spilled
onto the s-itch at the Ler>rdngs Lane ind that many Police officers had been deployed
that end in an effort to control them. The Nottingham fans at this time were getting
very restless and agitated over the incident as like us they were unaware as to the
1
    %■


                                     -   2   -




                            Jon Ndubuisi EKWUBIRI




    scale of the tragedy.
    Some five minutes after taking up our positions we became aware that supporters
    had been injured in view of the fact that fans were being carried from the Leppings
    Lane end to the kop end in an effort to receive some attention. This continued for
    some fifteen minutes until v;e learned that fatalities had occured although to what
    extent was not known. Over the next fourty five minutes our serial remained in front
    of the Spion kop, I saw numerous people being carried by stretcher, by fellow

    supporter and by Police officer.
    At about 4o00pm I had to visit the toilet situated under the North Stand, on my way
    back to my position I was approched by two Nottingham supporters who stated they
    were a Doctor and a nurse and were offering there services, I subsequently took them
    to the playing area at the kop end which by now was littered with bodies on make shift
    stretchers, Police officers, ambulance men and supporters alike were frantically
    trying to revive fans, most of whom appeared to be dead already. I led the tv/o members
    of the public to two fans who appeared lifeless on the playing surface and they
    proceeded to try and save t&am, unfortun^&ly their attempts were in vain. Both of the
    dead fans had friends with them who became hysterical and had to be calmed down
    although at this time they were unconsoleable. The Doctor and nurse then went on to
    try and help other fans. Having covered up the deceased fans with their respective
    coats I returned to my serial.
    Throughout the next hour many fans were carried from the Lepping Lane end on strtchers
    and makeshift stretchers which had been^billboards, many fans wersccrying and hysterical
    and the feeling of helplessness was overwhelming.
    A message was subsequently'sent over the intercom system to the effect that the game
    was to be abandoned, fans then left the ground in what appeared to be an orderly fashion.
    In company with the rest of my serial I returned to my original point on Halifax Road
    in company with Pc Ley, the mood of the Liverpool fans was that of disbeleif, we were
    persistenly asked by the f•ns as to how many had died, original estimates varied from
    ^0 to 72. Cnee in position on Halifax Road many fans became angry and generally
    blamed the police and the Football Authorities as to what had happened, aoth Pc Ley
    and mjrself became victims of abuse but in view of the circumstances no action was taken
    and the offenders advised accordingly, although I might add that their respective
    friends were very understanding and a ‘‘tempted to c"lm them down reminding them that no

    one person was to blame.
    At approximately 6 .15p® in company with the rest of my serial I attended at olaywheels
    Lane where I had a drink and a hot meal. We were then subsequently conveyed to Main
                              -   3   -




Street Police Station having been de-briefed.
On our arrival at Main Street we were met by Ch. Supt. Wain and Ch. Insp. Warne who
asked about our welfare and general condition.
Following a quick interview with CID officers I went Off duty at 7»30pm*


With regards to the qHestion of radio transmissions, I never was in possession of a
radio and I was not always in close proximity of an officer with a radio so I am
unable to make conr-ent.
The two bodies I actually came into contact with were carried   by the ambulance
service, I would describe them as follows, both were male, white in their twenties,
 G,>~t-
berth was obese, the other was of medium build.




Police Constable Ekwubiri
