OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and time raised                            Number


Title      K W      J L      |/c w \ OueA-dudicr k w lo c -H -                                   MsCTSuce
f Include source and any document number if relevantI

Receiver's instructions —urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                             Receiver

                                                                                                         8739
Document registered/indexed as indicated    ■   b   H    s   r

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                         Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions



Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                              S»0




Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                METROPOLITAN POLICE
                                                T020 Branch,
                                                New Scotland Yard,
                                                Broadway,
                                                London.
                                                SW1H OBG

Detective Chief Superintendent Foster,
Nechells Green Police Station,
Fowler Street,
Birmingham.
B7 5 DA                                         14th June 1989




Dear Mr. Foster,

RE:   HILLSBOROUGH ENQUIRY

I am writing in confirmation of your telephone conversation with Chief
Inspector Evans.

Assistant Chief Constable Jones has asked Commander Robinson for a copy
of the report of incidents at Wembley Stadium turnstiles, prior to and
during the Football Association Cup Final on Saturday 20th May I 9 8 9 .

I am enclosing a copy of the report which was sent to The Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police, (Chief Superintendent Mole). Whilst Chief
Inspector Miller, of Wembley Police Station, deals with turnstiles F to K
inclusive, similar behaviour by ticketless fans in forcing their way through
the other turnstiles was clearly observed by Chief Inspector Evans.

Please do not hesitate to contact me if you require any further assistance.

Yours sincerely,




H. KINLOCH,
Chief Superintendent,
Public Order Branch.


Enel.
           12-06-1989      10:38     KINGSBURY 7 AREA HQ                  +44 1 204 6160 P.02

                                                                                                  i
                                                                                    a    s       J


R e p o r* (o r th e
i r i f o f n t io n

                                                              METROPOLITAN                     POLICE
   The Chief Constable,                                             1Q 1. Division.Werribiey,...... station
   South Yorkshire Police,
   Police Headquarters,                                            603 Harrow Road,...Wembley, Middlesex.
   Snig Hill,                                                      HAD 2HH
   Sheffield S3 8LY,
   South Yorkshire.                                                5 Jime,

                                                              Ref. No.. .
   Through Deputy Assistant Comtussioner                      Your Ref
   R B Wells OEM MA (OXON)                                    D fU fid




                       Subjcct     F.A. CUP FINAL   -   20 MAY, 1989.         ........



I an a Chief Inspector in the Metropolitan                    Police, attached to Wemb.ley Division.
 Mv duties include the policing of events at                  Wembley Stadium and I have been doing
this in my present rank since January, 1987.

The Hillsborough tragedy, after the initial shock, gave me hope for the future.
This hope was that the behaviour of fans in Leppings Lane, which I recognise as
a not unknown tactic at Wembley, would now cease - the danger being acknowledged
by those who indulge in such acts.

On the 20 May I was in charge of the concourse at Wembley Stadium frcm the Royal
Tunnel round Westwards to Turnstile 'K', This area has two groups of turnstiles,
'F' and 'G' which are approached by flights of steps and are relatively sale iron
crushing.   it also has three groups of turnstiles, 'H', 'J' and 'K', approached
by level ground and which are liable to crushing problems.   The stadium offices
are close to *H\ 'J' and ’K' and likewise on level ground.

I saw the first Liverpol supporters on my way into Wembley at Rt.anmore Broadway,
some Six miles from the stadium, where a nunber were sitting on the pavement dxinkmg
cans of beer or lager, at about 9,30 a.m.                                         ^

The closer to Wembley, the more fans I saw who were drinking in the street, often
carrying more cans with than.

I arrived at Wanbley Stadium at about 10.30 a.m. and saw that a large number of
fans were already on the ccmplex, perhaps as many as 10,000. ^ ain' !^ny °
had cans of drink, i.e. beer or lager with than. I was dismay^ to fxnd that m a y
of those present did not have tickets for the game. My advi
the area went for the most part, unheeded.

                                                             OttiCP-/b
■12-06-1989   10:39   KINGSBURY 7 AREA HQ            +44 1 204 6160 P.03

                                       Page 2


   On inspecting the area I found that at Turnstile 'H* a small section of
   fencing, secured by scaffold clips, hsd been slackened so thst s signifi
   cant breach of the fence could be made, giving access to the circulating
   corridor.   From the enquiries I made it appeared that this had been done
   by fans during the night, no doubt intending to apply pressure at the
   right moment to gaii> antry to the Stadium.

   Infonration was passed to officers under my coomand by an unidentified
   Liverpool police officer, that, lie had heard fans planning to rush the
   ’H', •    and 'K' turnstiles. This confirmed my own view that these were
   the most vulnerable areas and therefore the most likely to be attacked.

   As time p r o g r e s s e d , I noticed that there were more people in that area
   suffering the ill effects of alcohol and tension was beginning to increase.
   This culminated in a number of fights at the 'pinch point', the narrowest
   point of the concourse, outside the Stadium Offices.             The fights were
   caused apparently by the sale of tickets by 'touts'. Although well known
   touts were not evident, there seemed to be a number of people selling
   one or two tickets.             The fans were keen to attack such people and yet
   also to buy the tickets at inflated priccs.

   By 12.30pm’
             , the crowd was building up generally, but especially so outside
   turnstiles 'H\ 'J' and ’K'.      Because this area is confined, I had to
   put in a cordon of police horses and foot police between the T,V. compound
   and turnstile 'H' to prevent the danger of crushing.

   Outside of the cordon, there were more outbreaks of disorder among fans
   who had been drinking and I personally received a blow to the head whilst
   assisting one of my officers in making an arrest.

    The turnstiles were late in opening because a lorry was still carrying
    out some work in the circulating corridor.   This lorry could only make
    an exit through a gate at the side of turnstile 'K'. It did this just
    before 1.15pm but caused quite severe problem with crowds waiting for
    the turnstiles to open.   The gate stuck when it was only half open and
    a lot of effort was required to prevent a large number of illegal entries
    to the stadium.
    once the turnstiles opened, I expected the crowd to ease considerably
    and to reduce the complaints of crushing I was getting from people in
    the crowd.   That people were obviously pressing forward and causing
    crush in these circumstances, in the wake of Hillsborough,
    I was more amazed, however, to find that the c r u s h was n o t diminishing
    as I expected it to at turnstile 'H'.    This was because of ticket le^
    fans forcing their way through the Lumstiles with ticket-holders
    having to be removed through exit gates, slowing down the whole o
    operation.
    Whilst a lot of illegal entrants were removed, I believe an appreciable
    number were not. The most intense crush was at turnstile H    ^nore
    had a fence weakened during the night, and m my         ^     ^
    planned by a large nuntoer of fans hoping to breach the security of the
    fence, if they were unable to get in through the turnstiles.

    By 2.30pm, the number of people going in through turnstiles
    'K' had reduced greatly.   This had been achieved by
    turnstile 'H' accepted at *J' and ’K' turnstiles and filtering people
12-06-1989    10:40   KINGSBURY 7 GREG HQ                   +44 1 204 6160 P.04
   ^-v   ■»                  •.   ■   —                     -           •         j
                                           page 3


 at the cordon and allowing only those with tickets through. Many people
 were reluctant to produce tickets, fearing that they might be snatched
 from than.   Ttiey took the trouble to secrete than in shoes, socks and
 other places, which n»de it difficult when production was demanded. The
 nunber of street robberies for this event are iuch higher than for similar
 events.

 There were now scire 300 people on the outside of the cordon who did not
 have tickets but were still anxious to find a way into the.Stadium. Rather
 -than leaving the cordon as a fixed target, I decided to commence a sweep
 of tbfr concourse,.pushing these fans towards the Royal Tunnel and away
 from ihe vulnerable area.

 When the sweep from the other side, turnstiles JA' to 'E1, reached the
 Royal Tunnel, the crowd which nurbered about* 500 began throwing bottles
 and cans at police. A nuntoer of arrests were made during the completion
 of the sweep.

 Despite the sweep, small pockets of ticketless fans returned to the concourse
 during the progress of the game. At about half time, there was a determined
 attenpt by about 200 to gain entry through gates and windows at the stadrnn
 Offices and turnstile 'H'. This was successfully repelled.

 Just before the end of the game, all gates to the Stadium vere opened
 in preparation for the exodus. At this stage, Liverpool were in the lead
 awl fans were starting to leave. However, the equalising goal was then
 Beared by Everton. This resulted in an influx of fans who had been leaving
 aixi      those still around the ground without ^tickets. All managed to
 get into bays around the Stadium to watch extra time.

 The nunber of arrests, 76 on the outside of the Stadium, does not fully
 reflect the nagnitude of misbehaviour by drunken fans. Rather a balance
 is struck in deciding whether arrests can be made without seriously reducing
 the nurtoer of police left to control the crowd.

"■ On this occasion, there was a rapport between the Liverpool and Everton
   supporters.   Had this not been the case, X believe rtwch greater disorder
   vrould have emanated from the section of fans determined to gain entrance
   to the Stadiun, regardless of the cost in any terms, to others.

  Having described a lot of bad behaviour on the part of sane fans, I should
  say that the majority were well behaved and concerned for the safety of
  themselves and others.




                                          \ J   J, MILLER
                                      Chief Inspector (Operations)
