 Michael James Francis Griffith
 Police Constable 1 6 1 S Vfoodseats Police Station, Sheffield
 South Yorkshire Police.


 I am a Police Cor..-,table ir. the South Yorkshire Police, presently attached t<^
 the plain clothes dept at Voodseats Police Station, Sheffield.
 At 8.30am on Saturday 15 April 1 9 8 ?, I commenced duty in full Police uniform
 at WoodLseats Police Station, Sheffield, in relation to a football ’Special
 iuty a; Hillsborough football ground for the seri final cup natch between
 Liverpool and Nottingham Forste football clubs.
 I was, together with other officers trahsported to Hillsborough and attended
 a briefing, which took place in the North Stand of the ground. 1 later had a
 packed lunch prior to corr-encin~ duties with serial 12.
 At approxina11v ll.lfar. that date, I commenced duties pn company with Police
 Constable 6 9 Pearson, patrolling the car park gate situated at the rear of the
^^ymnasium in P nistone Hoad, Sheffield.
 At intervals whilst patrolling the entrance and together with FC Fear^on, 1
 walked out and alone Penistone Hoad on numerous occasions and it vas during these
 walkabouts, that I noticed that there were a large number of footbaj.1 supporters
  carrying ar.d drinking from beer cans and bottles. A large goupr of fans of
 approsimatly 20 male supporters were sat for the majority o f the time, opposite
  the entrance to the car park in Pensitone Hoad. All the youths were drinking
 very heavily. I later appoached and spoke to these supporters, who were all in
 good humour and advised thee regarding entering the ground under the influence
  of alcohol.
 At 2.20pm that date, I walked onto the playing area at the ground to view the
 build up of the crowd inside the ground. I *.v-3 suppised to see that although the
^£op end o£ the ground (Fenistone Koad) was almost full or seer.-a to be, the
O p p o s i t e end (Leppings Lane) was only slightly filled, the majority of the supporters
 standing in the central section behind the goal area. I then returned to the
 entrance to the car park.
 Prio* to the kick off time of 3.ooptn, there appeared to be an unusual amount
 of supporters attempting to enter the ground at the last minute. A large number
 of supporters both alone and in large groups attempted to enter the ground via
 the   car park gates at my location. These were all directed to the ^eppings Lane
  end of the eround. A large number of thees support-rs were under the influence
 of intoxicants, but were not drurs k. Dufe to this large amount of supporters
 attempting to enter at the car park, the large netal gates were closed and locked
 in order that we were protected and guarded against any attenptsd late rush inside
 the ground.
 At approxinatly 3.01pm, I walked from the entamce and along the walkway which
 lead" Trvm tu»
1




                                   rape two


is situated between the cop and the North stand. As I reahcde the perimter track
aroind the yl-.ying surface, I noticed that the ratcn was in progress. I then
assisted an officer who had detained a youtn a m vas walkinr alonr the track
ar   a to th ? police root!*. 1 accoT^pani-71; the officer to the Folice rooT?, arid the
yovth was det-.ined.
Whilrt assisting that officer, I heard fro" vithin the ground a loud Yell by the
sro*d        as it vas only short lived, I knew fro~ previous experience at such
matches that, it vac a near Biss a goal tji on? cf the t'-ace playing*
At about 3*C?'?r: I returned to the v;-ik.ay at the 3ii; of tne iiorth stanc a m
noticed that the placers were off the pitch. There was a large grcwd of
supporters standing around the goal r.c-uth cf the Leppmgs -^ane end of the pitch
and I presume-i that there had beer, a pitch invasion by the crowd. I then went
to the Leppir.ge Lane end of the ground and as 1 dia sc i noticed that thafce
were a number of officers, standing or. the fence and shoutir.j a.-.J pointing
at the suppcrteres inside the leppingt Lane end of the ground. Even at this
 stage, being without a personal radio, I still beleived that it was a pitch
 invasion by the supporters. As I reached the perimeter fencing to the Leppir.gs
 Lana end of the ground, I noticed the fans within the crea behin-; the groum
 appeared to be a blurr, and there didn't appear to be any movenent within it. The
 only movement I could detect ware the offieers along the fencing and the
 supporters around the goal routh area.
 As X reached a sr.all gate, which allows access to the terrace, i was passed
 by ar.d officer (identity unhewn) a white rPie, who at this tine appeared
 to be dead. His face was a blue colour and his eyes were staring wildly. I
 then pulled this youth onto the grassed area of the ground, and checked for
 ary vital signs. There were none. I then attenjtec heart rr.assage and mouJi
^to r.c>utr. on the ycuth in an attenpt to revive hin. *f.ilct attempting these
 acts, I sen.-ed that there was a great deal of activity around me, but I didn't
 notice anything in particular. I believed at that point that the youth -»■ v.as
 attenpting tc revive was the only sudden death within the ground.
Whilst knelt over the deceased body, using couth tc rr,outh, I suddenly felt
 a. pain     the base of fry back, and 1 was pushed onto the body itse—f by what
 i believe was a kick. As I fell over the body, I heard soneone screac, ’¥ou
Basterd'. I didn't react to the kick in the normal manner, for some reason,
 I juet continued to attempt to revive the youth laying on the floor. After a
 short tir:e it was obvious that life was extinct an a with the assitance of
 either officers or fans, I cannot rene-ber which, t:>e ycuth was taken to *’he
rear of the T’erth stand near to the gynrnsiurr area.
After covering the b«dy with r,y coat, I the* returned o'lto the pitch area in order
 to assist other officers.
                                       Page three

Upon returning to the pitch area, it was then and only then that I realised
that other bodies had been taken from the Leppings Lane terrace and plac.ed
onto the pitch area.
I assisted other officers in the goal mouth area attempting to revive youths
laying on the pitch area, and checking that the conscious supporters had the
assistance they needed.    I then assisted an officer to carry a body from the
pitch area to the rear of the North stand.
Again I returned to the pitch area, and there saw Police Constable 1529 Friend,
who was standing over the body of a young male supporter. With      the assistance
of supporters who were passing with a large boarding, the body      was then taken
to the rear of the North stand.
I then checked that the original body I had removed from the pitch area had
remained untouched and as I did so an order was given out that      all the bodies
should be taken into the gymnasium area.       With the assistance of other officers
I placed my body with the area of the gymnasium.
I then examined the body and I would describe the youth as follows: Male, white,
20 - 22 years, dark brown short hair which was slightly curly, ginger coloured
moustache, 5' 10" tall and of normal build.       He was wearing blue jeans, blue
jean shirt, white 'T' shirt and white socks.       I then checked for any identification
and there was none.    The property on the body was asfollows
1. Quartz watch with a two face dial.
2.   £4.31 in cash.
3-   A packet of cigarettes and matches.
4. Ticket for the semi final Leppings Lane terrace.
At 4.05 pm, Dr Redgrave attended at the gymnasium and after examining the body he
certified that life tfas extinct.
A form Gen/18 was then part completed with all the details known at the time.
The deceased was subsequently photographed and the photo was marked with the
number allocated to the body, that number being number 71-
I remained with the body at the gymnasium until 5.30am the following day, Sunday
16 April 1989.   At that time after the body had not been identified by any person
it   was taken by ambulanceto the MedicoLegal Centre,     Watery Street,Sheffield.
At   that location the body was stripped and   was handed overto officers   already
in attendance.   The property was also handed to those officers.
I later returned to Woodseats Police Station and went off duty at 6.45am.
I later found out from enquiries made that the deceased name was C0P0C and that
he was later formally identified at the Medico Legal Centre.
I will state that prior to the match beginning, there appeared to be a large amount
of supporters just walking around and around the ground drinking from cans and
bottles. Although there was no obvious trouble.
