                                                                  r^/lofy/z/Jog
                                                                      R 376



ANDREW EDDISON



POLICE SERGEANT 2607



'E' DIVISION     HACKENTHORPE




O83O     On duty, PSV equipment prepared and short shields loaded into van.

0915    To Ground

0930    Hillsborough

09^5    North Stand - briefing

1020    Meal in van prior to deployment

1115    Stand by Lepping Lane terrace near to   groundcontrol

1200    Directed by Superintendent Murray toPenistone     Road turnstiles to

        assist search of Nottingham supporters prior to entry.     Mostly good

        humored, some carrying cans of drink and apparently were unaware on

        restrictions to entry with/when intoxicants/ed. A good proportion had

        obviously drunk some intoxicants but all were well behaved.     (My serial

        only arrested 3 for drunk trying to enter).     The Nottingham supporters

        arrived in a steady flow queues of more than half a dozen never

        materialised.

        Operationally they posed no problem, not all the gates need to be

        opened to cope with the flow of supporters.

        There were some Liverpool supporters with Nottingham end tickets, and

        also, especially as time came up to kick off, more and more Liverpool

        supporters were asking for tickets or whereabouts of touts.     Some had

        been drinking and some were carrying cans of drink.     They were advised

        accordingly as regards entry.
                                           -   2-


       opposite the gound outside Charlie Browns - drinking from cans prior to

       entry.

       One man in his 30's was selling tickets for the Nottingham end - he was

       from a Nottingham Supporters Club - he had about 30-50 tickets -

       numbered consecutively - he was swamped by Liverpool supporters

       (between 1 pm and 2 pm) he was advised.      The arrests of the 3

       Nottingham supporters occurred in the last hour before kick off.      I

       assisted in one at 1410 and at the Police room it was quiet, one or two

       prisoners - I instructed the arresting officer (R1729) to complete

       paper prior to returning to Penistone Road because it was quiet.

       About 1445 two more arrests were made, one was quite violent (drunk)

       and they were taken to the Police room.      I was approached by a man who

       asked to complain about the arrest of one of the Nottingham supporters

       - he gave me his details but declined to attend at the gym to see

       Inspector Riley, Complaints and Discipline, as he wanted to enter the

       match - he would think about the matter and if he wished to pursue it

       he would see Inspector Riley after the match in the gym.

1455   I entered the ground and found Inspector Riley outside the gym and

       informed him as to position - he would be available after match.

       It was about now I heard message on radio to effect "Open gates/Yes

       open the gates".

       I heard the teams come onto the pitch and decided to return to

       Penistone Road to collect my serial to take them to standby (Phase 2)

       at Leppings Lane End/South Stand.

       From the door of the gym Inspector Sewell shouted me over and asked

       me as to our duties and whereabouts of Inspector Beresford.     I told him

       we were covering Penistone Road and Inspector was writing up his

       prisoner, with PC 2435 (he was still in Police room documenting).     I
was asked to bring my serial to the gym immediately, I went to round

them up and told Inspector Booth/PS Hoyland that we had been taken off

turnstiles, although by now very few people about.     I took my serial to

the gym.

Inspector Sewell instructed me to take my serial to the Leppings Lane

end as there was some unspecified disturbance/trouble.     Inspector

Beresford/PC 2435 were not with us - I took 8 PC's onto pitch at ramp

between Kop and North Stand.     As we walked onto the side of the pitch

the game had started - Liverpool were playing to Kop end.     I looked to

Leppings Lane end and could see supporters on the fence, on the inside

not on top and I could see a few officers at that end on the track.

We walked along the front of the north stand and became aware of a few

supporters on the pitch at the Leppings Lane end, some were just

straying onto the pitch.     I asked them to move off the playing surface,

a couple were sat with their backs to advertisement hoardings - I told

them to move back to the fencing at the Leppings Lane end.     There was

no undue alarm with these supporters - they were still watching the

match.     I then realised that the Liverpool supporters were climbing out

of the Leppings Lane end and trying to get into the North Stand.

Then Superintendent Greenwood ran onto pitch to referee (game stopped).

I walked along touchline from corner (Between North and West) towards

the goal asking supporters to keep off pitch and keep calm (supporters

now were numbered in 10's )

I assumed match would restart after pitch had been cleared as it was

only overspill.

At the left side of the goal (Facing Leppings Lane end) I saw a man

being given mouth to mouth by officers and then a man started heart

massage.    (He said he was a doctor).   I saw blood come from his mouth
                                     -   4-


in bright red splashes when the doctor thumped his chest.          His colour

was blue/grey.

There were photographers jostling to get photographs of the man on the

floor.

I then started to realise that things were getting out of normal

proportions and a lot of supporters were on the pitch all obviously

suffering from crushing - feeling faint - gasping for air - and it was

hot and especially in an overpacked pen.          I could imagine some

fainting.     More and more people were being carried out and being given

mouth to mouth, I realised it was serious.           I tried to call for

stretchers but all radio transmissions were incomprehensible.              I saw Mr

Greenwood stood by the left hand goal post trying to use the radio but

he could not get through.     I said let's get the injured off the pitch

into the gym.     He said "Yes do it."        I spoke to officers nearby and

told him to get the injured moving into the gym, and everybody else

would follow.

Photographers were pushing around the goal area trying to get close ups

of the injured/dead and I started pushing them away, supporters were

incensed by     their behaviour - it wasobscene.

It appeared     the main problem was the gate to Pen 3, it was crowded with

officers/supporters trying to pull injured through.          With PC 2130 Frost

we managed to get to the gate and at this point I realised the enormity

of what had     happened, there were two piles of bodies, one to the left

in the corner of the pen and one     to the left of the gate and directly

under it, in the well beneath the low concrete wall.          They were all a

pale grey colour with their mouths open - they were dead - some were

twitching - I could not believe what I was looking at.          I then saw a

man to my right hanging onto the fence but trapped by his legs entwined
in the pile of bodies.     I then realised other people were moving and

were alive but trapped by their legs.

Between the two piles of bodies was a clear area and I could see a

barrier had buckled, the right hand upright had folded at the base

where it went into the concrete step and it had buckled in a downward,

forward arc to the left.     The cross section was bowed.     The few steps

behind the barrier were clear and the remainder of the crowd were at

the back of the pens by the mouth of the tunnel.

I saw PC 1535 Fairclough sat on one of the steps trying to pull

somebody out from the pile of bodies, he was crying.        Some supporters

were angry, shouting at us, blaming us but it was difficult to

understand what they were saying.     It was either "Why did you open the

gate?” (one outside) or "Why didn't you open the gate" (the one onto

the pitch from Pen 3)-     They shouted this over and over.

The blockage to gate 3was being caused by a fat man who was       dead, on

top of the pile, his feet were trapped near the base of the wall under

the gate, and he was lying backwards over the top of the pile.        His

shirt was up over his face.

He was first who had to be moved.     PC Frost and myself managed to get

into the pen and stood on the wall either side of the gate, I was on

the right he was on the left.     All the bodies seemed to have been sick

and it had run down over the bodies into the well beneath the wall and

it was swilling around my feet.     I could just about stand in the well

and hold onto the fence and I started to disentangle the legs of the

fat man, everybody had     urinated themselves I became aware of astrong

and obvious smell of beer/lager some had even defaecated.

As I was pulling legs and moving the bodies up so they could be pulled

out onto the pitch I became aware of some pulling on the bottom of my
                                    -   6-


trousers, I could see a hand from the bottom of the pile of bodies

grabbing my trousers - somebody was still alive.    The pulling on my

trouser leg stopped.

Chief Superintendent Nesbit was by the gate on the pitch organising

officers to pull bodies away, I could hear Superintendent Greenwood on

a megaphone shouting orders.    PC Frost and myself were pulling legs

apart and handing   bodies up to Mr Nesbit and he waspulling them     away.

A large black man   suddenly came from the pen and in   a frenzy of

strength moved bodies up to Mr Nesbit, he eventually was ushered away,

Once the fat man had been moved the pile of bodies was cleared fairly

quickly, the body at the bottom was that of a young child lying face

down, I passed it up onto the pitch.

By this time the pen was nearly empty but some supporters had helped me

move the bodies, a lot of people were crying.

When the pen was clear I went back onto the pitch - bodies were lying

everywhere - photographers were still trying to get     the best pictures,

I started pushing   them away. It was clear to the majority in the ground

what had happened - Liverpool supporters started to migrate to the Kop

end - and by the feelings/expressions it was obvious there was going to

be confrontation with the Nottingham Supporters.    I went down to the

Kop end and with Inspector Booth started to forma cordon across       the

pitch and once formed moved it up to the half-way line.     Liverpool

supporters were ushered back towards the Leppings Lane end.

The situation appeared to calm down.

It was about 15^5 - 1600 and I gathered my serial and assisted with

crowd control behind the Leppings Lane end as Liverpool supporters were

leaving.    It was all very subdued by now everybody knew what had

happened.
*                                          -   7-


    1615    Mobile patrol.    Middlewood Road/Penistone Road

    1715    D(l) - liaise with Chief Inspector King

    17^5    NGH - trouble between supporters and film crew.    Press advised to keep

             away.

    1900    To Hillsborough

    19^0    Stand down

    2030    10/10




    END OF REPORT
