                                                                    \

POLICE CONSTABLE 2378 DENIS WEBSTER - DEEPCAR POLICE STATION



I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police, at present

stationed at Deepcar.



On Saturday, 15 April 1989, I was on duty in connection with the

F.A. Cup Semi Final game between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest

which was being held at the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground,

Hillsborough



My duties were those of a mobile patrol in a personnel carrier, in

company with Police Sergeant 681 HILL, Police Constables 583 DAVIES,

(driver), 2628 CHUFMS,    844 PEES and 300 HAYS.



Our area of patrol was the Deepcar/Ought ibridge area, paying

particular attention to licensed premises and generally maintaining

public order.



At approximately 11.00 a.m. we took up our patrol area.   At this

time I noticed that there were numerous people waiting about outside

licensed premises, many of them wearing Liverpool colours.

Throughout the day until just before 3.00 p.m. frequent checks were

made of licensed premises.



Checks at public houses showed that some had few customers, whereas

others in particular, the Silver Fox, Manchester Road, Stocksbridge,

and the Blue Ball, Whamcliffe Side, were heavily patronised by

Liverpool supporters.    Both these public houses in particular

werevery full from mid-day onwards, and it was obvious that a lot of

alcohol was being consumed.   Most people's conduct throughout this

period was good humoured and there were no public order incidents.
Whislt making one of the checks at the Silver Fox Public House

Manchester Road Stocksbridge X saw    A Mercedes Mini bus parked in the

car park of that public “ House,    All the occupants were inside the public house

including young children aged 8 to 19 years, these were asked to leave and

the adults advised to make their way to the ground,



At 1.35p.m I had the occation to search a Ford Transit van registered number

----------- This vehicle had contained Liverpool supporters who had stopped

and enterred the Blue Ball public House, Main Soad, Wharncliff^ Side.

In the Vehicle was   6 cans   of Heldenbrau lager   7 full bottles of Baveria

beer, 11 empty bottles of Baveria beer, 1 can of Hoffmeister lager,full.

The Driver was reported for the offence.      He was advised to make his way

to the ground.



The area in which we were patrolling was normally 20 to JO minutes from the

ground, however the traffic thet day was understanably very heavy and we were

advising people that it would take about 1 hour and that they would have

dificuity parking.



At 2.20p.m we had occation to stop a Mercedes mini bus at Deepcar, this was

the same bus we had seen earlier in the Silcer Fox car park,       The vehicle

was displaying a vehicle excise licence that was expires in October      1988,

a fixed penalty notice was issued to the driver _____________________

(FP N590887)


We made our way to the ground and as we did so, we advised several people

in the public houses which were still quite full, to make their way to the

ground.   About 2.*f5p^   we were travelling along the main road to wards the

ground when I saw the Ford transit van that had been in the Blue Ball at

Wharncliffe Side, This vehicle was in the process of being parked on the


grass verge at the junction with Stockarth Lane, This point is       about l^-miles
from the ground which at a brisk walk I would estimate would take 15 to

20 minutes.
                                *




As we approached, the ground I turned my radio to the match channel and

I could hear a broken message from which I formed the opinion that there

was crowd control problems at the Leppings Lane end of the ground at

the turnstiles.



Police Sergeant Hill asked if our 'Tango* mobile was to be directed to

any .particular area.        He was informed by the match control to stay on

patrol around the ground.



Shortly after 3000p.m we were in the Penistone Road North Area when I

heard radio messages saying that there was serious crowd problems inside the

ground, at the Leppings Lane End of the ground.         A further message was

passed from ground control requesting all officers on to the pitch inside

the ground.    We went immediately to the Penistone Road entrance to the

ground and gained access to the pitch via the gate between the North stand

and the spion kop.



My first impression on looking towards the Leppings Lane end of the ground
                        *•

was that a    pitch invasion was taking place, I could see that there was

a large number of officers on the pitch and several fans, more fans were

climbing the fence on to the track.         I still thought that a pitch invasion

was taking    place and together with the rest of my unit I made my way towards

That end.     I did not hear any messages from the control at this time.



As I neared the penalty area I could see that officers were begining to

help fans over the fence, I then looked at the fence and saw that the fans

at the front of the terrace were being crushed by the people from behind.

I saw that there were people in great distress and that some infact looked
lifeless.   I could see that the small gates onto the track were open

and officers were trying to get fans through them, I went to the gate

at the rear of goal and saw some fans trying to rip of the wire fence,

it had begun to come loose and i went to it and was kickin the fence as the

fans pulled, the fence came away for about 1 metre but then the welds would

not give antmore.      I went to a gate nearby'and could see that there

were poeple trapped in the gates and were lying on top of each other some

appeared to be dead, other fans were climbing onthem in an effort to get over

the fence. I stood on tbe fence and climged up and I could see that there was

a gar> at the rear of the terrace and I shouted for the fans at the rear to turn

round but they just kept pushingforewards,      there were other officers at the

gate one of whom I knew as Sgt, Swift from S division, we were attemping to

get the fans in the gate free but could not move them, when a Liverpool fan

who I describe   as mid twenties, 5ft * iiich   and very fat, he put his feet

against the g&te and his hands and pressed back, by doing this he held back

the fans and     we were ahle to clear the gate ,     Once the gate was clear

many fans were able to get onto the pitch, After a while I was aware that

there were police officers on the terrace and bodies and unconcious fans

were being passed through the gate,   As this was taking place Superintendent

Greenwood came to the gate and through his megaphone organised the passing

of bodies through the gate and a line of officers to carry them away.

I stayed a£ the gate-passing bodies through until a young man aged about

'l8/20years was passed through , he had a red football jersey on , he was not

quite the same pallor as the others that had come through and I grabbed him

and carried him to a space on the pitch, I put him on the ground and

almost immediately a Liverpool fan gave him mouth to mouth whilst I pressed

his chest after a short time, the lad began to breath on his own alisou|jh

his braths were laboured,    He was placed on a bill boared and carried to the

rear of the nofcth stand, I satayed with him until a Doctor saw him and said

he could be left.                                       ---------------------
 I returned to the pitch and I could see that a line of police officer had

 been formed across the pitch, I saw police sergeant Hill amongst these and

 I went to him. after   ashort_ time I saw that the managers of the teams

 Mr Clough and Dalglish were on the pitch near to the players tunnel. I

 could see that fans were gathering round them and that some were very angry

 and were making threats towards Mr Clough.        I pointed this out to Sergeant Hill

 and togther witn him and other officers we went to them      and tryed to keep

 the fans away from them, We got them bS.CrC to the players tunnel and we remained

 there   stopping fans from enterring the tunnel and gaining access tp the

officers and changing rooms,            Several fans kept trying to gain access

alot of whom were drunk and very abusive towards all officers present and

 the T.V men who were there.         Cne youth who was very drunk was spoken to by

P.S. Hill He was turned away from the tunnel, he staggered and fell flat

on his face, He was removed by other supporters.



At k . 30p.m. all mobile officers were ordered back to their vehicles,

together with P.3 Hill, P.C. S k k Rees and 3^28 Churms we made our way back

to the vehicle where we saw P.C. 5-3 Davies who was our driver,        We resumed

patrol without F.C. 300 Hays who had become seperated from us.



We made our way to our normal after match duties which was monitoring and

assisting the traffic flow along the A 6102 and A616 out of Sheffield



We were called to one incident involving fans returning to Liverpool, when

a group entered the Presto Supermarket on Manchester Road, Stccksbridge

and attempted to ditract the cashout girl on the till, tehy were ushered

from the shop by Staff and drove off in a vehicle for which we made a search

and circulated,   The vehicle was stopped and checked in Glossop. Derbyshire.



At 600p.m we returned to the ground where we had a break.       At 7*0Qp.m we

were ordered to stand-by at the Niagara Sports Club/Ground.
I retired         duty at 2 ,00am.
