ROBERT BURNS




Police Sergeant 1757




'B' Division




I commenced duty at Wombwell Police Station at 9.00 a.m. on Saturday, 15

April 1989.    Paraded serial 15 officers, 8 male and 2 female Constables.

2342 Beard                     2654 Richardson

1543 Aitken                      78 Booth

 853 Burke                     1675 Rich

2192 Llewellyn                 2364 Ford

3107 Pearson                   3023 Martin

On completion, travelled to Hillsborough, Sheffield, by personnel transit

van.

Full match Order, parade and briefing at 9-50 a.m. in the North Stand

conducted by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.       On conclusion, packed meal

supplied and taken.

Further detailed briefing of my serial 15 and serial 14, Sergeant 1341

Crawford and 'B 1 ' officers, by Inspector White, in situ of our areas of

respective responsibilities.    This briefing was conducted on the terraces

area of the West Stand with both serials.        My serial responsible for

Liverpool supporters entering through turnstiles numbered 9 to 16 inside

the    ground from Leppings Lane.   Searching regards prohibited weapons and

items,    alcohol, banners or missiles.      Location being in the tunnel of the

North pen and cantilever terraces between the North pen and North stand.

Emergency evacuation procedure explained and officer from my serial, P.C.

853 Burke, deputed to the internal gate between the North and Middle pens
                                         -   2   -




on the terraces. This internal gate was definitely open, not locked by

padlock at this time.

At 11.00 a.m. my serial commenced their detail at Leppings Lane turnstiles,

the Match Order stating turnstiles numbered 1 to 16 between gate 'A' and

'B'.     I questioned this with Inspector White at this location and was told

the Order was wrong, my responsibility was for turnstiles 9 to 16.

Turnstiles 1 to 8 were cordoned off by a moveable crowd control barrier.

This being placed between turnstiles 8 and 9-           Officers from another serial

did take up position at turnstiles 1 to 8, for supporters to the North

Stand.    Having 8 male officers, one was allocated to each turnstile more or

less working as a pair for searching purposes.           This enabled me to hold the

two female officers in reserve with instructions to search any females.              At

some early stage I was aware of at least two ground stewards on duty at the

moveable crowd barrier between turnstiles 8 and 9.           Two other ground

stewards were on the inside of gate 'B', being their responsibility for

opening for access in and out of Police Officers.           These gates have plastic

viewing inserts at head height.

Brown tickets       North Stand                      Entry by turnstiles 1 to 8

Red tickets         West Stamd seating               Entry by turnstiles 9 to 16.

Purple tickets      Standing terraces                Entry to ground via

                    under West Stand                 turnstiles 'A' to 'G'

                    and open cantilever

                    terrace between the

                    West Stand and North

                    Stand (area shown 'NW'

                    on plan)

Shortly after 11.00 a.m.       my officers were briefed by Inspector White.         We

had a general patrol of my area of responsibility i.e. the North Pen


                                                                           A'*
                                                                             '7
leading into terrace area, cantilever standing terrace and visited ground

staff at the snack bar situated at this corner at the rear of the West

Star.i.    I spoke with these males, three, regarding their security.    They

were advised to close the metal serving hatch at the first signs of any

trouble and request my attention.      The snack bar was open to customers at

this time.     All turnstiles under my supervision were open and manned by

operators at about 11.30 a.m.

From about 12 noon, whilst on duty inside the ground at the turnstiles at

Leppings Lane, small groups of Liverpool supporters were entering the

grounds.     Jovial,   friendly, males, females and children, all were searched

with no problems, between then and a gradual build up to 2.30 p.m.       Items

of property i.e. large flags and penknives were confiscated, labelled and

handed into the property store.      The amount of supporters during these

times was very light and unusual for a large Cup match.       Many groups of

youths were seen to be standing outside on Leppings Lane.       Although stated

these supporters were friendly, many were complaining about not having the

other end of the ground where they could have received more ticket

allocation being a larger club than Nottingham Forest, with a larger

suppcrt and following.       This was their main grievance other than being

forced to being searched three times over.

At about 2.30 p.m. large numbers of Liverpool fans arrived outside on

Leppings Lane turnstiles.       I presumed arrivals under Police escort from the

special train.     The atmosphere of friendly fans began to change, they were

noisy and boisterous, shouting and pushing to get through the turnstiles.

Turnstile operators were complaining, some fans were getting ir. by climbing

over the turnstile.       Many were identified and being unable to produce a

ticket or stub, had to be manhandled and forcibly ejected outside through

gate 'B'.     This is a usual practice at matches, as fans waiting to enter
through turnstiles   'A' to 'G', form up outside gate 'B'.

At about 2.45 p.m. the situation inside and outside got worse.      As their

numbers increased the situation became electric.     Crushing was occurring

outside.   Numerous fans, male and female with children, young and elderly,

were complaining about being crushed outside.     Many were in a distressed

state, sweating, breathless and pale in colour, some rubbing their chests.

There were too many to deal with individuals.     Many pleading to help the

people outside.

During this time, which I can only describe many of these young male fans

by their actions as animals, fans outside were shouting for assistance,

banging on the metal gate 'B', they were being crushed.      Fans were being

crushed inside the actual turnstiles.    Incidents were happening all the

time.   The panic similar to mass hysteria made searching impossible and I

instructed my serial to act only on public order.     Numbers started to climb

outside walling onto the roof of the turnstile building at the same time as

others cleared the turnstiles were running towards the grouund entrances,

pushing others aside to gain better haste.    Many were actually jumping over

the turnstiles and fleeing towards the ground.     Turnstile operators were

shouting and complaining many were getting through with no tickets by

climbing over the turnstiles.    The majority of these late arrivals were

obviously under the influence of alcohol, the air at this location thick

with ~ h e smell of alcohol.   The breeze from outside where the crushing was

taking place, carried a sickly smell of stale alcohol into the ground.

There was far too many to be able to take action against.      This was

becoming a volatile situation.    A large number had climbed ontc the

perimeter walling, onto the lower roof of the turnstiles and were jumping

off from a height of about some 8 to 9 feet, into the ground.     Many fans

inside the ground were handing their full tickets up to those on the roof
and due to their numbers, we were unable to prevent this.        Complaints and

requests for help outside from those entering the turnstiles were becoming

numerous.     At this stage, being unable to communicate with match Control,

by personal radio, due to volume of air traffic, static and noise caused by

fans.   I had to shout to Inspector Bennett, who had arrived at my location,

regards the situation of people outside being allegedly crushed, asking him

for assistance from Control.     Due to the volume of air traffic/static and

volume of noise in the area, it was apparent the Inspector was unable to

make contact.     I was requesting the opening of the outer gate ’B', be

opened temporarily to relieve crushing pressure.       Inspector Bennett climbed

onto xhe roof of the turnstiles and walling to view the situation outside

the ground.     I could see through the turnstiles and over the heads of fans,

outside the ground onto Leppings Lane.     There was a mass of supporters

waiting to get inside the grounds.     It was obvious to me that the closer to

kick off time became, this volume of supporters were not going to get

inside the ground by then, a disaster would occur outside the

turnstiles.

The situation by this time was chaotic, outside and inside the ground.

Supporters fighting to get through turnstiles, others coming over the

walling onto the roof, in droves.     Whilst dealing   with an   incident of fans

crusting to get through a turnstile, part of the metal rain guttering above

me collapsed and struck me across     the shoulders.

During these incidents which were     out of control, even to 100 Police

Officers, Police Constable Rich, on my serial, brought to my attention one

of tt-e.se fans that had jumped from the roof was an off duty Liverpool

Police Officer.     He had been shown a plastic type warrant card, believed__

         or similar name.    I believed he was referring to a male I had just

seen jump down from the roof with others, aged about middle thirties, deep
tan complexion, dressed in red pullover and wearing a red and yellow

Liverpool flat cap.    Police Constable Rich informed me that the one I

described was a friend of the alleged officer he had spoken to.     This

officer stating he had no ticket.     These two with others had run off in the

direction of the North pen area.Whilst engaged, I challenged a      middle

aged male inside the ground I had seen handing a ticket to a young boy aged

about 14 years on the roof of the turnstiles.     Stated to be his son and

they had got separated outside.     The same person was seen on two other

occasions of the same actions but    disappeared before I could get to

him.

Due to the situation not alleviating i.e. crushing, pushing and complaints,

at the turnstiles.    The operators refusing admission with brown and purple

tickets, causing complete blockage, these holders could not get back

outside whilst stuck in the narrow entrances.     It was obvious to me the

operators were also reaching breaking point with the volume of supporters

and their actions.    I was aware of the presence of other officers from

another serial who had been outside/inside the ground with myself.       One

unidentified female officer stated they had come inside as they were being

crushed by the pressure outside.    To alleviate this situation, I instructed

the operators by shouting to be heard, to let these supporters through as

quickly as possible with whatever colour of ticket they had in their

possession and we would transfer them whilst inside the ground.     This

seemed to increase and flow, those with brown tickets were transferred

through by myself assisted by two ground stewards, by opening the crash

barrier between turnstiles 8 and 9.    There were numerous of these fans

mainly mannerly, middle aged male and female, who thanked us for

assistance.   Many in a distressed condition still complaining of crushing

outside.
Red ticket holders were pointed in the direction of the steps leading up to

the West Stand upper seating area.     There were ground stewards on duty

checking these tickets.     Purple ticket holders were directed towards the

North pen tunnel and cantilever standing area 'NW'.     During this time fans

were still pouring over the walling and running in all directions, nothing

or no one could have stopped them.

Whilst, transferring these fans towards the North Stand, I was aware of

Police Constables Pearson, Booth and Burke struggling with an adult male,

who was finally arrested and escorted towards me by the latter two

officers.    He was still struggling and the barrier was opened to let them

through into the walkway towards the rear of the North Stand and Police

Charge   Office.   This male was drunk, disorderly and force being used to

restrain him.

At this time, later informed by Police Constable Booth, 3.00 p.m. time of

arrest , I became aware of a large volume of supporters rushing and pushing

in my direction, still others coming off the roof and joining them.     There

appealed to be a mass of them running off towards the area of the North pen

and cantilever area 'NW'.     In order for this amount to gain access to the

terraces via the middle tunnel, they would have had to perforn; a 'U' turn

in front of me, travel through the open large gate in the walling which

separates the rear inside enclosure between gates 'B ' and 'C'.    I suddenly

encountered fans in possession of purple tickets having entered from

turnstile 1 to 8 whilst transferring others with brown tickets from my

turnstiles 9 to 16, jostling and pushing against each other.      Shortly after

this the crowd situation appeared to calm down and I was not aware the

match had started or the actual time.

Later I learned from Police Constables Rich, Aitken and Richardson, that

our gate 'B* had been opened from the inside by two Police Officers at the
same time Police Constables Booth and Burke were struggling tc arrest their

prisoner.    The officers stated they had argued against this action.      The

officers and two gate stewards had moved to the side of an adjacent

Portakabin to avoid the stampede.     I had no knowledge of this gate having

been open but would explain the mad stampede of the large volume of fans

rushing past me towards the North end of the West Stand.     I was also

inforaed that gate 'C' had also been opened prior to gate    'B '.   Police

Constable Rich informed me that as soon as the pressure of fans was

released at gate 'B', it was immediately closed again.

Whilst filtering stragglers through the turnstiles, I received radio

communication from match control    'ALL AVAILABLE OFFICERS TO THE PERIMETER

TRACK*.     Gate 'B' was opened from the inside to let numerous officers into

the ground and then closed.     I immediately told all turnstile operators to

close their respective outside sliding doors which was complied with

without question.     Likewise ran round to operators manning turnstiles      'A'

to 'C-", this also complied with.

As myself and my serial officers were making our way at the rear of the

West Stand towards the South end, I suddenly was confronted by a small

number of Liverpool fans emerging from the middle tunnel of the West Stand

terraces, in tears, requesting help.     These males were sweating profusely,

clothing stuck to their bodies and were gasping for air.     They informed me

many more of them were in the terraces and were being crushed and trampled.

These youths were sat down at the outside of the tunnel.

I immediately ran down into the tunnel towards the rear of the terraces.

Many more youths and adult males were found to be pushing to get past their

fellov supporters, standing at the mouth of the tunnel.     These people

initially refused my shouts to move, stating they had paid their money, had

tickets and were not moving for anyone.     They were becoming aggressive and
                                       -   9   -




I had to forcibly move them to allow injured persons through.

The situation on these terraces was one of chaos.          I went to the left side

of the middle barrier, where I found large numbers of sweating, gasping

males had to be pulled out of the crowd and assisted into the tunnel to

assist their breathing.      The air inside the tunnel was cool.      The air at

the rear of the terraces was dense and heavy, strong smell of stale

alcohol.   Again having to    force my way onto the terrace, I dragged two

teenage youths under each arm from the terraces up and out of the tunnel

into the fresh   air at the rear.    These youths I had found lying down on the

terraces being trampled on by others.          They had been unable tc walk of

their own accord due to breathing difficulties.          I ensured they would be

alright by them nodding their heads, they being able to speak and laid them

down in the recovery position.

On returning to the terraces many more were found in a collapsed condition,

some three or four yards into the terraces.          Other youths were pushing and

standing on them.   They would not listen to shouting of backing off.

Numbers of these youths and adults were assisted to their feet and pushed

towards the tunnel exit.      This was in the area to the right of the tunnel

looking towards the playing area.      Other officers were lifting and carrying

people from the front of the terraces.

I picked up another teenager off the ground who appeared unconscious,

dragged him backwards towards the tunnel.          By this time some cf the

supporters were actually helping their friends and Police Officers by

walking with the injured and others out of the tunnel.

The youth I had dragged into the tunnel, I managed to carry with an unknown

male supporter, out into the open and laid him down beside tw: other

injured and apparently unconscious youths.          I checked recover? position

seemed to help his breathing although his eyes were still closed.             A



                                               /
                                       10




further youth was laid beside him by a friend and this person asked me to

help him.     This youth was also laid in the recovery position.     His eyes

were open and staring, obviously in a state of shock.       His friend was told

to keep him quiet by talking to him.

A young policewoman, number 2342, suddenly told me a youth to cy left lying

face down had gone blue.     He was turned on his back, the officer applied

mouth to mouth resuscitation whilst I applied cardiac massage.       His colour

resuned with a faint heart beat.     He vomited slightly, frothy and opened

his eyes.     He was in a deep state of shock, the whites of his eyes were

bloodshot and grey, staring at the ground.       He was spoken to c^ietly to

soothe him.     He closed his eyes although his breathing became sore regular.

At the same time whilst knelt down with these youths, I was talking to two

others beside me.     The one with the friend knelt down beside him, declined

to get up and just wanted to lie in the face down position.        He was left

alone and told to get up when he felt better.

Still kneeling over the youth the female officer and myself resuscitated,

in order to relax I looked up and around me.       I can only describe the area

and situation around me as like a battlefield.       Bodies were littered

everywhere, some coloured blue, obviously dead.       The scene was carnage,

many supporters walking about like zombies, in shock and tears.        Others

trying to help their injured friends.       To my left a heavy built woman aged

40 to 50 was kneeling down beside an adult male, who had turned dark blue,

attempting to revive him by mouth to mouth.       The woman gave up this

hopeless task and walked across to myself and policewoman.       She stated she

was a nurse and asked if the youths beside me were alright.        After looking

at the youths' faces, stated this was a dreadful day and walked slowly away

towards other injured persons.     The woman was in total shock, obviously a

Liverpool fan, being dressed all in red clothing.       Even at this stage
                                                                               £ 24,
                                     11




supporters and Police were running out of the tunnel carrying injured and

dead.   I was being accidentally kicked and trampled in the panic.

A male suddenly appeared at my side and asked if these youths beside me

were alright.   He stated there were ambulances outside the gates, get this

one to one and leave the others that are beyond help.        I picked up the

youtb. we had resuscitated under the arms and two males took hold of his

legs, the policewoman at the side.        As we had only travelled about ten

yards towards the open outer gate 'C 1, the policewoman shouted 'He has gone

blue' and I applied cardiac massage.       He again recovered colour and I could

feel iiis heart beating.   At this stage whilst applying massage, I was asked

by a smartly dreassed male if I had any oxygen or a stretcher.        Stated he

was a doctor from Liverpool and was informed that this was the second time

the youth had arrested.    He confirmed a pulse.      I believe he was wearing a

brown suit, aged about 30 years, brown hair and sallow complexion.        He

appealed agitated to be a doctor.     (I believe this is the same person that

appealed on television at about lunch time the following day, Sunday,

stating he was a doctor at Liverpool University and making profound

statements against Police actions).        However, within seconds, I think,

whilst still applying massage, a male and female first aid officer arrived

with oxygen masks and cylinder which was given, followed by an ambulance

trolley.   The youth was placed on the trolley, wheeled out of gate 'C1,

turned left and placed in the right hand side of an ambulance.        I informed

the attendant that this youth had arrested twice.

The only identity of this youth is by description:        male, aged about 18/20

years f white spotty face, blonde/fair hair, thin build and features.          Denim

jacket and trousers, dark check shirt.

Returned them to the inner area.     Numerous injured persons, leg and hip

injuries were assisted to waiting ambulances and ambulance buses, backwards
and forwards.

I ran across one middle aged male with silver coloured hair, stood alone in

the ntiddle of the now partially deserted area, crying loudly.      On his

behalf I accepted a cup of water from a ground attendant walking round with

a tr&y.    This was handed to the male and I walked with him to the side and

sitting him down, attempted to console him.     Being requested by female to

attend distraught male friend.

At th_is time I was aware of being in a void, feeling of time standing

still-    Spectators were leaving the upper and lower parts of the West Stand

in vclume procession, directed by a cordon of Police and Specials through

the middle gate and out of gate 'B', shielded from a large nucber of dead

outside the ground behind green sheeting.     Finally positioned in the area

behind the West Stand as my serial started to rejoin me.       A young family

came and stood nearby me, their young son handed a Mars bar with thanks.

Groups of youths still leaving from the North pen and cantilever, many in

hatreo towards police, shouting 'bastards'.     On the other hand, numerous

people, youths and adults walked across and shook hands with words of

thanks and sorry.    Heads lowered with tears in their eyes.     I was still

being requested to attend youths in distraught condition, consoling them in

their anxiety.    Attending to collapsed females, fainting after finding

friends and relatives.

As the rest of my serial rejoined me at gate 'B', I was confronted by a

distraught female, having walked from the direction of the North Stand,

directed to me by Police Constable Rich.    The woman explained she was

searching for her missing husband.    Had been to the Casualty Office and

directed by Police to return to her husband's car in case he was waiting

for her, if not, to return to the Casualty Room.     She pointed to a male

being spoken to by Police Constable Rich and pleaded with me to clear him
off.    He had been following her for the last half hour saying he was a

reporter seeking a story.     This male walked towards me complaining.      He was

told to clear off and if I saw him near the woman again I would arrest him

personally.    His presence was making the woman more distraught.   Aged about

early twenties, pale complexion, wearing spectacles.     Stated fee was a

reporter for Sheffield Star.     In his hands, notepaper pad and pen.    He

walked away in the opposite direction from the woman, very dovncaste.

Informed to return with serial     to the North Stand for de-briefing and

stand down.    Serial stood down at 6.30 p.m. and returned to Wombwell.       This

was the first time I became aware of time, after 3.00 p.m.

To finalise, having worked various serials and different locations over a

number of years at Hillsborough, large Cup and League matches, I have never

seen supporters, including Liverpool fans, act in such a disorderly manner

and arrive late in such vast numbers.     The majority including teenagers

were well behaved and orderly.     It was apparent the minority of large

numbers, without tickets, were determined to gain access into this ground

by any means available and no amount of Police Officers were going to stop

them.    Numerous were under the influence of alcohol to the extent they

behaved like hooligans and were uncontrollable.

From what I witnessed inside the terraced end of the West Stand, I can only

visualise as mass hysteria.     I am positive that many of these fans were not

aware of being trampled, crushed or killed. OR. if aware, did not care.

Perhaps on reflection they became animals fighting for survival in the

heavy atmosphere being created by body heat.     It is worthy of note that

this was the only area of the ground where the sun was shining into.

Being on duty in the inside of Leppings Lane, seeing and hearing the mass

of the crowd outside, I agree in full with the actions taken by

Superintendent Marshall.    I saw the state and pleading of supporters

                                                               ]
entering the ground.   I am certain if these gates had not beer, opened many

would have died outside the turnstiles.   I myself became very apprehensive

for my safety shortly after 2.45 a.m.
