                                                                                          MIR.15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                             D ate and tim e raised                             Num ber



T itle .                                                                 _ ^ 4 v _
(Include source and any document number i f relevant}


Receiver's instructions — urgent action     y$x/no   $24
                                                                                                                     Receiver




                                                                                                                     Indexer
Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

                                                                                                              ■SSCX-
No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                             Statement Reader
S tatem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                     Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised

Examined - furth er action to be taken                                                                        0 /M          SIO




Further action No(s)                                                                                               llfJ & e r S        \
                                                                                                                ip®11
                                                                                                                    v|
                                                                                                               W ® *- k         i
                                                                                                                                Wfa'
When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Num ber Form             II 1 l»w**
                                    fit Cl's   ft*   /} C o (]P .




                                                     SHEFFIELD


                                                     26 May 1989
Lord Justice Taylor
Room 662
Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON
SW1H 9AT
                                                                                       (

Dear Lord Justice


Re: Semi Final at Hillsborough, 15 April 1989

I attended both the 1988 and 1989 semifinals, and on each occasion entered the
North  Stand (cantilever) via the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

I am writing now from notes prepared earlier.  In view of what I experienced
and witnessed I did not feel able to telephone the hot-lines earlier than
around 10 days ago.  I understand the police enquiry will last until November.

My experiences and observations can be split into what happened outside the
ground, and subsequently inside, after the tragedy had occurred.

A.     Background as an observer

(i)       I attended both semifinals in 1988 and 1989
(ii)        I support Sheffield Wednesday FC and have attended many hundreds of
          matches at Hillsborough since the early 1960's.
(iii)     I am 33 years of age, a law graduate, and hence have been trained to
          analyse facts and situations.
(iv)     I am 6'4" and can see over most crowds.

B.     Outside the ground (Experiences)

(i)      I arrived at the entrance gates on Leppings Lane in order to enter the
          North Stand shortly before 2.30 p.m.
(ii)     200 - 300 people were crowding around four (?) double turnstiles into
          the ground.
(iii)    2 police officers were assigned,    standing either side of the outer
          turnstiles.
(iv)     Myself and my friend joined the "queue".
(v)      By 2.45 p.m. we were in a very serious crush which would have been
         difficult to leave.   I estimate that around 600 - 900 fans were behind
         us, trying to approach the aforementioned turnstiles.
(vi)     The two police officers did not communicate with each other, nor with
         any other officers, to my observation, from 2.30 p.m. to 2 . 5 * p.m., when
         I was finally rammed into a turnstile already occupied by another fan.
(v)      To protect myself from the crush behind me I had my arms bent- at the
         elbow pointing upwards infront of my chest.
2.



(vi)     I had to shout to the crowd behind me twice
         1) at about 2.50 p.m. to try and relieve the crush.  I shouted that
            we were all going to get in and that we should all "cool it".
         2) when shoved into the turnstile I shouted for everyone to push
         back as it was apparently jammed, two of us being in the same stile.
(v)      Once inside I approached the 20 - 40 officers who were engaged in
         conversation, apparently oblivous to the problem outside.
(vi)     I approached an officer and described the events outside, reported
         above, and commented that I thought it would have made sense to
         have opened the concertina gates at around 2.00 p.m. to 2.30 p.m.,
         and seeing as there were so many police inside, they could have
         assisted the stewards in checking tickets, as used to be the case
         at large attendences at Hillsborough in the past, especially as
         everyone should have tickets.
         The reply I received made me feel like a second class citizen.
         "But what you're forgetting is that this is a football match, and its
         not a matter of common sense".

C..    Observations outside the ground

(i)    The weather was better than in 1988.     It was bright, hot and sunny.
(ii)   There was a distinct lack of urgency in contrast to the 1988 semifinal.
        No one seemed to be in any hurry' to get into the ground, myself
        included.
(iii)   There were some fans asking me if I had a spare ticket.      Obviously
        some had travelled hoping to buy a ticket from a tout, steal a ticket
        or get into the ground somehow.
(iv)   There was no police cordon checking tickets, as there had been the
        previous year.  The lack of this cordon probably added to the lack of
        urgency before 2.30 p.m.   The cordon in 1988 ensured no one got near
        the ground without a ticket. The cordon had stretched from the end of
        bridge over the Don on -Leppings-Lane :t o “jast:by:therSweetshop at the
        other side of the gates.
(v)    There were no police with Alsatian dogs that I noticed at 2.30 p.m.
        or later.  These were evident in 1988 and assisted the maintenance
        of the cordon that year.
(vi)   There was no instruction by loudhailer at 2.30 p.m. as the year before,
        that I can recall, at least at our section of the entrance.
(vii) The general atmosphere outside the ground before "queing" commenced
        seemed quite relaxed with neither police nor fans showing much urgency.
(viii) I was under the impression that far more had arrived earlier than in
        1988, but that they had possibly had to walk further to find a public
        house open, thus having taken them further from the gound. I heard
        comments about certain pubs being closed.      So fans bought cans of beer
        from off-licenses and drank en route.
 (ix) A handful of fans (I observed maybe 6 - 12) were climbing over the
        railings into the ground between 2.30 p.m. and 2.54 p.m.
 (x)   In 1988 I remember being "shepherded" by police to the stadium from
        the moment we stepped off the coach.- The contrast this year was marked.
       We alighted from the coach, and the first thing I noticed was a fan;
        "Have you got a spare ticket, mate?" No direction by police at all.
 (xi)      A police cordon this year would perhaps have increased the urgency in
           getting into the ground when we arrived.  Instead of which, we
           actually wandered to a nearby public house, which was apparently
           closed, in order to pass some time. As you will be aware, there is
           no alcohol for sale in the stadium, as in the 1960's and 1970's, and
           no pre-match entertainment as in USA before a baseball or Amercian
           Football game.
 (xii)     I sensed a complacency in the policing generally as a result of the
           above observations when compared to the slick operation the previous
           year .
 (xiii) There appeared to be less communication between police and other police,
        and between police and fans, than in 1988, and even than at SWFC
        matches I have attended.

 D.     After 3 p.m.

 (i)          An apparent pitch invasion noticed at around 3.06 p.m.
              (Peter Beardsley had just hit the crossbar at the Kop end).
 (ii)         Match abandoned shortly/ afterwards.
 (iii)       Fan with broken arm walked infront of us with St John's Ambulance
             person.   Arm twisted at nightmarish angle.
(iv)         Fans in Leppings Lane end climbing out of terrace into stand above,
             being forced back into terrace when they spilled onto the pitch
             through gate or over barriers, by police.
(v)          Fans collapsing on pitch, apparently out of breath.
(vi)         Drunken fan runs across pitch towards Kop.
(vii)        Dead bodies are deposited on the pitch right in front of us, by
             St John's Ambulance people.   I know they are dead, their faces are
             covered by jackets, blankets etc.
(viii)       Police enter stadium by corner between Kop and North Stand (just
             in front of my seat Row 7, seat 196, North Stand).
(ix)         Police line up in front of Kop, then in front of North Stand and
             in front of Leppings Lans across the width of the pitch, perhaps
             at around the halfway line, to protect public order.    ( A handful
             of possibly distraught Liverpool fans had run to the Kop)
(x)         Meanwhile, more bodies are deposited in front of me. The kiss of
             life is being used on some, who are half naked, probably as a result
            of being dragged out of the Lepping Lane enclosure.
(xi)        Tannoy announcement "Please will you clear the pitch".     The most
            insensitive and inappropriate announcement I am ever likely to hear
            in my life.   We had seen several dead by now and the grief of
            friends /family.
(xii)       Cameramen are running around like children in a sweet shop looking
            for the best angle.   The crowd respond to their "efforts" with
            abuse.   It was a sickening sight.
(xiii)      The rest of us are helpless and shocked.
(xiv)       I leave at around 3.35 p.m.
(xv)        The St John's Ambulance people appeared to carry the burden of
            support and life saving until we left, although one regular
            ambulance had arrived and was parked right in front of the fatal
            terraces, and another had parked on the pitch in front of me.
4.

(xvi)     Fans on the pitch who were unhurt ferried bodies to just in
           front of us on any makeshift stretcher that could be used, to
           applause from the rest of us who were helpless without first
           aid knowledge.
(xvii)    Those police that knew first aid were involved in life saving,
           as was a St John's Ambulance girl, aged between 12 and 16 years.
           By 3.35 p.m. we had witnessed the depositing of some 10 - 15
           bodies onto the pitch in front of us, plus many more casualties
           including a number receiving kiss-of-life.


SUMMARY


I believe the organisation outside the ground was not up to the standards
of 1988.

I believe the attitude of the police outside was perhaps more complacent
that 1988, as the crowd developed.

There was a failure, if not a serious breakdown, in public order outside
the ground, which led to an individual officer perhaps being put in a
"rio-win" situation. Why such a breakdown in order? Whose responsibility
is it to prevent this?

Touts were in operation, encouraging   people to travel without tickets.
I've seen police observe these touts   and do nothing about them in the past.

I would not be surprised to learn that someone may have died outside the
ground, the crush was bad enough for me, entering the stand, and I am 6'4"
tall and reasonably capable of protecting myself in such a situation.

I believe it (theoretically at least) should be easier for police to
regulate a crowd inside a ground than outside.  Therefore the objective
should be to get everyone in the ground as early as possible.

Society cannot prevent an individual from enjoying a glass or two of beer
before a match. A minority of individuals cannot hold a drink.   Is it not
easier to control this minority inside rather than outside a ground?  If so,
why not allow sale of alcohol inside theground. At least people would
turn up earlier for a match.

My thoughts hark back to an earlier age, when one could arrive at a ground
and enjoy a drink in the bar with a friend or colleague.  The ticket states
"You are requested to take up your position 15 minutes before kick-off".

I am quite prepared now to describe any of the above experiences, observations
or comments, in any more detail as may be required by the public enquiry.

Yours sincerely




                  , LLBf(Hons)
