                                                                                                     Q
              South Y orkshire Police
                           MINUTE SHEET                                      date..1.0...Sep.t.emfcer...S.l..

                           Subject   SAFETy OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 197.5. -..SWF.C.



10

Ch Supt
kerold                     Please find attached copy correspondence dated 8 September 1981
i                          from South Yorkshire County Council and 2 September 1981 from
p* Division                Eastwood and Partners, together with plans showing details of
                           new radial fences on West Terrace and details of new security
                           gates (sheets 1 and 2).

                           X understand Superintendent O ’Neill is representing the division
                           at the meeting at 9.30 am on Friday, 11 September 1981.




                           Superintendent
                           OPS TWS/SM


                           Enc

                  -   2-
                  Chief Superintendent Herold, 'F' Division

                  I attended this meeting, together with Superintendent Chapman and
                  Chief Inspector Stuart of Operations Division.

                  Members of the Fire Service and Buildings Department were in
                  attendance and the only reservations expressed were by the Fire
                  Service, who indicated that the security gates - which will be
                  open during football matches - should not in any way restrict the
                  egress routes, which they feel are of minimum width as it is.

                  The Buildings representative indicated he would seek further
                  information regarding the construction materials to be used but
                  this would pose no problem.




                  Superintendent
                  11.9.81




 G E N /5 2
^ASTWOOD                      & PARTNERS                                                                              BOWMAKER HOUSE
                 Consulting       Engineers                                                                           ? 3 KINGFIELD ROAD
                                                                                                                      S h e ffie ld s n   9as
 W . E a s tw o o d        B.Eng., P h . D , F .E n g .. F .i.C .E .
                           F .I .S t r u c tE . F .G .S .. M .C o n s.E .
                                                                                                                      Te!.:   (07 4 2 ) 583S71
 A. A. W ood               B .E n g , P h . D . C . E n g . F .I.C .E ,
                           F .IjS tru ct-E . M .I.W .E .S , M .C o n s.E

A.     G. B u rd e tt    G .M „ B .S c .( E n g ) . C .E n g ., M .I.C.E.

 R* C« A . EdStWOOd       B . S c , C .E n g „ M .I.C .E „ M .I.StrucL E .

A ssociates:
G eoffrey S p ir          c.Ent ., m . i . c . e .,   M .i.M e c h .E .

C. S. G reav es           B .E n j ., C . E n r ., M .I.C .E ., M .LScrucx.E.

A. J . C lough           B.A ., C .E n g ., M .C .I.B .S ...M .i.M e c h .E .                      Our R e f :    WE/JAS/PB/3563
J . A. S tra n g e       c.Ent .. Mj.stnjct.E.
                                                                                                   Your R e f :
Consultant:
A.    L. Percy            M .T e c h .fH o n .). B.Sc.. C . E n j . . F .I.C .E .,
                          F .I.S tru c t.E ., F .I.M u n .E ., M .R .T .P .I.




 CountyYH l l l hire C °Unty C o u n c i l >                                                                      2 September,       1981
 BARNSLEY, S.’ Yorks.
 S7Q           2TN.



 For the attention of Mr. D. Vaugh an .


 Dear Mr. Vaughan,

                        Sheffield Wednesday Football Club L t d .
                            Radial Fences at Leppings Lane End

               We have been instructed by the Club to organise the
installation of two radial fences on the terrace at the
Leppings lane end of the ground.

               It is intended that these fences are so positioned
that they divide this section of the terrace into
approximately three equal areas^ each served by its own
entrance.

               By dividing t h e •terrace more control over supporters
should result.                    A visiting team with only a few followers
will be allocated one section, with the other two sections
retained by the home supporters.

               Larger contingents of visiting spectators could be
accommodated in two or all three areas as their numbers
dictate.

               A 1.15 metre wide gate is proposed at the rear of
each fence to give access for maintenance and also policing
during a game.                   The gate could be left open, but fastened
back,           to connect the areas during a game if adjacent ones


                                                           Registered in England -   No. 1134531
                                                                     SHEET   2


E A S T W O O D & PARTNERS




    are accupied by supporters of the same team.       When establishing
    the height we have considered that the views to the corner
    flags should not be restricted any further than they are at
    present by the perimeter fence.      We therefore propose that the
    top of the fence should be approximately 1680mm above the
   terra ce .

           This may not prevent the odd spectator climbing the fence
   but should eliminate a mass invasion from one area to the other.
   Fences this height appear to work successfully at St.       James's
   Park,    the home of Newcastle United.

           We would be pleased if this specific point can be discussed
   within the Working Party and your comments forwarded to us.

           Also to be included in the same contract are some gates at
   various locations around the north stand.        Now the gymnasium is
   open to the general public security to other parts of the ground
   must be maintained.       It is proposed that gates are provided at
   the top of the ramps at both ends of the stand with additional
   gates at ground floor level at the Penistone Road end of the
   stand.     A separate gate will be placed behind the west ramp to
   prevent people going round the rear of the gymnasium towards
   Leppings Lane.

           Six copies of our drawing -3563/1 together with two copies
   of our drawings 3563/2 and 3 (for reference only) are enclosed.


                                            Yours sincerely,




                                                                         (
   c.c.    Mr. E. England,
           S.W.F.C. Ltd.
                 South Yorkshire Police
Tor­              MINUTE SHEET                   15 Sept 1981

ch Supt Herold
                  Subfart SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 -
F Division               SWFC




                 Sir

                 Please find attached for your information
                 copies of minutes of the meeting held at
                 Division Street Fire Station, Sheffield, on
                 11 September 1981 and copy of letter dated
                 14 September 1981 to Eastwood and Partners
                 from South Yorkshire County Council.




                 superintendent
                 OPS WS/SM

                 Enc




  ,    \
                                          ^        Ip P 1
South YorkshireCounty Council
F. A. M allett, L L B ., C h ie f E xecu tive                    C o u n ty Hall
                                                                 B arnsley
J.C . Harris, M.A., LL.B, (C an tab), C o u n ty S e cre tary    S o u t h Yorkshire S 7 0 2TN
D e p a r tm e n t of A d m in istra tio n                       T elep ho ne: Barnsley
                                                                 ( S T D 0 2 2 6 ) 86141
                                                                 Telex: 547675


O urR ef:      DV/SY/583/5             Y ourRef:   WE/KH/3563    D a te :   14th September, 1981.



Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

Referring to your letter of 9th September, the Officer Working Party
(Sheffield District) has considered the proposals referred to in your
letter of 2nd September and accompanying plans .

1.     Radial Barriers on West Terrace

Whilst welcoming the increased control on the Terrace which should
result, concern was expressed as to the problems which could occur with
opposing fans mixing at the rear of the West Stand and/or at the entry/
exit gates. However, it was felt that only experience would show
whether this would prove to be a reality and, if realised, whether the
problem was of. such a small scale that it could be easily coped with by
the police.

Accordingly, the Officer Working Party at this stage sees no objection
to the proposals to instal two 1680 mm high radial barriers, with 1.15
metre gates at the rear, on the West Terrace, subject to:-

(a) the further calculations required by the Building Authority being
     satisfactory (Mr. Sheriff to contact you direct);

(b) confirmation that adequate headroom will be available at the rear
     of the Terrace after installation of the barriers and gates, and

(c) the new gates at the rear of the Terrace also being under police
     control.

2.     Security Gates around North Stand

The Officer Working Party fully recognises the Club's need to provide
security for the remainder of the stadium when only the gymnasium is in
use.

Provided that the gates and/or their supports, hinges, etc. do not
impinge on the existing critical ramp widths and the gates are secured
in the .fully open position on match days, the Officer Working Party
sees no objection to the erection of security gates around the North Stand

Dr. W. Eastwood,                                             ^
Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,
Consulting Engineers,
Bowmaker House,
23 Kingfield Road,
Sheffield,                                                   .
QonfVi      YnT*V c h                                    —
 Dr. W. Eastwood                -   2   -                14th September, 1981.
                                            •i



 3.    Other Matters

 Two other matters were also raised by the Officer Working Party relating
 to the Police and First Aid Facilities and the siting of certain of the
 Lottery Ticket Boxes.

 (a)   Police and First Aid Facilities

       It was recalled that the existing unsatisfactory police and first
       aid facilities under the North Stand had been accepted on an interim
       basis on the understanding that the Club would provide purpose built
       replacement facilities in the 1980 close season.

       It is appreciated that discussions on the detailed requirements are
       still continuing, but it is f£lt that the Club should be asked to give
       a firm indication when the new police and first aid facilities are to'
       be provided.
 (b)   Lottery Ticket Boxes

       Concern was expressed as to the blocked egress which could result if
       the timber lottery ticket boxes presently sited close to the ramps
       were to be tipped over or ignited, either accidentally or deliberately

       The Officer Working Party felt that the Club should be requested to
       re-site the boxes in a less critical position.

X attach an additional copy of this letter for your use.

                                            Yours faithfully,




                                            Chief Executive.
                        SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

               Note of a Meeting of the Officer Working Party
               (Sheffield District).' fa-eld at the Division Street
               Fire Station, Sheffield, on 11th September 1981


 PRESENT:     D.   Chapman (South Yorkshire Police)
              B.   A. Ellis (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
              P.   Garner (South Yorkshire Police)
              D.   Horner (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
              W.   O'Neill (South Yorkshire Police)
              J.   Ray (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
              D.   Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
              T.   W. Stuart (South Yorkshire Police)
              D.   I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)

1 .___ Purpose of Meeting

The purpose of the meeting was to consider the letter dated 2nd September
and plans submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of the
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd. relating to the proposed erection
of Radial Barriers on the West Terrace for crowd control purposes and
Security Gates at various locations around the North Stand now that the
gymnasium was open to the general public..

2 .____Radial Barriers on West Terrace

Whilst there were drawbacks to the division of the terrace into
approximately three equal areas, each served by its own entrance, the
Working Party felt that increased control on the Terrace should result
from the proposals. For instance there could well be problems with
opposing fans mixing at the rear of the West Stand and/or the final exit
gates, but the police considered that they could cope with any problems
of this nature.

The adequacy and positioning of the gates to be installed at the rear of
the radial barriers was also discussed, as well as the use of the
existing gates in the pitch perimeter security fence at the front of the
Terrace.

It was noted that the plans submitted did not indicate the amount of head­
room which would be available at the rear of the Terrace should the
radial barriers and gates be installed.

IT WAS AGREED that Mr. Vaughan should notify Messrs. Eastwood and Partners
that the Officer Working Party sees no objection to the proposals to instal
two 1680mm high radial barriers, with 1.15 metre wide gates at the rear,
on the West Terrace at the Hillsborough Stadium, subject to:-

      (i)'     the further calculations required by the Building
                Authority being satisfactory;

      (ii)     confirmation that adequate headroom will be
                available at the rear of the Terrace, and

      (iii)    the new gates at the rear of the Terrace also being
               under police control.
3.    Security Gates around North Stand

Now that the gymnasium was open to .the general public, the Club wished to
erect security gates at the top of -the ramps at both ends of the North
Stand, with additional gates at ground floor level at the Penistone Road
end of the Stand. A separate gate would also be placed behind the West
Ramp to prevent people going round the rear of the gymnasium towards
Leppingp Lane.          •

These gates would .be fastened when the gymnasium only was in use so as to
provide security for the rest of the ground. However, on match days they
would be secured in the fully open position to allow unrestricted access.

IT WAS AGREED that Mr. Vaughan should notify Messrs. Eastwood and Partners
that the Officer Working Party sees no objection to the erection of security
gates around the North Stand, subject toJ the gates and/or their supports,
hinges, etc not impinging on the existing critical ramp widths, and to the
gates being secured in the fully open position on match days.

4.    Police and First Aid Facilities

It was recalled that the existing unsatisfactory police and first aid
facilities under the North Stand had been accepted on an interim basis.
The Club had undertaken to provide purpose built facilities in a similar
position to the existing timbered facili-ties during the 1980 close
season. Whilst some progress had been made in discussing details of the
facilities, no firm indication had yet been given as to when they would
actually be provided.

IT WAS AGREED that M r .. D. Vaughan should press the Club and/or its
Consultants   for a firm indication as to when the new police and first
aid facilities are toobe provided.

5.    Lottery Ticket Boxes

Attention was drawn to the blocked egress which could result if the
timber lottery ticket boxes presently sited close to the ramps were, to
be tipped over or ignited, either accidentally or deliberately.

IT WAS AGREED that Mr. Vaughan should draw the Club’s attention to the
desirability of re-siting the lottery ticket boxes.
                         SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

                   Note of a Meeting of the Officer Working Party
                   (Sheffield District).’beld at the Division Street
                   Fire Station, Sheffield, on 11th September 1981


PRESENT:      D.   Chapman (South. Yorkshire Police)
              B.   A. Ellis (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
              P.   Garner (South Yorkshire Police)
              D.   H o m e r (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
              W.   O'Neill (South Yorkshire Police)
              J.   Ray (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
              D.   Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
              T.   W. Stuart (South Yorkshire Police)
              D.   I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)

1 •___ Purpose of Meeting

The purpose of the meeting was to consider the letter dated 2nd September
and plans submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of the
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd. relating to the proposed erection
of Radial Barriers on the West Terrace for crowd control purposes and
Security Gates at various locations around the North Stand now that the
gymnasium was open to the general public,.

2.   Radial Barriers on West Terrace

Whilst there were drawbacks to the division of the terrace into
approximately three equal areas, each served by its own entrance, the
Working Party felt that increased control on the Terrace should result
from the proposals. For instance there could well be problems with
opposing fans mixing at the rear of the West Stand and/or the final exit
gates, but the police considered that they could cope with any problems
of this nature.

The adequacy and positioning of the gates to be installed at the rear of
the radial barriers was also discussed, as well as the .use of the
existing gates in the pitch perimeter security fence at the front of the
Terrace.

It was noted that the plans submitted did not indicate the amount of head­
room which would be available at the rear of the Terrace should the
radial barriers and'gates be installed.

IT WAS AGREED that Mr. Vaughan should notify Messrs. Eastwood and Partners
thatthe Officer Working Party sees no objection to the proposals to instal
two 1680mm high radial barriers, with 1.15 metre wide gates at the rear,
on the West Terrace at the Hillsborough Stadium, subject to:-

      (i)-         the further calculations required by the Building
                   Authority being satisfactory;

      (ii)         confirmation that adequate headroom will be
                   available at the rear of the Terrace, and

      (iii)         the new gates at the rear of the Terrace also being
                   under police control.
3.    Security Gates around North Stand

Now that the gymnasium was open to .the general public, the Club wished to
erect security gates at the top o i -the ramps at both ends of the North
Stand, with additional gates at ground floor level at the Penistone Road
end of the Stand. A separate gate would also be placed behind the West
Ramp to prevent people going round the rear of the gymnasium towards
Leppin<£ Lane.          •

These gates would .be fastened when the gymnasium only was in use so as to
provide security for the rest of the ground. However, on match days they
would be secured in the fully open position to allow unrestricted access.

IT WAS AGREED that Hr. Vaughan should notify Messrs. Eastwood and Partners
that the Officer Working Party sees no objection to the erection of securi
gates around the North Stand, subject toJ the gates and/or their supports,
hinges, etc not impinging on the   existing critical ramp widths, and to the
gates being secured in the fullyopen position on match days.

4.    Police and First Aid Facilities

It was recalled that the existing unsatisfactory police and first aid
facilities under the North Stand had been accepted on an interim basis.
The Club had undertaken to provide purpose built facilities in a similar
position to the existing timbered facilities during the 1980 close
season. Whilst some progress had been made in discussing details of the
facilities, no firm indication had yet been given as to when they would
actually be provided.

IT WAS AGREED that Mr..D. Vaughan should press the Club and/or its
Consultants   for a firm indication as to when the new police and first
aid facilities are to:be provided.

5.    Lottery Ticket Boxes

Attention was drawn to the blocked egress which could result if the
timber lottery ticket boxes presently sited close to the ramps were- to
be tipped over or ignited, either accidentally or deliberately.

IT WAS AGREED that Mr. Vaughan should draw the Club's attention to the
desirability of re-siting the lottery ticket boxes.
The Chief Executive                                       DV/MH/533/5
South Yorkshire County Council                            p/
County Hall
BARNSLEY                                                  18 January 1982
South Yorkshire
S70 2TN



Dear Sir

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975
SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB LTD

I refer to your letter of 23 December 1981 and to the letter from Messrs.
Eastwood & Partners - the Club's consulting engineers - relating to their
proposals to erect a pair of security gates at the base of the two staircases
at the rear of the West Stand at the ground. Fran a policing point of view I
see no problems whatever concerning the erection of these gates, subject of
course to thea being secured in a fully open position during the time the
public parts of the ground are occupied when matches are being played.

Dealing now with the radial fences which have recently been installed on the
Leppings Lane terracing, I can confirm that the fences are working particularly
well and proving to be most satisfactory in effecting the segregation of
opposing groups of fans. Since the fences were put up there has been no
fixture at the ground of sufficient interest to result in that entire section
of terracing being given to one group of fans and so I an unable to comment in
that respect, but I see no problems whatever.

However, there are one or too points concerning the actual construction of the
fencing which give cause for concern from a police point of view. In some
places the existing barrier rails have been extended up to and completely
through the new radial fences at a height of 4 ’6" or so from the ground,
making it very easy for fans to climb from one pen to another. In other
places the existing barrier rails have been cut off short of the radial
fences, leaving what the police consider to be dangerous pieces protruding
into some of the gangways. This matter has been drawn to the attention of the
Club Secretary, who has been advised of my intention to bring it to your
notice. I would point out that Mr. England totally agrees with police
observations regarding the construction of the radial fences but I understand
from him that it is being suggested that any alterations could conceivably
result in a reduction in the capacity of the Leppings Lane terracing. I am
not aware of the thinking behind that but for my part see no reason why that
should be.




               */<
.   •
        2

        The Chief Executive
        South Yorkshire County Council

        18 January 1982


        SAFETI OF SPORT? G?.CU?OS ACT, 1575
        SHEFFIELD WEVliESEAY FOOTBALL CLUB LTD

        I apologiac ror tne delay in replying to you but I ;m 3urc you will appreciate
        that the recen~ bad weather ban necessitated the ccuiceliation of a nmnber of
        matches at the “round vhich wculd perhaps have provide Jl greater e;nsrier.ee in
        the handling of spectators within the new pens - particularly the natch on
        Boxing Day.

        Yours £a2*£z£v3.1'




        Chief Superintendent




                                   I
      South Yorkshire Countv Council
      F. A . M allott. LL.B.. Chief Executive                          County Ha!!
                                                                       Barnsley
      J .C . H arris, M.A., LL .B ,(C antab), County S e c re ta ry    S o u th >orksh ire S70 2T; !
      D e p a r tm e n t of Adm inistration                            T elephone: Barns ey
                                                                       ( S T D C226) 861-
                                                                       Telex: 547675


      O u r Ref;                            Your Ref:                  Date:
      D V /M H /5 8 3 /5                     O P S /T S                23rd !)ecembe: , 19£ 1




Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.

I attach a copy of a letter dated 14th December and plan from
Messrs. Eastvood & Partners (the Club's Consultants) relating
to the proposed erection of pairs of gates at the bottom of the
two staircases at the rear of the West Stand at the Hillsborough
Stadium.

Perhaps you will let me have your comments on the proposal from
a policing point of view, as well as confirming that the radial
fences and security gates already installed are proving to be
satisfactory.

An additional copy of this letter and enclosures is attached for
Divisional use.

                                                   Yours faithfully,




                                                   Chief Executive




The Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police,
Police Headquarters,
Snig Hill,
SHEFFIELD,
S3 8LY.
 E A S TW O O D & PARTNERS                                                                                                    BOWMAKER HOUSE
                    Consulting       Engineers                                                                                23 KINGFIELD ROAD
                                                                                                                              SHEFFIELD S11 9AS
W . E a s tw o o d            B.Eng.. P h D„ F.Eng,, F.I.C.E..
                                                                                                                              Tel.: (07 4 2 ) 583871
                              F .l.S truct.E „ F.G .S.. M .Cons.E.

A . A . W o od                B .E n g . P h . D . C Eng.. F.I.C.E..
                              F .l.S tr u c t E_ M.I.W.E.S.. M .C o n s E

A . G . B u rd e tt          G M.. B .S c .(E n g ). C.Eng.. M.I.C.E.

R. C . A. E a s tw o o d     B.Sc.. C.Eng.. M.I.C.E.. M .I.Stru ct E.

A ssociates:
G eoffrey Spir               c.Ent      . m . i . c . e . . M .i.M ech.E .

C. S. G reaves              B .En{ ..   CEnt      . m . i . c . e . , M .i.S tru c -.E .

A. J . ClOUgh               B.A ., C . E n j . . M .C .I.B .S.. M .i.M ech.E .                         Our-BeU         KEZJAS/ SR/3,563
J . A. S tra n g e          C . E n j ., M .I.S tru c t.E .
                                                                                                       Your R e f:        -       '       f
C o n su lta n t:
A.        L. Percy          MT e c h .( H o n .) .  B S c . . C .E n t .. F.I.C.E.
                             F .l.S tr u c t.E .. F.I.M u n .E ., M .R .T .P I.
                                                                                                          1 2 D E C 19S i
                                                                                                   CM/itiY k a i l .
                                                                                                   SOvM                 '7u jin


 South Yorkshire County Council,                                                                                       14 December,           1981
 County Hall,
 Barnsley,
 South Yorkshire.
 S70 2TN


 For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan

 Dear Mr. Vaughan,

                          Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                        Radial Fences at Leppings Lane End
                                        and Security Gates

                    The work on the radial fences and security gates
 indicated on our drawings 3563/1-3 which we sent to you on
2 September 1981,                               is now su) s.t\r;T * al] '                          ;nr l
                    Three first team home games have been played since the
fences were erected.                                            We have not heard any formal comments
from the Working Party about the operation of the fences and
their access gates but we understand that representatives of the
South Yorkshire Police have inspected the work and they are
satisfied with the new arrangements.
                    To increase security it is proposed that pairs of gates
are installed at the bottom of the two staircases at the back of
the West Stand.                            Two copies *.f                                  ur drawing 3563/4 are enclosed
showing details of the gates.



                                                                                           Yours sincerely,



                                                              'Registered- !!!"England -      No
 South Yorkshire County Council
F. A . M a lle tt. LL.B., Chief E xecutive                               C o u n ty Hal!
                                                                         B arnsley
J .C .H a r r i s , M.A., L L .B ,(C antab ), C ounty S e c re ta ry .   S o u t h Yorkshire S 7 0 2TN
D e p a r t m e n t of A dm inistratio n                                 T elep ho ne: Barnsley
                                                                         ( S T D 0226) 86141
                                                                         Telex: 547675


O u r Ref:    BV/SY/583/5                  You.-Ref: WE/JAS/SR/3563      D a te :   20th January, 1982.


Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.

In reply to your letter dated 14th December, 1981, I understand that
the Building Authority has contacted your office direct for clarification
on a small number of points regarding the proposed installation of pairs
of gates at the bottom of the two staircases at the back of the West
Stand.  Subject to the satisfactory resolution of these points and, of
course, to the gates being secured in the fully open position during the
time the public parts of the stadium are occupied when matches are
being played, the Officer Working Party has no objection to the proposals.

As regards the radial fences installed on the West Terrace and the
security gates around the North Stand, the Officer Working Party wishes
to imake the following comments

(a)       Radial Barriers on West Terrace

The matches played at the stadium since the installation of the barriers
confirm that they appear to be working well and satisfactorily effect the
segregation of opposing groups of fans. However, the entire section of
the Terrace has yet to be given to one group of fans.

The Police inform me that, on installation of the new radial barriers,
the existing crush barriers have been extended in some places up to and
completely through the new, radial barriers at a height of 4'6" or so
from the ground. The effect is to make it very easy for fans to climb
from one pen to another.   In other places the existing crush barrier
rails have been cut off short of the radial barriers in a manner which
leaves dangerous pieces protruding into some of the gangways.

(b)       Security Gates around the North Stand

You will recall that my                     letter of 14th September, 1981 stated that,
provided that the gates                     and/or their supports, hinges, etc., do not
impinge on the existing                     critical ramp widths, the Officer Working Party
saw no objection to the                     erection of the security gates.

I am informed that the manner in which the gates have been installed
has resulted in each gate's hinge impinging at least 1\" into the width
of the ramp. This means that there is a 15" reduction in width of the
                                   ~1
Dr. W. Eastwood,
Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,
Consulting Engineers,
Bovmaker House,
23 Kingfield Road,
Shef f ield,
Dr. W. Eastwood                 -2-                      20th January, 1982.



means of escape on each ramp.

As the Annual winter inspection of the Hillsborough Stadium is due
to take place anytime around now, I would suggest the opportunity be
taken to discuss these matters at the inspection.

Perhaps you would contact Mr. D. Vaughan of my staff (extension 422)
so that the necessary arrangements may be made.

An additional copy of this letter is attached for your use.

                                      Yours faithfully,




                                      Chief Executive.
                       SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

                Note of a Meeting held at the Hillsborough Stadium,
                    Sheffield on 4th February, 1982


PRESENT:   Representing the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd

           E. England        (Secretary)
           Dr. W. Eastwood   (Messrs. Eastwood & Partners)
           J. Strange        (Messrs. Eastwood & Partners)

           Representing the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)

           Ms. J. Barker        (South Yorkshire Police)
           R. Hero Id           (South Yorkshire Police)
           D. Horner            (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
           M. Johnson           (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
           D. Sheriff           (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District
                                 Council)
           D. Sumner            (City of Sheffield Metropolitan Disi rict
                                 Council)
           D. I. Vaughan        (South Yorkshire County Council)
           F. Waterhouse        (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)

1 .____Purpose of Meeting

The purpose of the meeting was to discuss«-£he apparent difference of opinion
on certain aspects of the radial barriers installed on the West Terrace
and the security gates at the top of the North stand ramps, as well as to
carry out the usual winter inspection of the Stadium.

2 .___ Ground Inspection

A.   West Terrace

Whilst the whole Terrace had yet to be used, the matches played since the
erection of the radial barriers indicated that generally they worked well and
satisfactorily effected the segregation of opposing groups of fans.        ^

However, the police pointed out that in places the existing crusn barriers
had been extended up to and, in some cases, completely through the new
radial barriers, which had the effect of making it relatively easy for anyone
who wished to do so to clic’o from one pen to another. Also, in the pen
nearest to the South Stand, a small length of existing crush barrier had been
left unsupported.

IT WAS AGREED -

(i)   That, on balance, it was preferable from a safety point of view to
prevent crowd surge by the existing barriers being extended up to and/or
through the new radial barriers than to completely prevent persons being
able to climb from one pen to another, subject to review at the end of the
current season.

(ii) That the unsupported small length of existing crush barrier would
be cut off.

                                        -1-
B.    West Stand ■

One of the security gates which the Club wished to instal at the bottom of
the two staircases had now been erected.

IT WAS AGREED       that this could be regarded as satisfactory.

C.    North Stand

The Fire Service felt that the manner in which the security gates had been
installed at the top of the ramps unduly restricted the exit width available.

The Club's Consultants and the Fire Service disagreed on the interpretation
of paragraph 16 of the "Green Guide", and consequently on the figure to be
applied in the calculation for assessing whether the exit width lost at the top
of the ramps by the method of security gate installation was critical or not.

IT WAS AGREED   that,   as the point might well have been covered in the
initial consideration   of the Club's application for a General Safety
Certificate, the point would not be pursued at the moment.

      NOTE - A search   of the file subsequently revealed that, as
             suspected, the point had been considered at a
             meeting of the Officer Working Party on 12.2.79,
             the relevant part of the Note of the meeting reaaing:-

                    "the construction and width of the ramps being   .         i    a   .
                     such that they could quite-properly be    ^          U        ThCSf** /
                     regarded as elevated roadways".
                                                                                      o ,« .
D.    Spion   Kod


It was noted that the infilling of the step adjacent to the handrail on
the left of the original exit at the top of the Kop had taken place; that
the boundary fence at the top of the Kop had been reinforced, and that the
existing barriers had been permanently extended and the area at the foot
of the nex-r Kop exit (adjacent to the brick built refreshment point)
levelled off as agreed.

E.    South Stand

The agreement to visually inspect the roof trusses for apparent deflection
after exceptional gale or snow loading conditions was recalled.

F.    Items of General Maintenance

IT WAS AGREED       that the following items of general maintenance required
attention:-

(i)   The rounding off of the corners on the steelwork of the underside of
the exit at the southerly end of the West Stand (to be done that day), as
well as the rounding off of the brackets to the North Stand security gates

(ii)  The repair or replacement of the corroding stanchions supporting the
fencing and sheeting above the boundary wall on the right hand side of
Gate "0".


                                          -2-
(iii) The cracks'in the concrete terracing of the Spion Kop to be filled.

(iv) The wooden support to the electrical line between the brick built
refreshment point and the Owls Club to be fixed mere securely.

(v)   The brick wall between the South Stand and the Spion Kop (nearest
to the South Stand) to be pointed.

(vi) The concrete supporting strut to the wall between the Spion Kop and
the South Stand (nearest to the Spion Kop) to be protected (cracks and
exposed bar).

G.    Temporary Structures

Concern was expressed as to the possibility of inadequate structural stability
of temporary structures, such as scaffolding used in connection with
television transmissions.

Paragraph 20 of the Club's General Safety Certificate required T.V. cameras
and portable equipment to be placed only in such positions as may be agreed
between the Police and the Club. The Club also were generally required to
ensure that the Stadium complied with good engineering and building practices
and with the relevant British Standard Specification or Code of Practice.

IT WAS AGREED that the question of temporary structures should be kept
under review, and that the Club's Consultants should give advice to the
Club.

3.    Future Developments

A.    Police and First Aid Facilities

It was likely that, following continuing consultations with the Police, the
Club would shortly be in a position to formally notify the County Council
that the new Police and First Aid Facilities would be provided in the
forthcoming close season.

B.    Additional Turnstiles and Exit Gate in Penistone Read

The Club hoped to formally notify the County Council shortly of their
intention to proceed in the forthcoming close season with the demolition of
some of the existing toilets on the Penistone Road side of the Stadium in   j
order to provide additional turnstiles and exit gate on that side of the ^
Stadium.

C.    Widening of Walkway and Erection of New Fence

Because of drainage problems, the existing concrete panel fence to the
rear of the Spion Kop (nearest to the Owls Club) hac had to be removed.!
When settlement was complete, it was intended to widen the existing
walkway and erect a new fence on the revised line.
