ROBERT FREDERICK LAX



CHIEF INSPECTOR



ROAD TRAFFIC DIVISION




On the 15 April 1989, I was detailed to 8.00 a.m. to 8.00 p.m. using

call sign GHV1.

My duties and responsibilities were the control and supervision of the

Road Traffic Division, Southern Section, in respect of all traffic

travelling to Hillsborough from the south for the semi-final.    In

practical terms, this meant I had command of the Ml Motorway from

Junction 30 (Barlborough) to Junction 3^ Tinsley, the Sheffield Parkway

and designated routes into Sheffield from the south.    The vast majority

of traffic using these routes originated in Nottingham.

I commenced duty at Main Street Traffic Office, Rotherham, at

approximately 7*30 a,.m. and travelled to Woodall Police Post to brief

the officers under my command.

At 8.30 a.m. Superintendent Brougham opened the briefing and generally

outlined his overall requirements.

The briefing then split into two groups - I continued to brief the

 officers detailed to perform duties in relation to the fans travelling

 from Nottingham to Hillsborough.    The briefing was based on the Road

 Traffic Operational Order.

 At approximately 0900 all officers were deployed to their specific

 duties.

 I went on patrol of m y area responsibility as observer in Jaguar patrol
car E142VAK with Inspector Cawthorne.

We patrolled the Ml motorway from the force boundary with Derbyshire to

Junction 34 at Tinsley and we also checked the north bound service area

at Woodall.

At around 10.30 hours we noticed a steady build up of traffic travelling

north and cars/mini buses in particular with football supporters on

board.

By 12.30 hours traffic flow north on the Ml had become very heavy at

times.   Stationary traffic was backing up the slip road at Tinsley and

into lane one of the north bound.

Officers were deployed at Junction 34 and at the top of the slip road to

ease the tail-back of traffic on to the motorway.

Whilst at Tinsley at the bottom of the slip road, Inspector Cawthorne

and I noticed a mini—bus with Notts fans.     Some appeared to be drinking

 from cans.    Inspector Cawthorne instructed the vehicle to be stopped and

 searched.    An amount of canned and bottled beer was found on the bus.

The occupants claimed to be unaware of the regulations regarding alcohol

 but immediately offered to dispose of the beer.    We allowed them to do

 this on the roadside and as they did not appear drunk I allowed them to

 continue.

 During the time 1230-1330, the signs on the north bound Ml showing

 football traffic via Junction 34 were altered twice to show via Junction

 33 Catcliffe.    This was to relieve congestion at Tinsley.

 I was present at Junction 33 Catcliffe, when the diversion was put in

 force and I assisted with traffic flow at the junction.

 The diversion worked well and Tinsley quickly cleared whereupon the

 diversion was lifted.    The motorway was kept clear of standing traffic.

 Reports were received of some congestion at Park Square and in the
Attercliffe area as a result of the diversion but motorcyclists had been

deployed to assist on these routes.

Between 1330-1400 there was a noticable drop in traffic on the motorway

north bound.   In particular there was little or no football traffic.

At 1420 I had checked with Inspector Cawthorne Ml Junction 34, Junction

33 we also had patrolled from Tinsley via Attercliffe,    PrinceofWales

Road to the Parkway.   All routes were perfectly clear.   Therewas some

reports from the motorcycle wing of residual traffic in the Burngreave

area but they were dealing with it.

Shortly after that time officers on duty on the Ml south of Sheffield

and at Junction 33 and Junction 34 of the Ml were stood down to their

respective meal areas (these being Brightside Lane Driving School and

the service area of Woodall).

At 1430 we attended at Woodall Police Post.

At around 1450 we went to the service area on the north bound at

Woodall.

At sometime around 1505-1510 whilst in the service area for meal with

Inspector Cawthorne, I was monitoring VHF radio when I noted ground

control requesting dog handlers into the ground.

I then heard "OPERATION SUPPORT" all officers to the ground.

Together with Inspector Cawthorne I made my way back to the police post

and en route Inspector Cawthorne questioned Force Operations if all

motorway patrols should attend.   He received a reply in the affirmative.

At around 1520 we attended at the Force Driving School where I liaised

briefly with Superintendent Brougham (0HX1).   We then departed directly

to Claywheels Lane traffic garage - adjacent to Hillsborough.

At around 1525 we arrived at Claywheels.   I assisted Inspector Cawthorne

and Superintendent Brougham in receiving the patrols as they arrived.
                                                                                2it
                                 -    4   -




At approximately 1530-1535 after Superintendent Brougham had deployed

motorcycle patrols I was deployed with Inspector Cawthorne to ensure the

motorway to the south was clear.

Junction 34 at Tinsley was checked.           Lane one was coned off to allow

free flow of traffic onto the motorway and Inspector Walker was left in

charge.

At 1555 we checked Woodall service area south bound and found no Police

Officers present.   I understood at that time that Inspector Steele had

been deployed from Claywheels Lane but his whereabouts at that time were

not known.

I remained at Woodall south bound and noticed a heavy volume of football

supporters entering the services.

Operations asked via radio if I required a police presence from

Derbyshire Police at Woodall.        I agreed that if Derbyshire could supply

 two patrols to Woodall it would be appreciated.

The service area continued to fill with football supporters in the main

Notts supporters.

Traffic on the motorway was flowing smoothly although very busy.

During this period Inspector Steele arrived with part of his team and

 patrolled the service area.    Also an Inspector and approximately ten

 officers from Chesterfield assisted by patrolling the service area.

 By about 1920 traffic on the motorway and the service area had returned

 to normal.

 No problems had been encountered and officers were stood down.

 At around 2000 with Inspector Cawthorne I returned to the Rotherham

 traffic office.

 At 2100 we liaised with Superintendent Brougham.

 At 2130 I retired from duty.
