                                                                                       M I R . 15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                            Date and time raised       3 ! S jg<=»,                 Number


Title                                                                                               fS j
(Include source
         source and any document number if relevant)                  ^


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Y^s/Nlo   / l£ .Q r <X            6 *0
                                                                                                                    Receiver


                                                                                                                ■T * f?
                                                                                                                    Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                     ic44
                                                                                                                Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                    Indexer
Indexed as indicated
                                                                                                                   '? C
No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken




Further action No(s)                                                                                                Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                      hx.xfe               I A-^-f l j q / 2.

       HILLSBOROUGH                  STEERING                COMMITTEE
                    c/o CastCe Chambers, Coo^Street, LiverpootL2 SS9i
                                Tel: 255-0628 Jo*: 236 0047


Mervin Jones Esq.,                                                3rd July 1989
Assistant Chief Constable,
West Midlands Police,
Furnival House2
SHEFFIELD




Dear Mr Jones,

I confirm the request made initially by Counsel for the injured and bereaved
Mr Hytner QC, through Mr Collins QC, for arrangements to be made for the video
footage of the scenes on the terraces at the Leppings Lane end to be shown to
those bereaved families who wished to see the videos at Liverpool.

We are very much obliged to you for agreeing to this request and I will be in
touch to arrange a convenient date for the showing.

I have written in the last Bulletin to all Solicitor members of the Group
notifying them of the proposed showing, warning them that the scenes are
distressing and asking them to confirm whether their clients do wish to
attend.

Todate I have received positive replies from approximately 6 or 7 firms but
have given everyone a deadline of Friday this week to let me know whether their
clients do wish to attend and if convenient to you I will get in touch in the
early part of next week to let you know numbers and so that a convenient date
and time can be arranged.

Some Social Workers are willing to attend with their clients which should help
and as agreed I have extended the invitation to Social Workers who are involved
in the helpline" projects in the Merseyside area.      I also confirm that some
of the Groups clients have also expressed the wish to see the still photographs
which were exhibited at the Inquiry and if they can identify relatives have
a print.

I understand that there is a spare set of negatives and if you wish I would
be happy to take those and to arrange for prints to be available at Liverpool
for Social Workers and clients to see and then if they wish we can arrange to
take further prints for their use.

I look forward to hearing from you and again I am very grateful for your assistance.

Yours sincereljl
        HILLSBOROUGH                     STEERING                   COMMITTEE
                     c/o CastCe Chambers, Cook^Street, L iv erp o o lL 2 9S9-C
                       Tel: 051 255-0628 J o *: 051 2 36 0047 <DX 14100




Chief Superintendant M Foster,                                             31st July 1989
Netchells Gren Police Station,                                            |        |
Fowler Street,
BIRMINGHAM   B7 5DA




Dear Mick,

Many thanks to you and to all Team for the way in which you received
i        I and myself on Friday.

I felt our visit was emmensely worth while, it gave me an insi^feTinto what
was happening and - in practical terms as far as identification of test cases
for the civil action was concerned - was invaluable.

It also enables me to deal with a number of questions which may                  arise from
members of our Group.

Dealing with the practice matters which flowed from the visit I note that
you are still looking for additional witness statements and I will forward
to you over the next couple of days copies of those statements which have
been passed through to me by Solicitor members of the Group since the Inquiry
closed and which therefore I have not forwarded to the Inquiry itself.
When I next write to the Group as a whole (which is likely to be in mid-August) )
will include a request that if they do take further statements from clients
or witnesses they forward copies to me which I will pass through to you.

As far as the eight families who have expressed a particular wish to see the
video of the Leppings Lane end is concerned I leave it to you to make arrangements
with the families direct for appropriate appointments. I enclose a copy letter
that I am today sending to the Solicitors for each of those clients which
is self explanatory and I would be grateful if the Solicitors could be informed
- purely as a matter of courtesy - of the date of the appointments.

So far as any showing of material to the injured is concerned I leave that
to David Alexander who will be writing separately to Mr Jones with a request
to be considered by the Coroner.

I have written (enclosed) to Mr Jones in relation to those photographs which
were on display at the Inquiry itself and await to hear from him once he has
considered that request with the Coroner.
C/tnd



I gave Kevin Tope a copy of our List showing Solicitors instructed on behalf
of relatives and dependents of the deceased.   As I mentioned we have asked
members of the Group to confirm and update their client list by the 31st,
July - that is needed in connection with the civil claims.

If there are any alterations to the List which you have once the additional
information is fed into the computer I will let you have a revised list.

Equally I was very grateful to be able to take a note of those individuals
who had been confirmed as being in either Pen 3 or Pen 4 and I would be grateful
if when further identification is made you could let me have an updated list
confirming pen 3 and pen 4 victims respectively.

Finally, without wanting in anyway to go "over the top" I would like to say
how tremendously impressed I was with the methods of work, the hard work that
everyone was doing and the effectiveness of it all but particularly with the
sensitive approach which was obvious from all your Team and the very helpful
and friendly approach they had to us.

I have no doubt that we may have to be in touch with you again in the future
and thank you again for our visit on Friday.

Every good wish.

Yours sincerely,
