OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                           Date and time raised                                Number


Title    l^ c d o v c z a                           fCLp.(icAct>rtAC>/~j                  (f\qiios)fc
fInclude source and any document number i f relevantI
                                                                                                      19 ( ( ^ r O .
Receiver's instructions —urgent action —Yes/No




               red/indexed as indicated
Documentt rey^ere

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                           Statement Raadar
Statement reader's instructions



Indexed asijrricKca
            indicated
No(s) of actions raised
Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                sio
                                                                                                JL.

                                                                                                           (S31

Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
Incident   105    280391 Ol(          AMENDMENT TYPING DOCUMENT

                                                    Other Document Number   D315



      Date             090191

      Description      INDEXERS POLICY FILE RESUMED INQUESTS 191190




           INDEXERS POLICY FILE FOR RESUMED INQUESTS COMMENCING 191190 ONWARDS.



           090191 PC



           The Resumed Inquests comnenced at Sheffield Town Hall on the 19th

           November 1990 (191190) with the original jury from the Preliminary

           Inquests which took place in April 1990 (000490) and again presided

           over the the Coroner, DR. S.L. POPPER.     The Coroner has been supported

           ky a small team (roughly a dozen in number) of West Midlands Police

           Officers based in Sheffield with office facilities at Fumival House

           and computer links set up with the West Midlands HOLMES system.



           Since the end of September 1990 (000990) PC                has been the

           only indexer on the Hillsborough Inquiry, being advised and guided by

           the Systems Manager's Department at Nechells with DC             still

           keeping a watching brief or overview and advising where necessary.



           There are still three Databases in use:

           Iacident 2: stores the vast majority of information which has come into

           the system from the beginning of the Inquiry. Home incident.

           Incident 6: stores a basic 'skeleton' of information regarding persons

           involved in the Criminal/Disciplinary sides of the investigation with

           any relevant documentation re these matters being registered to

           this database. There will, of course, be other peripheral matters which
                                                                PAGE     2
                                                                D315

may be found on Database 2, that being the 'master' index.

Incident 5: stores the majority of information arising out of the

Coronal aspects of the enquiry namely, in the most part, frcm both the

Preliminary Inquest (at the Medico Legal Centre during April 1990

(000490)) and then the Resumed Inquest (at Sheffield Town Hall frcm

191190 onwards). Both took place before Dr. S.L.POPPER and before the

same members of the jury.



As far as possible information regarding the Inquests has been put on

Database 5, again as with Incident 6 with simply a skeleton nominal

record for each person. So, for example, where a person appears before

the Inquest and has changed his/her address this will be kept updated

on the relevant record on Incident 2. The only exceptions to this are

the rare occasions where a person does not appear for any reason on

Incident 2 and so a completly new nominal record has had to be created

on Incident 5.



Similarly, where a person appearing before the Resumed Inquest has

changed his/her occupation this will be recorded in the occupation

field on Incident 5 as it appears confusing on Incident 2 and cannot

usually be fitted into the occupation field alongside the old

occupation in any case.



An. additional confusing aspect is that Incident 5 has been used for

both Preliminary and Resumed Inquests. Therefore, in an effort to try

and seperate some of the information,   where for example there was an

existing address, say for solicitors, which had information from

the Preliminary Inquest then a Catagory was formed for that solicitors

firm and the information from the Resumed Inquest was placed on the

Category, not the address.   I have tried to make use of the one line of
                                                               PAGE     3
                                                               D315

text to explain such matters.



On Incident 5 a subindex of 'Resumed Inquests 191190' was formed to

show where categories have been formed for this part of the enquiry, as

opposed to the Preliminary Inquest, and all categories formed as a

result of the second set of Inquests have been linked to this category.



D124 was formed to compile a 'file' of basic information for the

Coroner regarding the preparation side of the enquiry, ie so that all

relevant matters could be found together. It amounts to several

documents, seperate in their own right, but all registered as part of

the same document.



There have been many requests for information during the enquiry and

many policy changes in respect of this matter. During the Inquests in

order that any such requests could be found together all requests were

registered/indexed on Incident 2, notwithstanding that many of them

related to matters concerning Inquest witnesses or families of deceased

persons. A standard format letter was sent to each author of such

requests.



Transcripts have formed the major part of the Resumed Inquests and each

day have been seperated into parts pertaining to each individual who

gives evidence. Where opening/closing remarks form more than the odd

line or two that part of the transcript is registered/indexed in its

own right: registered to the Category, linked to the day in question

and two lines put on the Category. Individual evidence is registered to

the person giving evidence and similarly linked through to the date

that that evidence was given with the document number. Similarly where

the Jury is dismissed whilst legal submissions /discussion take place
                                                                    PAGE   4
                                                                    D315

then the relevant transcript will be also registered to the Transcript

Category.    Shortage of manpower has prevented these transcripts being

typed onto the database with the exception of approximatly the first

four days transcripts which have gone through the system in the normal

way.



2L0391 PC



With the Resumed Inquests reaching their conclusion in the next few

days and in order to prepare for the handing over of material to South

Yorkshire Police the current situation on 105 is as follows:



No error nominals on this database

No error addresses on this database

No error telephone numbers on this database.



Details for this incident are as follows:



Nominals:      552       Sequences:     0       Messages:            26

Vehicles:        0       Events:        0       Reports:              0

Streets:        36       Other names:   6       Telexes:              0

Houses:         43       Actions:       10      Other documents:    566

Telephones:     25       Statements:* 12        Questionnaires:       0

Categories:    234       PDF's:         0    (^excludes suffixes)



Unident Vehicles: 0

Unident Streets:     1




280391: PC
                                                                        PAGE     5
                                                                        D315



         The jury having reached a verdict today the majority of Incident Room

         staff return to the West Midlands tonight to resume other duties.

         The only people left to tidy up the enquiry will be:

         DSU Beechey

         DI Perkins

         PC Lander

                          typist/admin)



         Policy File now closed.




END OF REPORT
