OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                 Date and time raised                         O p-      Number


Title   f c >   t   .& J L        G   o   ^   r .   S /v fS T 'Y           ' T   r C   S   f o   o   s   G &   x x id       <£x d c s
(Include source and any document number if relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — YewNo
                                                                                                                             Receiver


                                                                                                                        3    1    5       3
                                                                                                                               Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated
                                                                                                                            lO
No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                        Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions


                                                                                                                               Indexer
Indexed as indicated
                                                                                                                            3 &       Z
No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                        O /M          SIO
Examined - further action to be taken




Further action No{s)

When satisfied all actions raisect Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                              REF:
 Superintendent Marsh
                                              STATION/DEPT.: OPS

 Chief Superintendent Nesbit                  DATE:          13.*u 89

SUBJECT:
           SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS

 I refer to the correspondence from Chief Superintendent (MS) in
 respect of the above.

 Enclosed for information is a copy of the Certificate issued by
 the then South Yorkshire County Council in December 1979. Also
 attached is a copy of the first Draft prepared by the City Council
 in August 1987»

  Referring to the latter could I draw your attention to paragraphs
     5 & 6 which have been totally deleted from the new draft.
  Similalrly could I draw your attention to paragraph 10 which outlinec
  duties of stewards. To some degree the first draft made the stewards
  answerable to police officers. In the latest draft the reference to
  police has been totally removed.

  Generally speaking the new draft certificate ,apart from matters
  relating to the police, is reasonably consistent with the first
  draft. However you may consider it appropriate at some stage to seek
  the views of Chief Superintendents Broomhead and Duckenfield.




                                                 [ 30CUMENT Bo. 7Z.I+
    South Yorkshire Police
                                                                    POLICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                                    SNIG HILL
                                                                    SHEFFIELD    S3 SLY
                                                                    TELEPHONE (0742) 768522
                                                                    TELEX 547996




    The Clerk & Financial Officer                                   Your Ref:
    South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
    PO Box 37                                                       Our Ref:    MS/DD/CEC
    Regent Street
    BARNSLEY       S70 2PQ                                          Date:       5 April 1989
    For the attention of Mr F B Alderman




    Dear Sir

    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS

    As discussed on the telephone with Mr Alderman, I enclose a copy of
    correspondence received from the Administration and Legal Department of Sheffield
    City Council and relating to the Council’s proposed general conditions to attach to
    certificates under the above Act. I also enclose a copy of my immediate reply, from
    which you will see that I am concerned that the proposals do not take full account of
    the legislative provisions regarding the attendance of police at sporting events.

    I should be obliged if you would kindly advise me on the propriety of the Sheffield
    proposals.

    Yours faithfully




I   Chief Constable




    The officer dealing with this correspondence is OSupt. Denton   Ext. 3435
        South Yorkshire Police
                                                                                                    *------------
                                                                        POLICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                                        SNK3 HILL
                                                                        SHEFFIELD    S3 8LY
                                                                        TELEPHONE (0742) 768522
                                                                        TELEX 547996




        City of Sheffield Metropolitan District                         Your Ref: GP/262/DMB
        Administration and Legal Department
        Town Hall                                                       Our Ref:     MS/DD/CEC
        SHEFFIELD         S1 2HH
                                                                        Date:        5 April 1989




        Dear Sirs

        SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

        Thank you for your letter dated 30 March 1989 and enclosures detailing your
        proposed revision of Safety Certificate Conditions. I will consider the proposals and
        reply in more detail in due course.

        Meanwhile, I am concerned to note that the conditions do not appear to require the
        attendance of police officers at football matches, as provided by Section 2 of the
        Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (as amended by Section 21 of the Fire Safety and
        Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987). I am forwarding a copy of your correspondence
        to the Police Authority Legal Department for advice on the matter and will contact you
        when that advice is available.

Q tj    Yours faithfully




       f Chief Constable




        The officer deakng with this correspondence is C/Supt. Denton    Ext. 3435
City of Sheffield             M e tro p o lita n D is tric t
                                                                                                            Cf
 Roger Pensarn, FOS, MBIM, Solicitor                                                                      Administration and Ltgal Department
 Head of Department
                                                                                                          Town Hall
                                                                                                          Sheffield SI 2HH
                                                                                                          Telephone      0742-26444
 Our reference      G P /2 6 2 /D M B                                                                     Facsimile      0742-735003
                                                                                                          Telecom Gold 76.LMX 086
 Your reference                                                                                           Telex           54243 SHFUB G
                                                                                                                       or 265871 MONREF G (quote ref LMX 086)
 Date                30th March, 1989


The Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police,
Police Headquarters,
Snlg Hill,
SHEFFIELD.
S3 8LY

For the attention of Superintendent Stuart
Headquarters Operations

Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Grounds - Draft Revised Safety Certificate Conditions

I refer to your letter of 4th August 1987 In connection with draft Safety
Certificate Conditions. I now enclose for your attention a copy of the final
draft of the new Certificate Conditions which take into account the observations
made in your letter.

You will however notice that there are no references as such to the Police
within the Certificate. I have carefully considered this matter and have come
to the conclusion that Conditions which purport to delegate the Council's
functions to outside bodies are unenforceable as they are beyond the powers of
the Council. Therefore several Conditions which were included in the first
draft (relating to for example discussions between Certificate holders and the
Police) have been deleted or Modified.

 I am, of course, conscious of the very important Police role in
 connection with the safety of spectators at sports grounds and 1 have therefore
 taken two steps to ensure that this role is properly recognised in the
 certification system. Firstly the definition of authorised officers in the
 Conditions includes Police Officers. Secondly there is also a new Condition
 which relates to guidance given by the Council on safety matters. A draft of
 the proposed guidance is enclosed with the new Conditions and you will see that
 it refers largely to Police/Certificate holder relations.

 Would you please let me have your comments on the draft Conditions in due
 course.

^Yours faithfully,




 Head of Department

 Enc.

 P B / 1 9                                                                                             734690 - Mr. Bownes
                        C o r t a i a n K n n a a n n i n ri* « r tn th i< m ftftffr n lm ig e fiftO                         (STD Code 0742)
                              Sheffield City Council


Interpretation of Generel Safety Certificates issued by the Council

Word/Phrase

The Act                 The Safety of Sports Grounds Act lf/5 including any
                        Modification or re-enactment there c & e nd any subordinate
                        legislation aade thereunder*

Authorised Officer      Any police officer, any officer ofjgpfe South Yorkshire
                        Tire and Civil Defence A u t h o r i t y , a n y officer of the
                        Sheffield City Council who Is authcujjlsed in writing.

The Certificate         The written General Safety Certificate issued by the
                        Council under the Act to the Holderjof which this
                        Interpretation document forms parti-"'*

The Council             The Sheffield City Council.

The Guide               The current edition of the "Guide to Safety at Sports
                        Grounds" published by HM Government or any succeeding
                        code or guidance produced by HM Government.

The Holder              The person to whom the general safety certificate has
                        been issued.

Specified Activity      Any sporting event (including football matches) and any
                        religious event and any public entertainment for which a
                        licence Issued by the Council Is In force.

Spectator               Has the meaning assigned to It by the Act.

The Stadium




BH19/DB303
C:                                Safety of Sports Grounda Certificate Conditions

          General Safety
          mmmmm—m m — mmammmmmmmmmmmm




          The Holder shall appoint in writing at least ome Safety"Offloer who has
          full authority to (a) take responsibility ftar safety atttie ground and (b)
          implement and supervise safety measures. A Safety Qffloar shall (a) be in
          oharge of the Stadium and the Holders Employees and (b) j^e in attendance
          at (or in direct personal comini cation mitti) a central ^bootrol point
          during a specified activity.


     2.   The Bolder (and the Safety officer (a)) Shall take all aeoessary
          precautions for the reasonable safety of spectators admitted to the
          stadium and shall ensure that all responsible jsnasae Cm defined in
          Section 12(2) of the let) are completely fawi 11ar with their duties under
          that Act and this certificate.


     3.   Where for reast»s of safety the Council gives notice to the Holder that
          the stadium or any section or sections of it s u t not be used for the
          accomodation of spectators the Holder shall not permit any areas so
          indicated to be used.


     4.   The Holder shall provide such signs or notices of such type, size and
          design as the Council say from time to time require Tor reasons of public
          safety. The Holder shall ensure that the signs or notices so required are
          clearly legible so that they can easily be read at all times.


     5. The Holder shall take all possible steps to ensure that no materials that
        are capable of being used as missiles are accessible to spectators.


     6. Without prejudice to the provisions of Section 8 of the Act the Bolder
        shall not cause or permit the stadium or aqy of its installations to be
        altered (which term shall exclude minor remedial works which do not in any
        way affect the safety of the stadium) in any manner Whatsoever without the
        prior written consent of the Council. The Holder ahull supply the Council
        with copies of such plans and specifications as the Council may reasonably
        require to enable any application for such consent to he considered and
        shall comply with any conditions attached to that consent.


     7. The Holder shall provide and maintain at the stadia to the satisfaction
         of the Council a suitably equipped first aid room and shall arrange for
         attendance of such number of qualified first aid attendants as the Council
         may require. The attendants duties shall only relate to the administering
         of first aid. The first aid room shall be capable of being lit by both
         the general lighting and the emergency lighting and shall be easily
         identified by means of signs. The Holder shall also ensure that at all
         times a doctor is immediately available to attend at the first aid room
         when required.


     8. Television cameras, cables and other portable equipment shall not be
         installed in the stadium except with the prior written consent of the
         Council.
c.   9.   In the event of a spectator being injured in the stadium, the Holder shall
          (within 72 hours of the Injury ooouring) submit to the Council a full
          written report on the circumstances of the injury. The Bolder shall
          also supply such additional information as the Counoil aay require.


     10. The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every specified activity of
         a Chief Safety Steward and such number of Safety Stewards ps are specified
         in Schedule 1.


     11. The Bolder shall ensure that the Safety Stewards are:-
         (a) fit and oapable to carry out their duties;

          (b)   properly trained and instructed;                     .

          (c)   readily identifiable by dress;

          (d)   provided with written instructions as to their tasks/duties.


     12. The written Instructions given to stewards must include the following
         tasks and duties. Stewards must:

          (a)   Under the direction of the Safety Officer or the Chief Steward
                or an Authorised Officer prevent overcrowding by ensuring
                the crowd limits in various parts of the ground are complied with.

          (b)   Prevent spectators, as far as possible, from climbing fences and
                other structures e.g. floodlight pylons, and from standing cm seats.
                Where by virtue of the scale of the incident stewards are unable to
                prevent this, they must immediately report the matter to the nearest
                authorised officer or to the chief steward or the safety officer.

          (c)   Ensure that gangways and exits are Tcejpt clear.

          (d)   Identify and Investigate any incident or occurrence among spectators
                (which may affect spectator safety), reporting their findings to the
                Chief Steward or the Safety Officer.

          (e)   Know the location of and be able to operate effectively the
                fire-fighting equipment at the ground.

          (f)   Know the location of the first aid room and any first aid equipment
                kept elsewhere.

          (g)   Be fully conversant with any methods or signals used to alert staff
                that an emergency has arisen.

          (h)   Be capable of recognising potential fire hazards and suspect
                packages, reporting such findings Immediately to the nearest
                authorised officer or the chief steward or the safety officer.

          (1)   Comply promptly with any instruction given in an emergency by an
                authorised officerthe chief steward or the safety officer.

          (J)   Remain at their allocated posts as instructed unless authorised or
                instructed to do otherwise by an authorised officer, the chief
                steward or the safety officer.

          (k)   Report to the safety officer any damage or defect which is likely to
(7:.               P°se a threatto spectator safety eg. a damaged crush barrier.

             (1)   Open the exitdoors/gates and secure them In the open position on the
                   initiation of the emergency proceudre.or when instructed to do so by
                   the safety officer, the Chief Steward or an authorised officer.

                                                                   •yfr-
        13* Training exercises organised by the Safety OffXoer relating to the duties
            of stewards shall be held st least once mwmrj ttoree sbb^». A written
            record of the exercises shall be kept.

       14. All exit doors and gates for use by spectators In both ordinary evacuation
           snd emergency evacuation situations shall he manned by stewards in
            accordance with schedule 2. The other duties detailed la. schedule 2
            shall be carried out by stewards.


             Spectator Areas

        15. The Holder Shall ensure that all doors, gates and turnstiles throughout
   |        the stadium are maintained in good working order act all times. Particular
             attention shall be paid to doors, gates snd turnstiles in spectator
             Ingress and egress routes and also to pitch perimeter gates. The Bolder
             shall not cause or permit any exit doors or .gates to be altered in type,
             design or method of operation without the prior consent of the Council in
             writing.


       16.   The means of ingress and egress and the gangways In the stadium shall at
             all times be kept unobstructed.


       17.   All floor surfaces and steps throughout the stadium which are available
             for use by spectators shall have even and non-slij> surfaces. Adequate
             drainage shall also be provided where necessary.


    18.       The entrances to and exits from the stadium and the means of access to
   ^         those entrances and exits shall be as specified In the j>lan which forms
             part of this certificate.


             Fire Safety

       19.   The Holder shall provide a public address system which shall be audible in
             all parts of the stadium to the satisfaction of the Council.


       20.   The Holder shall institute and maintain a fire warning system to the
             satisfaction of the Council.


       21.   The Holder shall provide and maintain such fire fighting equipment in such
             locations as the Council may from time to time specl&.


       22.   Except with the consent of the Council in writing the Solder shall not
             permit the storage in the stadium of any flammable, toxic or oorrosive
             liquid or compressed substance (except fire extinguishing snd drinks
             dispensing apparatus). The Holder shall comply with any conditions
             attached to such a consent.
23.    Except with the prior written coaaent of the Council the Holder shall at
       all tines saintain the stadium in a dean condition and shall not permit
       any accumulations of rubbish or any other Materials whether combustible or
       not.                  i       —                           ,


       Lighting and Electrical Instsllstlons

24.    The Holder shall ensure that all parts of the stadiun to^Which
       spectators are admitted are marinated to a sufficient standard to enable
       such persons to enter or leave the stadias safely.


25.    The Bolder shall provide to the satisfaction of the Council a system of
       emergency lighting which shall, in the event of a failur^of the general
       lighting be sufficient to enable spectators to leave tbs jptediuB safely.
       The emergency lighting shall (a) be powered by a source independent of the
       ■ains electricity supply and (b) cone into operation immediately on the
       failure of the sains lighting and (o) rawIn in operation for at least
       three consecutive hours when activated.
P
26.    The electrical installation for the premises shall be constructed and
       Maintained in a safe and satisfactory condition, lo alteration which
       significantly affects the installation shall take place without the prior
       written consent of the Council.


        Capacity

27.     The ma-iHmum number of spectators that may be admitted to each part of the
        stadium at any one time shall not exceed the number specified in schedule
        3.


        Inspections. Tests and Records

    28. Where any condition In this certificate requires written records to be
        kept such records shall be produced on demand to any authorised officer.


    29. The Council may at any time by notice In writing, for reasons of public
        safety, require the Holder to carry out such works and/or inspections as
        may be specified in the notice. The Bolder Shall comply tilth any
        conditions specified in that notice.


    30. If a significant defect is discovered pursuant to any inspection or test
        carried out under the terms of this certificate the Bolder shall
        Immediately notify the Council and take steps to correct the defect.


    31. The Holder shall arrange for the tests and inspections listed in Schedule
        4, to be carried out and for records to be Icept or reports to be supplied
        to the Council in accordance with the terms of the schedule. Where
        reports are required to be supplied to the Council, tliej shall be supplied
        as soon as possible mi completion of the inspections/tests.


    32. Without prejudice to Section 6 of the let or any regulations made
        thereunder the Holder shall maintain written records showing:-
G      (a)     the number of spectators admitted to each part of the stadium for
               each specified activity;

        (b)    the names and addresses of the stewards Mployed by/the holder;

        (c)    the names of the stewards on duty at each speeifi«dro>tiTity and
               details of their duties;

        (d)     details of the training exercises organised by thi        dor for
               stewards in accordance with Condition 13 - the **•         shall show
              ' which stewards attended each exercise and the oon1        of those
               exercises.


       Guidance to Holders

    3 3 . The Council say from time to time issue written guidanos^Vo holders on
          safety matters. The holder must pay due regard to any sneh guidance.
                                                                 i   ■■




        RP2ABM/JS

        29-3.89
                          SCHEDULE 1 - CONDITION NO.10


The lumber of Safety Stewards on duty at each specified activity shall not be
less than 69.

                          SCHEDULE 2 - CONDITION NO.14

The Safety Stewards carry out the duties set out below:**


No. of Stewards            Duties
                           Manning of Final Exit Gates

 1                          *A' (Shorehaa Street)

11                          *B' to *L' (John Street)

 2                          'M' and 'N' (Bramall Lane)

 2                          'O' (Bramall Lane)

 2                          'R' and 'S' (South Stand)

                            Control and Directions of Spectators

 6                          Bramall Lane Stand

 3                                      "   Terrace

 9                          John Street Stand

 2                          John Street Terrace (Timber Section)

 n                          ”       "         "       (Concrete Section)

 4                          Spion Kop Main Area

  1                         ”       " Disaaled/Childrens Area

  9                         South Stand           ;

                            Patrolling the Standing and Dealing with Emergencies
                            etc.                   ____________________________

  2                         John Street Stand

     1                      Bramall Lane Stand

     1                      South Stand

                            Manning Internal Gates

                            Pitch Perimeter Gates to
                            (Nos 1-4) John Street Terrace

                            Gates between John^Street Tiober Stand and Terrace
                            (Nos 2-5)          ‘

                             Gate between the two parts of the John Street Tiober
                             Stand and Terrace (No.9)

 10/DB232/MS
                          SCHEDULE 3 - CONDITION NO.27


The number of spectators admitted to a specified activity shall not exceed
44,009.

The number of spectators admitted to each area of the stadium, listed below
shall exceed the maximum numbers shown.

Area                                   Maximum No. of Spectators

South Stand (Seats)

Bramall lane

   Seats                               2,958
   Terrace                             7,354

John Street

   Timber Section Seats                1,200
   Concrete Section Seats              1,490
   Timber Section Terrace
     (right-hand section)              1,048
     (left-hand section)                 589
   Concrete Section Terrace            2,832

Spion Kop

   General Area                        18,250
   Disabled Section                       120

Childrens Section                         220


                                       44,009




 10/D M B232/M S
                                                  c


                          SCHEDULE 1 - C0NP1TI0H 110.10



The number of Safety Stewards on duty at each specified activity shall not be
less than 66.

                          SCHEDULE 2 - CONDITION H0.1*

The Safety Stewards carry out the duties set out below:-


No. of Stewards            Duties
                           Manning of Final Exit Cates

2b                         2 for each main exit

                           Control and Direction of Spectators

12                         1 per vomitory in the South Stand

 8                         1   "   "            " West Stand

18                         1   "   "        "   " North Stand

                           Patrolling the Stadium and Dealing with Emergencies
                           etc.       _____________________________________ _

                           Beneath South Stand




1 0 /D M B 2 3 2 /K S
                          SCHEftin.F. 3 - CONDITION NO.27


The nuaber of spectators adaitted to a specified activity shall not exceed
54,324.

The number of spectators admitted to each area of the stadiua, listed below,
shall exceed the aaxiaua nuabers shown.

Area                                    Maximua No. of Spectators

                                        21,000
■p r   •   r v'r

South Stand (Upper)                       5,567

South Stand (Lower)                       3,310

West Stand                                4,465

West Terrace                              7,200

North West Terrace                        2,900

North Stand                               9,882


                                         54,324




   10/DM B232/M S
r
                                       D R A F T


                                    SCHEDULE     if-              ^Condition No. ?/


                             INSPECTIONS AND TESTS REQUIRED


    GENERAL                         INCIDENCE          WRITTEN    W   W I T T E N REPORT
    REQUIREMENT                                        RECORD         REQUIRED TO BE
                                                       REQUIRED       SUPPLIED TO
                                                                       COUNCIL



    A competent person shall        At least           No.             Tee.
    inspect the structures which    once every

    «rke up the Stadium.            12 months.


    A competent person shall        Before and         Yes.
    carry out a general visual      after each
    inspection of the Stadium       specified
    to ensure compliance with       activity.
    the Safety Certificate
    Conditions.


    A competent person shall       At least                            Yes.
    examine the electrical         once every
    installation of the Stadium.   12 months*


     A competent person shall       At least                           Yes.
     test and inspect all fire      once every
     appliances (including          12 months.
     extinguishers, hydrants
    >and water supplies)


     The emergency lighting and     At least                           Yes.
     fire warning (including        once every
     the Public Address) systems    12 months,
     shall be tested/inspected
     by a competent person.


     The emergency lighting         Not more           Yes.
     system shall be tested by a    than three
     competent person.              hours prior
                                    to a
                                    specified
                                    activity
                                    taking place.
r'v                                        -   2-


      GENERAL                        INCIDENCE       WRITTEN    WRITTEN REPORT
      REQUIREMENT                                    RECORD     REQUIRED TO BE
                                                     REQUIRED   SUPPLIED TO
                                                                ODUHCXL



      All the fire n a m i n g       Hot more        Yes.
      detection public address       than three
      and other cowtin! cation       hours prior
      systems shall be tested        to a
      by a competent person.         specified
                                     activity
                                     taking place.


        1 lighting systems           Not more        Yes.
        xcluding the emergency       than three
      lighting) shall be tested      hours prior
      be a competent person.         to a
                                     specified
                                     activity
                                     taking place.


      All doors, gates and           Not more        Yes.
      turnstiles throughout the      than three
      Stadium shall be tested        hours prior
      by a competent person.         to a
                                     specified
                                     activity
                                     taking place.



         representative sample,      One 20Z sample             Yes.
      'comprising 20Z of the crush   in each period
       barriers and handrails in     of 12 months.
       the Stadium shall be tested   Once a sample
       by a competent person in      is tested that
       accordance with the Guide.    sample shall not
       The Council shall be          be tested again
       notified in advance of the    (unless specific­
       dates of testing.             ally required by
                                     the Council) within
                                     four and a half years
                                     after first testing,
                                     but shall be tested
                                     again within five
                                     and a half years of
                                     that date.




      DMB111/5/JJJ
                     GUIDANCE FOR SAFETY CERTIFICATE HOLDERS


INTRODUCTION

This note has been prepared by the Sheffield City Council in order to inform
Certificate Holders as to the general background of the Safety Certificate
Conditions* The Council in dealing with Safety Certificates takes advice from
the Chief Fire Officer, the Chief Constable, the Director of Health and Consumer
Services and the Council's Building Surveyor. These Officers and the Council
itself Is concerned to see as far as possible that the spectators at any
specified activities are reasonably safe.

GUIDANCE

Where advice Is given to the holder by any of the four Officers Mentioned It
should be acted upon in accordance with the tine constraints given In the
advice. The holder is reminded that failure to take steps to ensure the
reasonable safety of spectators could give rise to a prosecution.

The Chief Constable and his Officers have a particularly important role In
relation to "public order" situations the correct handling of which should
reduce any risk to spectator safety.

The Chief Constable must therefore be provided with appropriate facilities at
the stadium for control, crowd surveillance, detention and administrative
purposes. These facilities are essential If public order Is to be maintained
and the risk to spectators minimised.

The Chief Constable must also be informed at the earliest possible moment of the
proposed date and content of all specified activities so that appropriate
planning can take place.

In addition there must be consultation and agreement between the holder and the
Chief Constable well in advance of specified activities about the proposed
methods of admission and the segregation of spectators. Consultation must also
take place If advance information is such that public order difficulties may
arise. As a result of this consultation It is possible that the Chief Constable
may require, for reasons of preserving public order, that the specified activity
Is "all ticket" or the specified activity should not be played at all at the
Stadium or the day and the time of the specified activity should be changed.

The Chief Constable' should also be able to use whatever means are appropriate to
exercise control over spectators for reasons of safety and as part of this
control he and his Officers should be allowed full access to all areas of the
Stadium.




GP262/DMB

1/DB101/MS
 City of Sheffield            M e tr o p o lita n D istrict
                                                                                                                     'Vi/S



 Roger Pensam, FCIS, M B IM , Solicitor                                    Administration and Legal D epartm ent
 Head of Departm ent
                                                                           Town Hall
                                                                           Sheffield S1 2HH
                                                                           Telephone             0742-26444
 Our reference       GP /2 62 /DMB                                         Facsimile             0742-735003
                                                                           Telecom Gold          7 6 :L M X 0 8 6
 Your reference      MS/JDB/JW                                             Telex                 54243 SHFLIB G
                                                                                      or         265871 MONREF G (quote ref L M X 086)
 Date
                      16th December,            1987


 The Chief Constable,
 South Yorkshire Police,
 Police Headquarters,
                                                                                                             f POLICE
 Snig Hill,
 SHEFFIELD.
 S1 80 Y


                                                                                                      QUASr,
 Dear Sir,
                                                                                        A Q M IK i s Tr Z i
 Fire Safety and Safety of P l a c e S p o r t Act 1987
 Safety Certification

 I refer to your letter of 3rd December, and feel that I ought to confirm
 that only one Safety Certificate is currently in force in Sheffield, namely
 that relating to Hillsborough.

 As far as I can see the existing Hillsborough Certificate does not contradict
 the amended Section 2 of the Safety of Spoils -Q«®uncls Act 1975. As you are
 aware, the draft revised Certificate conditibas^'C^hlch’ .'Were circulated to you
 and upon which you commented some tirae 'ago) take full" account of that
 amendment of the 1975 Act.                                   . •)
6n                                                            i-.                           £■
 Yours faithfully,                                              'V v<                .v :   *’




 Head of Department




                                                                                   o o c m m              7 ;i s




 jjj                                                                    73^690 - Mr. Bownes
  *

S. ■




       The Legal and Admin Department                    Your R e f :
       Sheffield Town Hall
       SHEFFIELD                                         Our Ref:       MS/JDB/JW
       SI 2HH
                                                         Date:          3 December 1987




       Dear Sir

       RE: FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987 - SAFETY CERTIFICATES
       IN RESPECT OF BRAMALL LANE AND HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUNDS

       Having in mind the implementation of Part II of the Fire Safety and Safety
       °f Places of Sport Act 1987 on 1 January 1988, I shall be obliged for your
       confirmation that the condition relative to the attendance of police officers
       at football matches in the Safety Certificates issued in respect of Bramall
       Lane and Hillsborough has been amended to comply with the new Sub Section
       (2A) added to Section 2 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.

       Yours faithfully




       Chief Constable




       The officer dealing with this correspondence is C/Insp. Bennett        Ext: 3438
       All communications should be addressed to "The Chief Constable"
                                                                  /H -0‘
                                                                                                      iH jl h
                                        SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL             -TZv. 'yCf
                                SAFETY OF SPCHTS GROUNDS ADVISORY GROUP

                                                             AT: >10.0 0
                                                                                        10 MAT 1988
     NOTES OF A MEETINGTSJHBBDOfr:, 28th April, 1988                                        WMX



     ATTENDANCE:           d . Moore and B. Platts (HCS); Superintendent T. Stuart (SYP);                ^
                           D. 0. Binnington, S. 0. Brailey and S. 0. Vickers (SYCFS);             \^
                           Mr. A. Butler (Building Surveyors); Mr. Bownes.




                                   DESCRI?1IDN                               ACTICN TO BE TAKEN



X•       SWFC & SUFC Inspections
         The annual inspection dates were noted


         Sheffield United - Building Surveyors Memorandum
         of 11th April
n•
_

         The contents of the memorandum were noted and it was
         agreed that the situation should be kept under review.


         Owlerton Sports Stadium “ Safety Management Plan
3.
         Mr. Moore presented the Safety Management Plan which is
         designed to be capable of amendment in appropriate
         circumstances. The idea is to place a large scale plan
         in the stadium control room. The plan itself would then
         provide complete information as to lines of communication,
         stewarding, fire extinguishers, etc., at a glance. It was
         agreed tha^the plan was a most useful inovation.


         Owlerton Sports Stadium - Access Around the Whole Stadium

         After some discussion it was agreed that access should be
         maintained around the whole stadium even on the top of the
         old south terrace.  This particular footpath should be
         restored to a suitable condition.


5.       Owlerton Sports Stadium - Capacity

         The Capacity of the stadium was again discussed at some            The Fire
         length. The Fire Service indicated that they could not             Service to
         give advice on exit widths until some idea had been                enquire
         obtained from the Company as to its future plans for               further
         the stadium. The point was made that although exit                 into the
         widths could be recommended for a 4,000 capacity those             capacity
         widths would need to increase if the capacity was to be            question.
         raised at a subsequent time. It is therefore desirable
         to set a exit width, etc., at appropriate levels to
         prevent the need for expensive works later on.


          1 0 H A Y 1988

                                                                           [DOCUMENTH l    7 2 . lo             |
     1
                                     SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL
                             SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ADVISORY GROUP               2 ,APR198r7ii


       NOTES OF A MEETING HELD ON:   Wednesday, 23rd March 196 3?.T: 10.00



       ATTENDANCE:   D. 0. Grimshaw, T. D. 0. Sykes (C.F.S.); D. Moore and B. Platts (H.C.S.);
                     Superintendent Stuart, Inspector Soul, Sergeant Goddard (S.Y.P.);
                     A. Butler, M. Harvey (Building Surveyors); D. M. Bownes.




ITEM                             DESCRIPTION                                 ACTION TO BE TAKEN


           S.W.F.C. - Building Surveyor's memorandum of 2.Z.88

           The Building Surveyor's representative outlined the
           memorandum and the circumstances which gave rise to it.
           Superintendent Stuart indicated that “he gangway p roblem
           had been discussed with Sheffield Wednesday who were
           going to taJke measures with their Stewards in an attempt
           to resolve it. As far as the turnstile question was
           concerned, a pattern has developed of people arriving
           some 15 mins. before the start of the game hoping to
           gain admission.   This trend may be due to the banning of
           alcohol at sports grounds which could lead to pe-ople
           going elsewhere for refreshment prior to the foctball
           match.  As the available turnstiles cperated quite
           effectively for the majority of the time, and that the
           late arrival problem could perhaps only be dealt with by
           education cf spectators.




           Owlerton - General Principles

           Discussion took place about the south and east terraces
           which Eastwoods in their original report had recommended
           be closed.  There was no disagreement with the idea of
           closing the south terrace (which is in a very poor
           condition), but whether or not there should be
           maintained along the front of the terrace a public
           walkway so that complete public access could be allowed
           around the perimeter of the stadium was not finalised.
           It was mentioned that the Company planned in due course
           perhaps to re-site the speedway pit cn the site of the
           old south terrace.




           The Capacity of Owlerton Sports Stadium

           There was a fairly lengthy discussion about capacity
           principally revolving around Eastwoods' original capacity
           estimate of 6,731 people. There was also discussion
           about controlling the access of spectators to particular
           areas or zcnes of the stadium by various means.   It was
           recognised that such area control would be difficult as
           the stadiur. is not at the moment physically split into
           different zones or sections. As the stadium at the
           moment requires considerable works to be undertaken to
           bring it up to reasonable standards, it was felt that
   R3719
                                CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM

From       The Building Surveyor                        To     The Head of Administration
           Department of Land and Planning                     and Legal Department

Date      2nd February 1988                                    For the attention of Mr. D» Bovm.es
Ref.      BSD/A .Bu/VG
Tel. Ext. ^ 6 2 - Mr* Butler                            Ref.


           Safety of Sports Grounds Act
           Stewarding at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.,
           Hillsborough. Sheffield

           I am advised by a member of my staff, who has attended recent games,that                         V
           there has been a lack of effective stewarding on the Kop, resulting in
           the crowd occupying the radial gangways as additional standing areas,
           throughout the games.

           Although it is appreciated that these games were important Cup-ties and,                             j ,
           therefore, attracted increased c r o w d c a p a c i t i e s , stewarding must be of a
           quality and of such numbers as to maintain these gangways free from
           congestion during performances.

           It is also understood that the turnstile capacity on the Penistone Road
           frontage was insufficient, and that many of the spectators were still
           entering the ground up to 15 minutes after the kick-off.

            The combination of late arrival and ineffective stewarding could lead to
            dangerous occurances.

            It is considered that the Club should be made aware of these matters and
            be required to confirm that stewarding will be made available to keep these
            areas clear.

            This is possibly a matter that should be raised at the next meeting of the
            Working Party, so that police and fire authority comments may alefo be sought.




       r
                                                                                              25. ?
                                                                            v*    *rv'




                                                                                 in n p iiy c u j




                                                                                      2 3    M A R I9 8 8


                                                                                        %TR5 n $ T5i
City of Sheffield           M e tro p o lita n D istrict
                                                                                                        Is



Roger Pensam, FCIS, MBIM , Solicitor                                   Administration and Legal Department
Head of Department
                                                                       Town Hall
                                                                       Sheffield S I 2HH
                                                                       Telephone   0742-26444
Our reference    GP/262/DMB                                            Facsimile   0742-735003                     ; i?
                                                                       TelecomGold 76.LM X086
Your reference   WE/JAS/PB/9648                                        Telex        54243 SHFLIBG                    ^
                                                                                 or 265871 MONREF G {quote ref LM X 086!
Date             7th March 1988


Messrs Eastwood & Partners,
Consulting Elgin eers,                                             /-2-o
St. Andrew's House,
23 Kingsfield Road,
SHEFFIELD,
S11 9AS

Dear Sirs,

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC                                                                  MAR 1988
Facilities for the Disabled
                                                                                                   4 T I O N 5 D\
I refer to your letter of the 15th January, which was addressed to
Department of Land and Planning,

The Building Surveyor has written to me making basically three points

 (a)      At the site meeting on the 12th January, 1988, a total constructional
          package was agreed between all parties present which was relfected
          in my letter of the 13th January.  It now appears that all the points
          of contention at that meeting are being raised again.

 (b)     The Building Regulations applicable in this case are in functional
         terms and, therefore, no provision exists for their relaxation.

 (c)     If further discussion on these items is required by either yourselves
         or the Club it is suggested that these take place at a Working Group
         meeting.

 There is in fact a meeting of the Working Group due fairly shortly and if
 you still propose to ask the Council to consider amending its approval of
 the 13th January in respect of the facilities for the disabled, I may be
 able to arrange for you to attend part of that meeting.

 Please let me know if you do intend to proceeu on this matter.

 Yours faithfully,




 Head of Department



                                                                                   DOCUMENT No. 7Z&

 ELW                                                       73^690 - Mr Bownes
                                                               O P E R A TIO N S
                                                               8 March 1988

                  PERINETSR TRACK FESCE GATE FASTENINGS AT FOOTBALL STADIA




    I attach a copy of a report dated 25 February 1988 in respect of
    a new gate fastening fitted at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

    You will note that this will be fitted at both the Sheffield grounds
    and it is reconraended as being suitable for use at the other grounds
    in the county.

*

    Chic £ S\:perintenient
    Operation? & 'Traffic
                          SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                         REF:                n/CWC/HK
FROM:     Inspector Calvert
                                                         STATION/88^.: Hanmerton Road
TO:       The Chief Superintendent - *F' Division        DATE:               25 F e b ru a ry 1988

          SUBJECT:       GATE EASTENI1IGS - PERIMETER TRACK FENCE
                         HDULSBOHCUSi GROUND


          At the last annual s afety i ns pection at the Hillsborough
          Foo tba ll Ground it b e ca me apparent that the bolt type
          fastenings in the p e r i m e t e r track fence access gates was
          inefficient, this b e i n g d u e to d i f f icu lt y in operation
          wh e n unde r pressure from the terraces wh i c h forced the
          bolt against the keep p r e v e n t i n g movement.

          At this time it was a gr ee d that the club wou ld attempt
          to obtain some secure fastenings for the gate wh i c h could
          be e a sil y operated in an emergency.   I have to day (in company
          w i t h other m embers of the safety committee) visi te d the
          groun d when a prototype lever operated fastening was d e m o n ­
          strated.     (This is fitted to gate number 6 on the Spion
          Kop perimeter fence).

          This fastening was far su pe rio r to the present bolt fastening.
          It is easily operated by one hand even w hen the gate is under
          p r ess ur e from the terrace. It also has the great advantage
          that it is impossible to interfere with from the terraces.

          The committee agreed the n e w fastening was satisfactory and
          co ul d be fitted to all the p e ri me ter track gates, both at
          Hi ll sborough and Bramall Lane.

          I request that a cop y of this report be forwarded to Operations
          Department, Police Headquarters, for their information and
          ci rculation to other divisions who m a y have a similar problem
          at grounds in their areas.




          Ins


          MINUTE 2

          Operations Department
          Police Headquarters


                                                     SOUTH YORKS. POLICE
          Forwarded as at Minut e 1 above.

                                                           2 9 F E B I9 8 8 N ?


                                                    c h ie f s u per in te n d en t
        U . Chief Superintendent                    OPERATIONS & TRAFFIO
         \  'F' Division                  N   '
E A S T W O O D & PARTN ERS                                                                                      St. Andrews House
               ( C o n s u lt i n g E n g i n e e r s )                                                          23 Kingfield Road
                                                                                                                 Sheffield S11 9AS
Director*:
W. Eastwood                      F.Eng. B.Eng.. Ph.D„ D.Eng,                                                     Tel.: (0742) 583871                         „
                                 C.Eng- F.I.C.E., P.P.I.StructE,                                                 Telex:       547266
                                 FJ.M«ch.E, F.G.S.. M.Con».E.
                                                                                                                 Fax:    0742 554330
A. A.    W OOd                  B.Eng, Ph.D. C.Eng. F.I.C.E.                                                                                           ' '
                                F.I.StrucLE, M.I.W.E.S, M.Cons.E.
                                                                                                                                             and at:
R. C. A. Eastwood                B.Sc, C.Eng, MJ.C.E. M.I.StructE.

G. Spir                          C.Eng. M.I.CX, M.I.Mech.E.                                                          P r im U r H oui*
C. S. Greaves                    B.Eng, C.Eng„ M.I.CX, M.l.StructE.
                                                                                                                     12/13 Hatton Harden
                                                                                                                     London EC1M SAM
S. Preston                       B.Eng, C.Eng. M.I.C.E. M .l.StructE
                                                                                                                     T el.: (01) 242 7436
G. M. Seaman                     B.Sc„ C.Eng., M.I.C.E. M.I.StructE.                                                 Fax:      01 - 4045424
C onsultant:
A . Q . B urdett                G.M., B.Se.(En*.). C E nf.,                       ourRaf: WE/JAS/PB/ 9854
                                 FJ.C.E.. F.I.Strua.E.
                                                                                  Your R t f :



City of Sheffield Metropolitan District,                                                             3 February,             1988
Administration & Legal Department,
Town Hall,
SHEFFIELD Si 2HH.                                                                                              ADht?Hi5?RAH0N ft LE6NL
                                                                                                                  o i p u sm m m .
                                                                                                                                             ?swr
                                                                                                                    ■'DlTr. fcf
                                                                                                                     uMiiiM—  A*— O ihih n»i«i i i n,i»
For the attention of Mr. D. Bownes.
                                                                                                                     -   5   FEB      1388        U

                                                                                                                 fo.S.M .j     LI3    | ELAiS p & Q
Dear Mr. Bownes,

                                     Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic
                                          Safety at Sports Grounds Act 1975

               As requested in your letter dated 8 January,                                                1988 we
reply to your letter dated 22 April,                                            1987 and the letter
from Yorkshire County Fire Service dated 18 February.                                                                    We
reply in the same order as the letter from the Fire
Service,               for easy reference.


               Means of Escape in Case of Fire

               North Stand

                         With the exception of a small hut and the steel
               clad groundsman's accommodation, which are both
               located under the ramp and not the stand,                                                the timber
               clad buildings have been removed.
                         We believe that the reference in the minutes
               dated 7 August,                       1985 was to storage facilities and
               not to buildings.

               Spion Kop

               a)        The small timber programme kiosk will be

                                                                                                         DOCUMENT No.           7 3
                                                                                                                                         o
A ssociates:
J . A. Strange                       A. J . Clough                           R. Tandy                          J . M. Wood
C.Enf., MJ.Struct.E.                 B A , C.En*.. M.GJ.B.S.E., M.LMeeh.E.   C En(., F.I.Struct.E.             B.Sc., C-En*„ M J.CJL, M.I.Struct.E.

                                        An Unlimited Company. Registered in Enoland -            No. 1833144
EASTWOOD fr PARTNERS                                           SHEET




     removed so that the width of the exit route is not
     re d u c e d .
     b)      This item has already been dealt with in our
     letter dated 15 January.
     c)      Some of the concrete terrace steps have been
     repaired but,    as has always been accepted,       the
     repairs will continue to be a regular maintenance
     job.
     d)      The intention of the mesh was not to prevent
     people from climbing onto the steelwork but to act
     as a guard preventing spectators damaging and
     possibly loosening the rear sheeting.
             We disagree that spectators climb onto the
     steelwork in large numbers although we do not deny
     that the police have,     at some matches,      had to tell
     a few spectators not to sit on the steelwork.
             The cost of erecting a full height fence
     would be several thousands of pounds.           The Club is
     not at present contemplating that magnitude of
     expenditure just to protect a few spectators from
     their own foolish behaviour.
     e)      There are four or five lengths of barrier
     where the drop in front is just over one metre,
     but as far as we are aware this has not created
     any hazard.      In fact to the contrary,    because
     people can leave the ground by going under the
     barriers onto the lateral gangway.        This is a
     common feature of most league g r o u n d s .
             The welding is performing well and it seems
     that any additional vertical support is
     unnecessary.     However, the welding can be inspected
     at regular intervals to make sure that it con­
     tinues to hold the mesh securely.
EASTWOOD ft PARTNERS                                                   SHEET




     f)    Exit gates are unlocked before spectators enter
     the ground.         The keys then remain in the possession
     of the steward(s),            given the responsibility of
     unlocking the gates, until after the end of the
     match and all spectators have left the ground.

     West Stand

     a)    Do we understand correctly that the
     reference to 'timber framed and clad units'                   is to
     the bar fittings at first floor level?                    If so, then
     those fittings were part of the original construction
     for which Building Regulations Approval has been
     granted.        There has not been any previous comment
     about the presence of the bar fittings in that stand
     or other stands.             We do not consider that they
     present a h a z a r d .
     b)    This item has already been dealt with in our
     letter dated 15 January.

     South Stand

     a)    (i)       We note the comment about the doors and
     this point has been dealt with under the regular
     procedures of obtaining a Fire Certificate under
     the Fire Precautions Act of 1971 for the offices.
     Fire O      f   f   i    c    e   r   h   a   s   been dealing with
     the matter.
          (ii)               We see the principle behind the creation
     of fire compartments.                 That is sensible.     Sealing
     off the windows is not difficult but the provision
     of ducting to the south wall is, and furthermore
     very expensive.              A major exercise such as providing
     ducting would by necessity have to wait until the
     redevelopment of the South stand in 1991.
EASTWOOD ft PARTNERS                                                    SHEET




          (iii)        We agree that stored materials should be
     removed from stairways and exit routes.             There is a
     particular problem outside the kitchen area,             at
     ground floor level, but the caterers have been asked
     to clear that particular area well before the public
     are admitted on match d a y s .
     b)       (i)      it was agreed in 1979 that the fans
     ventilating the lounges at first floor level should
     be fitted with intumescent grilles with smoke
     controlled shutters.            Those grilles and shutters
     were fitted although we see that two recently
     installed fans do not appear to have similar grilles
     and shutters.          As the form of fire protection from
     those lounges has already been agreed with the Fire
     Service,the Club are not prepared to have ducting
     installed, although the new fans should perhaps be
     fitted with intumescent grilles and smoke controlled
     sh ut t e r s .
            (ii)       A close inspection of the gas supply p i p e ­
     work in the five bars revealed that four bars have
     valves fitted to the feed pipe or to the appliance
     when there is only one appliance in the bar.                 The
     pipework in the bar nearest to the Spion Kop has
     been replaced recently but without a v a l v e .
                       However,   there is a master valve,   at
     ground floor level, which isolates the gas supply
     to the whole of the first floor.            That valve was
     installed at the request of the Fire Service in
     1980.
          (iii)           We confirm that all the timber facing onto
     the public circulation areas was treated with an
     intumescent paint during the work carried out in
     19 80.       Since then the walls have been re-decorated
EASTWOOD ft PARTNERS                                         SHEET




     but this does not reduce the effect of the
     intumescent paint underneath.
            (iv)       We cannot understand this comment because
     the paint store was constructed in its present
     position on the advice of the Fire Officer.         A
     special 'non-sparking'     light fitting was even
     installed on his recommendation.      It is not contem­
     plated to move the store again after spending money
     to build the store in its present position.
             (v)   We do not consider that the two laminate
     covered toilet kiosks present a hazard.        As for the
     wooden cupboards, they have been on the first floor
     for many years and no previous adverse comments
     have been made by the Fire Service about their
     presence.
            (vi)   We agree that the holes round the cables
     should be plugged with an appropriate fire resisting
     material.
           (vii)   As far as we are aware all doors leading
     onto the first floor and ground floor circulation
     areas were provided with 25mm rebates and the doors
     made up to a nominal one hour st a nd a rd .   That work
     was done in 1979-80.
          (viii)   We agree that the spaces above toilet
     accommodates should not be used for storage but
     believe that the Club have now removed the stored
     materials.

     c)     We believe that cliirbing over the existing low
     wall does not present any difficulty in the event
     of an emergency.      Spectators will go over the wall
     whether there are gates or not.      We do not consider
     that the installation of gates is necessary.
EASTWOOD ft PARTNERS                                          SHEET




     d)      Escape through the rear of the stand has always
     been accepted by the Officer Working Party.       F u r th e r ­
     more,    it has been readily accepted with the
     protection which has been provided so far to the
     escape r o u t e s .


     Automatic Fire Protection

             We will suggest to the Club that proposals
     should be put forward for the provision of a fire
     detection system but the system is not likely to be
     installed until the major re-development of the South
     stand which is planned for 1991

     Emergency Lighting

             Testing of the emergency lighting system is
     being organised and we will be contacting the Fire
     Service in the next day or so to agree a date and
     time for carrying out the test.
             The testing of the general electrical circuits
     will also be organised over the next few weeks and
     a current IEE Certificate produced.

     Fire Alarms

             The Club was told by the Fire Service to put
     the call points in the bars in the stands.       Moving
     the call points again is out of the question.

     Inidcator/Control Panel

             The Officer Working Party was asked,   at the
     time of installation, where the indicator/central
     panel should be placed.       The Club was told that it
     should be located in the Police control centre,
     where it .is now.      No duplicate panel was asked for
     and it is not considered that one is necessary.
EASTWOOD ft PARTNERS                                      SHEET   7




     Gates
             The comments about the gates are noted.


     The Club have expressed to us their increasing c on ­
cern that with the introduction of each new member of the
Fire Service to the Officer Working Party new or
different recommendations are put forward by that officer,
which in some cases openly contradict the recommendations
offered by his predecessors.     Whereas we agree that    many
of the observations and recommendations are of a
subjective nature the Club cannot be expected to continue
spending money on matters which are purely a matter of
personal opinion.      Some consistency in the comments
offered by members of the Officer Working Party would be
appreciated.




                                            Ypurs sincerely,




c.c. Mr. G. Mackrell,
     SWFC
EASTWOOD                            & PARTNERS                                                               St. Andrews House
                (C o n s u ltin g   E n g in e e rs )
                                                                                                             23 Kingfield Road
                                                                                                             Sheffield S11 9AS
Directors :
W. Eastwood                     F.Eng. 8 .Eng., Ph.D.. D.Eng,
                                                                                                             Tel.: (0742) 583871
                                C.Eng„ F.I.C.EL. P.P.I.StmetE_                                               Telex:       547266
                                F.I.Mech.E, F.G.S.. M.Con».E.
                                                                                                             Fax:    0742 554330
A. A. Wood                      B.Eng., Ph.D . C.Eng.. F.I.C.E..
                                F.I.SUUCLE.. M.I.W.E.S. M.ContE.
                                                                                                                                  and at;
R. C. A. Eastwood               B.Sc, C.Eng, M.I.C.E. M.I.SmictE.

G. Spir                         C.Eng.. M.I.C.E.. M.I.Mech.E.                           o^     _____________ /:P r e m i e r    House
                                                                                                               $2/13 Hatton Garden
C. S. Greaves                   B.Eng.. C.Eng, M.I.C.E.. M.I.StructE.

S. Preston                      B.Eng.. C.Eng, M.I.C.E.. M.I.StructE.
                                                                                         22     J A N 1988      onion EC1N 8AN
                                                                                                                      (01) 242 7436
G. M. Seaman
C onsultant:
                                B.Sc.. C.Eng.. M.I.C.E, M.I.StnjctE.
                                                                                   £        W l O N S 1^
                                                                                                                           01 ■ 4045424

A. 6 . Burdott                  G.M.. B.Se.iEn(.). CEnt.,                       Our R ef:               S7PB/9648
                                F.I.C.E., F l^truct-E.
                                                                                YourRaf:      87/3124B


City of Sheffield Metropolitan District,                                                          15 J a n u a r y , 1988
Department of Land & Planning,
Town Hall,
SHEFFIELD Si 2 H H .


Dear Sirs,

                                    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club ole
                               North Stand - Facilities for the Disabled

               After the meeting of the Officer Working Party at the
 crrcund or. 12 January- we discussed with the Club Secretary
 the matter of the guarding along the front of the platform

               We are of the opinion that a mesh inriil would
 distract the view of the disabled so much that a lot of the
 oieasure of attending the games woulc. be lost.                                                       As an
 alternative we propose that a mid-rail be introduced,                                                           as
 shown on the attached sketch.                                          This would effectively
 trevent oeotils being pusned unasr the top guarct rai_ but
  at the same time maintain good signt lines.                                                      We tind it
 difficult to accent that there is any danger to either the
 disabled,                their helpers or in extreme emergency situations
  other members of the public using the stand being pushes
  or squeezing between the two rails or m i d —tail and top o z
  the wall.                 Any sensible person who regularly attends
  football matches will appreciate that the risk of anyone
  falling through the rails is so remote that it can be
  ignored.

                Since the meeting we have learnt that when the pitch
  is very wet the tractor used for dressing the grass is______

                                                                                                       DOCUMENT No. 7 ^
 A ssociates:
 J . A. Strange                      A. J. Clough                            R. Tandy                       J. M . Wood
 G.En^., M.I.Strucu£.                e>,,c.E.n,K.cxasi,                     C Enf., FJ^trua-E .             B-Sc.. C.tng^   M.l.StructX

                                       An Unlimited Company, Registered in England - No. 1833144
EASTWOOD &> PARTNERS                                              SHEET   2




fitted with a second pair of wheels.        This is to spread
the load of the tractor over a larger area so as not to
damage the grass.

         In order for the tractor to pass down the passage
adjacent to the access ramp we now find that greater
clearance is required and the width of the access ramp
needs to be reduced to what was shown originally on our
drawing 9648/1,       ie 1025mm between the gable concrete
beam and the inside face of the angle standard.

        To maintain a handrail on the gable wall would, we
believe,       narrow the ramp to an unacceptable width.     In
the circumstances we suggest that the handrail on the
gable is omitted.        If a relaxation to the Building
Regularions is required then we would wish to make such
an application.

        A photocopied extract of the typical cross-section
of the ramp is enclosed marked up with the proposed
d i m e ns i on s .

        Your comments would be welcomed.



                                              Yours faithfully,




c.c. Mr. D. Bownes,
     Administration & Legal Dept.
          »wJItJkNN. D W ikW vaw JD                                                       y/i^i)|
                o^vi ytfcD
                                                        LOCATION PLAN.
 ^\cso«H»wAc« , *2&)A^ O t t p



> l< = J z £ \l sX^»S» ~^=>                                      V025
3            >00

      CaiJ c S.C^E.
> -y- c»vjE       a   >
  C e o > K CoulcSE-t^t
                                                    3
iZ\JiCi.




    ^SAs                  ~V*1
= > 0 0 C.^c_ c*s» tvJ c..

       ^JCY“^'-Jt2»»vJC, ,



                              » o •« V O O X ' o "\h k . feftSt
                                           ~^<=> C-o>Ac.S2.e"^E. SA-fi^fc*
                          ^ S » a c . ^ A . « u V . & & & ST^fcL S t \ f
                          D K i \\fc X >    o C . E x ^ A v io ^ C   j b .u l e .i - v o ^ .

                          <2e» KNKN- TT>\A.i*A.C^E.15..

                                                  SFCnnN R — R f T V P I f A ! )
                                                                                                       G3
                                                                                                       CD

                                                        LD




                                                 o•




                      T Y P I C A L SE CTION.




                                                                                 Dm.           Ch<L          Data
EASTW OO D & PARTNERS' (Consulting Engineers}
St. Andrews House. 23 Kingfield Road. Sheffield SIT 9AS. t»i. 107421533371
                                                                                 SCSMS
SHEFFIELD WEDNESOAY F.C. PLC ,H IU S B 0R 0U & H
DISABLED ENCLOSURE.
                ■    t? **                                                   I         9   6   L   8   / 2          I
    City of Sheffield          M e tro p o lita n D istric t


    Roger Pensam, FCIS, MBIM, Solicitor
                                                                  Administration and Legal D epartm ent
    Head of Department
                                                                  Town Hall
                                                                  Sheffield S I 2HH
                                                                  Telephone       0742-26444
    Our reference    GP/DMB                                       Facsimile       0742-735003
                                                                  Telecom Gold    76:LM X086
    Your reference                                                Telex           54243 SHFLIB G
                                                                             or   265871 MONREF G (quote ref LMX 086)
    Date             13th January 1988


    Mr G. Mackrell,
    Secretary,
    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC,
    The Stadium,
    Penistone Road,
    SHEFFIELD,
    S6 1SW


    Dear Sir,

     Safety of Sports Ground?Act 1975 - Facilities for the Disabled

     As you are awa re representatives of the 5afety of Sports GroundJ Advisory
     Group met Mr. Strange of Eastwood and Partners at your Stadium on 12th
     January 1988 to discuss the above ■proposals.'

     The details of the proposed facilities were generally accepted and provided
     that the construction is in accordance with the plans approved for Building
     Regulation purposes there is no objection to its proceeding-

     However, at the   meeting it was agreed that a balustrading at                           the front       edge^^
     of the disabled    persons accommodation (nearest to the pitch)                          shouldbe        proviae
                  —   ^        » 1  •      * . . J U. 4- ~ ~ ~ U r7 C v                1 HA   m *n i rr V-.
     at a height of 900 mm and be m f iliac with steel                                        — •

     Provided that these requirements are met the Council, as Certificating Authority,
     has no objection to the work being carried out.

     I have passed a            copy of this letter to Messrs Eastwood and Partners as usual.
A
^ Y o u r s faithfully,




     Head of Department




                                                                                   DOCUMENT No.    7 3 ^




                                                               734690 - Mr Bownes
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE - MINUTE SHEET



    F IL E REFERENCE                        MINUTE SHEET NO                |.
                                    •s
    sub jec t                 C o ^ J k u




                       - 2-
(   m -s )




                        'wORKSH/


                       2 9 DEC1987
                        4n™ ™ , V




                                              |~30C U M EH T Ho.   7 3 3
 City of Sheffield          M e tro p o lita n D istrict

 Roger Pensam, FCIS, MBIM, Solicitor                                          Administration and Legal Department
 Head of Department
                                                                              Town Hall
                                                                              Sheffield S1 2HH   -J
                    GP/262/DMB                                                Telephone    0742-26444
 Our reference
                                                                              Facsimile    0742-735003
                    MS/JDB/JW                                                 Telecom Gold 76:L M X 086
 Your reference
                                         j                                    Telex        54243 SHFLIBG
                                                                                         or 265871 MONREF G (quote ref LM X 08(
 Date                16th December, 1987


 The Chief Constable,
 South Yorkshire Police,
                                                rr
 Police Headquarters,
 Snig Hill,                                                                                                   POLICE
 SHEFFIELD.
 S1 80 Y                                                                                         2 D e c |m

 Dear Sir,
                                                                                          f£3!^fRAfl0N
 Fire Safety and Safety of Place“5r“Sport Act 1987
 Safety Certification____________________________

 I refer to your letter of 3rd December, and feel that I ought to confirm
 that only one Safety Certificate is currently in force in Sheffield, namely
 that relating to Hillsborough.

 As far as I can see the existing Hillsborough Certificate does not contradict
 the amended Section 2 of the Safety of Spoi^'Q<*unds Act 1975. As you are
 aware, the draft revised Certificate cood'itfloni^'CVrhich^were circulated to you
 and upon which you commented some time'ago) take full'aceSjuntvof that
 amendment of the 1975 Act.         r '•                       £
lb                                                                                         r-
 Yours faithfully,                                              .
                                                           V*    . v- -•j '       ■'




 Head of Department




 JJJ                                                                  73^690 - Mr. Bownes
      Chief Superintendent Mole
      F DHQ

      No objections provided that the materials used and specification meet
      regulatory requirements.   The siting of this facility for the disabled
      within the North Stand gells well with the Membership scheme operating
      therein.

      Submitted for return to the Chief Superintendent, Operations and Traffic.




■ L   Chi&Onspector




      ^       -


                                                                            6




                                         (
          |       T " DIVISION
                                       SHEFFIELD C IT Y COUNCIL

                              SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 197 5

                 NOTICE OF A PROPOSAL IN RELATION TO A DESIGNATED STADIUM

to :-                                          yAJJ'i. j.f.tAt.                               AH*
Stadium: ............... P 'S . J A .4£... W &                f t ...   ............. ........

proposal: .......... f f i k W    T J fa   .. & A .. I V A .. .27$/? $ k * P . ............

Copy letters enclosed from/date:               ..             .J . I P ..            ?•....... .




Plan Nos. enclosed:            3 m         i


1 enclose for your attention copies of the documents detailed above.                          Please
let me have your written comments on them by : j~ )             >*H b

If you do not let me have written comments by that date I will take it that'
you approve the proposal(s).            n ,


Date:     2 DEC 1987                                Head'of '^Administration and Legal
                                                    Deoartment


Anv enquiries in relation to t^is matter should be made                     to        nowne
teleohone Sheffield        34OC*5 / 7 6 9 .



             'r '      .

   ■!II, 11*,I       r ~




                                 f Y       -/LOTS7        )   I

                                 \ S - - s 7- .
E A S T W O O D & PARTNERS                                                                  \$/h/v             St. Andrews House
               (C o n s u ltin g E n g in e ers)                                                               23 Kingfield Road
Director*:
                                                                                                               Sheffield S11 9AS
W. Eastwood                   F.Eng. B.Eng„ Ph.D . D.Eng„                                                      Tel.: (0742) 583871
                              C.Eng., F.I.C.E. P.P.I.StructE.                                                  Telex:       547266
                              F.I.Mech.E» F.G.S.. M.CofW.E.
                                                                                                               Fax:    0742 554330
A. A. Wood                    B.Eno, Ph-D . C.Eng., F.I.C.E.
                              F.I.Stiuct.E» M.I.W.E.S., M.Cons.E.
                                                                                                                                            and a t;
R. C. A. Eastwood             B .Sc. C.En*. M.I.C.E. M.I.StructE.

G. Spir                       C.Eng., M I C E.. M.I.Mach.E.                                                        Premier House
C. S. Greaves                 B.Eng., C.Eng. M.I.C.E. M.I.StmcLE.
                                                                                                                   12/13 Hatton Garden
                                                                                                                   London EC1N 8AN
S. Preston                    B.Eng., C.Eng. M.I.C.E. M.I.StnicLE.
                                                                                                                   Tel.: (01) 242 7436
G. M. Seaman                  B.Sc., C.Eng, M.I.C.E. M.I.StructE.                                                  Fax:     01 - 4045424
C onsultant:
A. G. Burdett                 G.M., B.Sc.(En{.). C.En*..                           Our R ef :          WE/JAS/JAN/9648
                              F.I.C.E.. FU truct-E.
                                                                                   Your R a f:



                                                                                                       17 November 1987
City of Sheffield Metropolitan District,
Administration and Legal Department,
Town Hall,
SHEFFIELD.
S1 2HH

 For the attention of Mr. D. Bownes

Dear Mr. Bownes,

                                Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic
                                             Facilities for the Disabled


               In response to earlier correspondence about the accommodation
 of the disabled, at the front of the North stand, we enclose
 six prints of our drawing 9648/1 showing details of the latest
 proposals.
               The space created by removing the front two rows of seats
 will be filled with an incombustible lightweight no-fines concrete
                                                      i
 with a sand/cement screed topping.  The ramp will be constructed
 in steelwork with open mesh flooring to give a non-slip surface
 which will also be less prone to the build-up of snow and ice.
               The timber partition shown on the original drawing will not
 be constructed and the third row of seats will be left in position
 for use by the semi-ambulant and also those people helping with
 the wheelchairs.
               Reading through previous comments,                                          from the members of the
 Officer Working Party, we believe that the principles of
 construction are now in line with their views.                                                            In anticipation
 of agreement to these latest proposals,                                                   and at the request of



A ssociates:
J . A. Strange                    A. J . Clough                               R. Tandy                       J. M. Wood
C.ent.. M.i.Struci.E.             B.A.. C E nt.. M.C.I.B.S.E.. M.f.H«cii.E.   C . t n g FXStrtfCC.£«         B.SC.. C.Enj., M.I.C.E.,M.I.Struct.E
City of Sheffield           M e tro p o lita n D istrict
                                                                                 «T                         ^
Roger Pensam, FCIS, M BIM, Solicitor                                           Administration and Legal Department
Head of Department
                                                                               Town Hall
                                                                               Sheffield S1 2HH
                                                                               Telephone    0742-26444
Our reference         GP/262/DMB                                               Facsimile    0742-735003
                                                                               Telecom Gold 76:LM X086
Your reference                                                                 Telex         54243 SHFLIB G
                                                                                          or 265871 MONREF G (quote ref LMX 086)
Date
                      4th December, 1987


Mr. G. Mackrell,
The Secretary,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC
The Stadium,
Penistone Road,
SHEFFIELD.
S6 1SW


Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 -
Annual Inspection of the Sheffield Wednesday Stadium -
6 th August, 1987_______ ______ ______________________

1 enclose for your attention a list of comments made by Officers arising from
the above inspection.

I anticipate that during the course of your Clubs' normal maintenance
arrangements many of the items listed will have already been attended to.                                           Would
you please let me have your comments on the points raised in due course.

If you require any clarification of the individual comments made you will see
that on the right-hand side of the sheet an abreviation of the title of the
Department/Authority concerned. At the end of the list is a Schedule showing
the appropriate Officers to contact if necessary.

The Fire Service has recently reminded m e that no reply has yet been received to
my letter of 22nd April enclosing their letter of 18th February.   You will
recall that you were asked in that letter to comment on the points raised by the
Fire Service and I would appreciate those comments as soon as possible.   I take
the view that it is appropriate for a Certificate Holder to have the opportunity
to comment on the views of Officers before final decisions are taken cn works
that are required.  If, however, you do not wish to avail yourself of this
opportunity to comment please let me know so that appropriate requirements can
be f ramed.

I have passed a copy of this letter onto Messrs. Eastwood and Partners.

Yours faithfully,


                                                                                          DOCUMENT Ho.   7 3 3


Head of Department

AF                                                                                  734005 - Mr. Bownes

                                       ownnirtoc n n thte m a t t P r   TIHQ                      (STD Code 0742)
COMMENTS                                                                  MADE BY

1.0   Spion Kop

1.1   The timber ticket hut adjacent to the refreshment bar on the main
      means of escape exit route from the KOP should be removed, since
      it is causing both a high risk and a narrowing of the escape
      width.                                                              B.S.

1.2   A broken concrete post supporting the end of a crush barrier
      adjacent" to the tunnel exit at the north end of the KOP to be
      removed,’ and the crush barrier be modified to join onto the end
      of the new steel supported barrier directly adjacent to it.         B.S.

1.3   A timber hut at ground level, under the KQP structure should be
      removed.                                                            B.S.

1.4   An additional length of crush barrier is required to be installed
      adjacent to the base of the ramped stairway from the extended
      terracing. This was agreed on site by Dr. Eastwood.                 B.S.

1.5   An area of the corrugated metal sheeting used as cladding to the
      side of the Kop is corroded and torn.                               HCS

1.6   It was noted that in some places the stair nosings serving radial
      gangways had become defective.                                      HCS

1.7   At some positions within the new development there is a
      difference in height between a terraced area and radial gangway
      of over 600mm. As such these areas require to be protected by a
      suitably constructed pedestrian guardrail.                          HCS

1.8   Some areas of the front terracing were found to be in need of
      minor repairs. It was agreed, however, that this defect would be
      adequately controlled by means of "ongoing" maintenance.            HCS

1.9   The defective rendering to the final exit gate wall requires to
      be repaired.                                                        HCS

2.0   North Stand

2.1   A broken glass panel in the west gable end should be replaced.      B.S.

2.2   The step between seats 12 and 13 on row 43 is loose and should be
      correctly bedded down.                                              B.S.

2.3   It is important to ensure that the groundman's store beneath this
      stand is not used for the storage of potentially inflammable
      fertilisers or weedkillers.                                         HCS

3.0   West Stand

3.1   Signs over the front parapet wall at the upper level are to be
      permanently secured at the following positions:-

      a) between seats 1 and 14
      b) between seats 20 and 28
      c) between seats 136 and 150.
        Binding wire ties are not considered to be satisfactory for this
        purpose.

        Additionally the sign brackets adjacent to iseats '62 ^ 72 are to
        be correctly bent (or otherwise suitably checked) and secured.

3.2     Rain water drainage holes through the upper level slab should
        have a gauze inserted so as to inhibit the dropping of missiles
                                                                                     B.S.
        onto the crowd below.

3.3     It is felt that discussion should take place regarding the
        suitability of the gate fastening  device at     the base ofthe
        emergency exit stairway on the south end of      this stand.The
        fastening consisting of a patent lockable barrel bolt which
        cannot easily be unfastened in the direction of t r av e l , and is
        impossible to be unfastened from the other side.

4.0     Miscellaneous Points

4.1     At a number of points within the stadium various pieces of
        abandoned builders’ waste were readily available :for
        projectiles by the crowd. S u c h material should be collected and           ^
        suitably disposed of.

4.2     The main first aid room requires to be supplied with adequate
        first aid equipment for the treatment of spectators should they
        become ill or injured within the   sports ground.

4.3     The provision of qualified first           aiders is being reviewed at the
        moment; it i s felt that the e x i s t i n g arrangements r e q u i r e
        formalisation. The Club’s views on this point are sought.




 Abbreviation Used               Authority/D epartment and Contact Officer

 T. c                            City Council Building Surveyor
                                  Mr. A. Butler - 734162

                                  City Council Health and Consumer Services Department
 H. & C.S.
                                  Mr. D. Moore - 734620




 BH/7/DMB2310
                               Wednesday
                                       r         x.!—
                                                               I           a d ;.
                                    Hillsborough, Sheffield S6 1SW.              I
                      Telephone: (0742) 343122 Telegrams: Wednesday Shef ISRIfK
                            Telex No. 547709 WEDNES Fax No. 0742 33714*        -




              Our Ref: GHM/NL.1450
              Your Ref: GP/262/DMB


              Mr.Roger Pearson                    23rd O c t o b e r , 1987
              Head of Department,
              City of Sheffield,
              Administration and Legal Department,
              Town Hall,
               SHEFFIELD.Si                2HH


               Dear Mr.Pearson,

               GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS - 1986 EDITION

               Thank you for your letter dated 15th O c t o b e r ,19 87.

               I confirm that I do have a copy of the Guide to
               Safety at Sports Grounds - 1986 edition and have had
               such for many months.

               With regard to the appointment of a Safety Officer,
               my duties encompass those of the Safety Officer and
               I would be grateful if you could amend your records
               to note that I am responsible for all matters of
               safety within the ground.


                Yours sincerely,




                                                                                           DOCUMENT No.




                   Chairman: H. E McGee, Secretary: G. H. Mackrell, F.C.C.A. Manager: H. Wilkinson
Directors: M. Sheppard, J.P., F.C.A. (Vice-Chairman), S. L Speight, O .B.E. C. Woodward, K. T. Addy, E. Barron, G. K. Hulley.
City of Sheffield          M e tro p o lita n D istrict

Roger Pensam, FCIS, MBIM, Solicitor                                        Administration and Legal Department
Head of Department
                                                                           Town Hall
                                                                           Sheffield S1 2HH
                                                                           Telephone            0742-26444
Our reference           GP/262/DMB                                         Facsimile            0742-735003
                                                                           Telecom Gold         76:LM X 086
Your reference
                                                                           Telex                54243 SHFLIBG
                      ' WE/JAS/SLW/8722/8723                                          or        265871 MONREF G (quote ref LM X 086)
Date
                        15th October, 1987




     Messrs. Eastwood and Partners,
     Consulting Engineers
     St. Andrew's House,
     23 Kingfield Road,
     SHEFFIELD.
     Sll 9AS




     Dear Sirs,

     Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 ^ Gate Release Devices

     I refer to your letter of 19th August and the enclosed plans of a proposed gate
     release device.

     The proposed device has been discussed by the various Authorities at some length
     and it has now been suggested thatfcerhapsa prototype device could be fabricated
     and fitted to one of the gates for testing purposes.   It has also been mentioned
     that with some modifications the proposed device could also be used for the
     sliding gates at Sheffield United Football Club.

     I look forward to hearing from you with your comments on this matter.

     Yours faithfully,




     Head of Department




/'     A o   .



                                                                                                                                  mm

                                      21     OCT 1987                                 OOCUMENT No.            7 3 7




  PB/5                                                                     734690 - Mr. Bownes
                      For telephone enquiries on this matter please ring   .................................... <STD Code 0742)
                                                      SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL
                                         SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ADVISORY GROUP
                                                                                                                                                 * 0


         NOTES OF A MEETING HELD ON: Thursday 17th September, AT:                                           10.00           k .Y i.m x f.



         ATTENDANCE:       D.    Binningtcn, A. Rider, F. Waterhouse, T. Sykes, R. Woodhouse (SYFS),
                           D.    Dukenfield, R. Marshall, D. Beal, D. Roseaveare (SYP), A. Butler,
                           G.    Swan, M. Harvey (Building Surveyors), D. Moore, A. Bird, (H. andC.S.),
                           D:-   M. Bownes (HALD).



ITEM                                           DESCRIPIION .                                                        ACTION TO BE TAKEN
N d m tG t.



              Sheffield United - Fire Service letter of
              I2th August 1987_______________________

              Items (a)(i) to (iii) had either been attended to                                                      HALD to write to
              or were in the process of being dealt with.                                                            the Club.

              Item (iv) relating to the sealing off of the press
              box has already been dealt with by letter from
              HALD dated 12th August, although no confirmation
              of the action taken by the Club has yet been
              received.

              Item s ( v )    t o ( v i i ) sh o u ld     be b r o u g h t    t:     th e     C lu b 's
              a tte n tio n   and m o n i t o r e d .

              I t e r ( h ) r e l a t i n c to th e e x i t     doors        w a t:        ’ ■ had
              been d e a l t w i t h b v t h e C l u b .

              Items (c)(i) to (iii) should be brought to the
              attention of the Club.

              All the points mentioned in the Fire Service letter
              should be brought to the attention of the Club.


                          - B u ild ir."        Surv.             CO”
              1Otb A u e u s t 1 9 8 “

              I t was f e l t t h a t a l l t h e i t e m s l i s t s :                          ne                         to   w rite     t:
              t r o u e h t t o t h e a t t e n t i o n o f t h e Cl'.:- ,               ■ e r t f o r 2.
              and 2 . 1 0 and t h o s e whi ch d u p l i c a t e ; -' : t                • co mm ent s
              r a d e bv o t h e r A u t h o r i t i e s .

              I t was a s r e e d t h a t i t e r 2.': r e l a t i r : : t     -           i'n: coor
              s h o u l d he d r o r r e r as t h e d o o r was : . : t        ::
              c irc u m s ta n c e s a v a i l a b l e to s p e c ta to r?     ar:z        remained
              i o c k e r and usee o n l y Hy t h e P o l i c e "... r             :t:     m atches.

              I t e m 2.10 - r e l a t i n g t o th e p i t c h of t he u t o = r
                     l e v e l o f t h e s r a m a l l L a n e St an d - i :.= ? - f e l t t h a t
              t h e C l u b s h o u l d be n o t i f i e d o f c o n c = r r . a b o u t t h e
              p i t c h and be a s k e d t o m o n i t o r t h e s i t u a t i o n d u r i n g                       DOCUMENT No.   7 3 g>
              the co urse o f th e c u r r e n t f o o t b a l l season.
                                                        DESCRIP1I0K                                                ACTION TO BE TAKEN
ITEM



       S.U.F.C. Health and Consumer Services comments
       dated 18th August 1987

       All the points listed can be passed on to the Club                                                          HALD to write to
       where they do not conflict with other reports.                                                              the Club and the
       The general comment was made that the general                                                               HAA.
       housekeeping of the Stadium was of a low standard
       and that several items pointed out last year had
       still not been complied with.

       There was some discussion about first aid facilities
       and it was felt that the Area Health Authority
       should be asked for consents on the situation. The
       John Street Stand First Aid loom is apparently not
       used as such as casualties are normally treated on
       the spot and transported inaediately to a County
       Ambulance* It was filt that perhaps the players*
       first aid room could substitute for the John Street
       Stand Room.

       As to the number of first aiders present, H and CS
       felt it would be appropriate to set a basic standard
       with w h i c h t h e C lu b s h o u l d c c - p l y . I t was pointed
       out      th a t       a ll       P o lic e m e n    r.evs   f i r s t a id c e r t i f i c a t e s
       a nd t h a t t h e i r p r e s e n c e i*.                         S t a d i u m was now a
       m a t t e r o f c o n t r a c t betveer.                           C l u b a nd t h e P o l i c e ,
       P a nd CS p o i n t e d o u t t v £ t :                          e e v e n t o f a raaior
       d is tu rb a n c e o c c u r r in r - i z -                     • i n j u r i e s , the P o lic e
       w o u ld have o t h e r th in g s t*                            :'ra n t o a d m i n i s t e r
       f i r s t a id .  This- r . s t t e r ? '                        fe r e c o n s id e r e d a f t e r
       'e a r in s : the Area r i e a l : r A . :                            s c o m m en ts and i t
       may h a v e some i m p l i c a t i c r . s                       t h e new s a f e t y
       certificate.


       S .V .F .C .              -   B u ild in g   S u r v e y t r ’ s co mm en ts       of
       1 3th       August                   __________

         1.      t nr       r - 1r r ? r e n t : c             :           r-c ’- r o u e h t    t:   the-
                                                                           ■ r-   t         c o n flic t
       v i t ’r; v * o ir . t f        r h i sec.         ;:               r.ritie?.   Particular
       7e   r € 7 *-' r. *.*-•                                             :rs''- 2."- re 1s11nr t
       z:\tz e i :e r r e : : r -         e x it    =                      -e West Stand.

                                                                            T"r • T'v 7         !-v r. 1 c ’ ’*'
                                                                                                       ACTION TO BE TAKEN
ITEM                                          DESCRIP7ION
NUm tlA



          It was also noted that on a visit to the                                                     Fire Service to check
          Stadium, there was a large void under the                                                    on whether work is
          Vest Stand in which some rubbish had                                                         done.
          accumulated, which the Club had agreed to move.


          Gate release devices — Eastwood's letter of
          19th August-•

          The Fire Service* are setfding a letter-dated                                                RAID to write to
          15th September advising that it may be                                                       Eastwoods on receipt
          appropriate for a sanple device to be                                                        of the Fire Service
          constructed and fixed to one pitch perimeter                                                 letter.
          gate and then tested in situ to see whether
          it could perform, "its function adequately.
          This method of approach was generally agreed.
          It was also mentioned that perhaps the
          device could be used in a modified form to
          replace the existing unsatisfactory locking
          arrangements on the existing sliding exit
          doors.


          Owlerton Sports Stai:

                                                                                                           B u ild in g S urveyor to
          The B u i l d i n g S u r v e y : r i n d i c a t e d t h a t he was
                                                                                                           se r.d n o t e s t o HALD
          in th e p ro c e s s o f r r =? aring d e t a ile d n o te s
                                                    i t m i g h t be a p p r o p r i a t e                       c o m p le tio n .
          on t h e S t a d i u m and t
          f o r t h e s e t c be c i r : _'_5t e d t o o t h e r A u t h o r i t i e s
          and t h e n u s e d as s t = = i s f o r c o n d u c t i n g d e t a i l e d
          i n s p e c t i o n s and d r a ­ i r . r un d e t a i l e d r e a u i r e n e n t s
          in   order      of   im m edia:




          Green Guide -            G e n e ra l Management Responsibilities

                                                i t a l e t t e r s h o u ld     be   sent                      • to w rite   to
           I t was reco mm en de d
                                                  o u t th e above                                               C lu b s .
           to th e C lu b s p o i n t :
           re s p o n s ib ilitie s .




                                                                                        2 2 SEP 1987




           AA/10


                                                                                                       \
                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                 '•'A
CH SUPT MEMXMS OPS & TRAFFIC DIVISION                                         <X>S IW/SH
SEE DISTRIBUTION*-                                                                   DERATIONS
                                                                                     (■September 1987

             SAFETY   o p spo r ts   g r o u n d a d v is o r   *   group




 ^ShfffiSd                   nBet at 10 *" 00                               17 septenfcer 1987

 Forwarded herewith are papers relevant to that meeting and you n r wiah
 to oe represented.




                cf
 Chief Superintendent


 Bnc


 Distribution

Ch S vp ts        d Division
                  F Division




                         m           .
                                             SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL

                                    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ADVISORY GROUP

                   MEETING TO BE HELD ON: Thurs. 17th Sept. 1987        AT    1 0 .0 0   A M /EH


                                       AT:         Town Hall, Sheffield

                   REPRESENTATIVES ARE INVITED FROM:


      FIRE SERVICE       POLICE     BUILDING SERVICES      HEALTH A C.S.     HALD


                   ITEMS FOR DISCUSSION:


    ITEM NO.

    •
                                             DESCRIPTION                                 COMMENTS



     :: 3x
                       Sheffield United Annual Visit                           Reports from Fire Service,
                                                                               Building Surveyors, Health
                                                                               and Consumer Services
                                                                               attached.



        2               Sheffield Wednesday Annual Visit                       Reports from the Building
                                                                               Surveyor and Health and
                                                                               Consumer Services attached.




        3               Gate Release Devices - Eastwoods'    Proposal           Copy letter already


    •
                        of 19th August, 1987                                    circulated




        4              Owlerton Sports Stadium - Co-ordination of
                       inspections, reports, etc.




*
*        --    -   ■         “ *r- •" 'r ■ r-
/                                                                                               »    I I I ( /fy
    SOUTH YORKSHIRE FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY
                                                                                                         rfy *   s t s r


    South Yorkshire County Fire Service
    H. E. Wright M.I. Fire E., F.B.I.M.                                                   Sheffield (West) Division
          Chief Fire Officer                                                              Division Street
                                                                                          Sheffield
    Divisional Commander                                                                  South Yorkshire S.1 3FG
    K. L. Mettam, J.P., Grad.I.Fire E.                                                    Telephone Sheffield
                                                                                          STD (0742) 731645/6/7

    Our Ref: C1033/FJW/EB                    Vbur Ref:                                    Date: 12th August, 1987
    This matter is being dealt with by .S ta tio n O ffic e r F. J . Waterhouse           Ext No       5.1



       City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council,
       Legal and Administration Department,
       Town Hall,
       SHEFFIELD. SI 2HH


       For the attention of Mr. D. Bownes


       Dear Sir,

       SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUND ACT 1975
       SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB, BRAMALL LANE, SHEFFIELD

       Further to the joint inspection of the above premises on 4th August, 1987,
       please find below the comments of this Authority.

         a)   John Street Stand

                 (i)    The damaged floor boarding adjacent to Exit K requires repair
                        or replacement.

                (ii)    The plastic lids to the metal refuse                    bins in the refreshment
                        area should be replaced by metal lids.

                        There are a number of areas where rubbish has accumulated and
                        these represent a considerable risk. Whilst it was not possible
                        to check every part of the stand it was noted that the disused
                        aa. room and the disused press box were particularly bad in
                        this respect.    It is considered essential that all parts cf
                        the stand be checked and any rubbish removed.       In addition
                        areas and voids where rubbish has gathered should be sealed
                        to prevent any further material accumulating.

                (iv)    The stairways leading off from the disused press box should
                        be sealed off.     It is strongly recommended that in view of
                        the problems caused by unauthorised entry and subsequent vandalism
                        consideration be given to removing the stairways together with
                        the structure of the old press box and boarding over the entry
                        to the void below.

                  (v)   The fastenings on the final exit doors should be modified to
                        achieve the standard set out in my copy letter to you dated
                        9th December, 1986. This was agreed by the Club's representative
                        during the inspection.




                                All communications to be addressed to the Chief Fire Officer.
                                      CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM

     - From      The Building Surveyor                  To The Head of Administration and Legal
                 Department of Land and Planning              Department

         Date     10th August, 1987                            For the attention of Mr. D. M. Bownes
         Ref.     BSD/A.Bu/GS/AM                                                          •
         Tel. Ext 4162 - Mr. Butler                     Ref.




                 Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
                 Annual visit - Sheffield United Football Club,
                 Bramall Lane, Sheffield.___________ ____________

q   QJL          During the annual visit to the above ground, the following points were noted:-

t& s Uv'VvJT 1.0       North Stand
         r                      —
    U»           1.1   The bottom section of handrailing at the base of the stairway adjacent
/            j   h     t° Gate E was badly corroded and in need of replacement.

    _ fI         1.2   Steel reinforcement was showing on the underside of the stairway
                        landing adjacent to gate E - Patching required to be done.

             U   1.3   A length of loose hanging barbed wire adjacent to Gate F should be
                        removed.

                 1.4   The accumulation of rubbish over the entrance to the Ladies toilets
                        adjacent to Gate F to be removed.

                 1.5   Loose stored materials over STORE adjacent to Gate L should be removed.

                 1.6   Lengths of reinforcing bar and steel conduit adjacent to gate P should
                        be removed.

                 1.7   Wire grill to ventilation opening into void under seating area from
                        old players tunnel should be replaced.

                 1.8   Rusty and badly corroded steel sheeting to internal face of gable,
                        adjacent to stairway 1 to be removed, and if necessary replaced.

                 1.9   TRe top level of seating adjacent to stairway 7 were found not to be
                        fastened to the structure - These should be fastened down.

                 1.1C Loose pieces cf concrete seen through broken timber roof boarding
                       adjacent tc the old press box should be removed.

                 l.li The filling of voids under the timber seating with a polyurethane foam •
                       filler appears to be an unsuitable material which may materially add
                       to the existing danger of a timbered stand. Unless proof of this
                       material's suitability can be provided to the satisfaction of the
                       Council, it should be removed.




                                                                          Cont/
2.7     The signs hung over the front balustrading to the upper level,
        between seats A48 and A62 were not fastened to the structure by .
        any positive fastening. This situation should be rectified
        immediately by bolting the supporting stays to the balustrade
        wall, so avoiding these large sign boards being used as missiles
        capable of causing multiple fatalities.

2.8      A number of the tip up type seats at the upper level have become
        damaged or worn, so causing the seat in its lifted position to^
        park in such an angle as to be a trip hazard to the public on the
        row behind. Repairs should be carried out so that the seats are
        retained in the up position by the backrest.

2.9     The proposed mesh guard to prevent spectators standing on the new       t        ^
        electronic score board has not been installed.                                   i

*2.10    It was noted that the pitch of the upper level of the stapd was _
        very steep. A going of 680 mm and a rise of 480 ma g iv e s a pitch
        of 35 degrees.                                                          (Q

        In comparison, the new kop at the S h e f f i e l d Wednesday ground,
        a maximum pitch of 31 degrees 15 minutes.

        It is suggested that the possibility of requiring crush barriers in                  _
        this area of the stand should be discussed at the next meeting of   0 ^ 0 /
        the "advisory group".                                                        Q

 3.0    South Stand

 2.1    Tr.e eeress doors from the ladies and gents toilets having a one way
        flow system are marked on the main corridor side with red EXxT signs.

         Although the fire exits from that same corridor are marked with green
         EXIT signs, the duplication of the word exit could cause confusion
         in an emergency evacuation.  It is suggested that the egress doors
         from the toilets be marked "NO ENTRY" and not "EXIT".

 A .C    The K.op

 1.1     Tr.e cates m the crowd division fencing tc the southern enc cf tr.e
         v op o d ov: ir. a northerly direction although the natural slopr ^ne
         ground is southerly. These gates would therefore appear tc oe opening
         ir. tr.e wrong direction.

 A.2     The rainwater pipe at the head of the Kop adjacent to the above fence
         gate is incorrectly fixed - a wire tie is not considered suitable.

  4.3    Rusty and jagged steel sheeting to be- removed from:-

         a)   South side of toilets
         b)   North side of toilets
         c)   Adjacent to Licenced bar

  4.4    Repair is needed to the wall adjacent to the disabled access walkway.
         The face of the wall is spalling off.




                                                                 Cont/.
/   .                          CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

'From     Director of Health and Consumer        To    Head of Administration and Legal
          Services.                                    Department.

Date      18th August, 1987•                           For the attention of Mr. D. Bownes
Ref       EPU/DRM/MM
Tel Ext   4621 - Mr. Moore                       Ref



          THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
          SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB, BRAMALL LANE, SHEFFIELD.
          SAFETY CERTIFICATION INSPECTION, 4TH AUGUST, 1987.

          I write with reference to the above and following our recent site aeeting
          and subsequent general inspection of the named football ground. As
          requested I would now submit my Department's findings to the "Safety of -
          Sports Grounds Advisory Group" and to yourself as certificating officer.

          Shoreham Street Entrance

          1.   The perimeter fence surrounding the turnstiles was found to be
               in a loose and ineffective condition. It was broken down in
               places and contained insecure metal posts.

          2.   Some loose barbed wire was found to be projecting into the
               spectators area to the side of the main gate at approximately
               head height and in a dangerous fashion.

          3.   The brick-built turnstile housing contained some loose and
               defective brickwork that could easily be removed for use as a
               weapon or missiles.

          4. The wooden built food bar was in a defective condition allowing
              pieces of wood or large sections of broken glass to be easily
              removed from it.

               The food bar was being used for the storage of nine 26 kg cylinders
               of liquified petroleum gas. Obviously such an enclosed and
               combustible structure is entirely unsuitable for such purposes and
               could pose a severe hazard to spectators and staff alike. Such an
               occurrence is of great concern to my Department because the hazards
               associated with the unsafe storage of these gases have been pointed
               out to representatives of the club on multiple occasions.

          Side Practice Ground

          Following my Department's extended previous correspondance 1 was again
          very concerned to note the continued existence of an L.P.G. storage
          compound that does not comply with the Health and Safety Executive's
          Guidance Note on this subject. The storage facility is still not supplied
          with the required warning sign, constructed out of suitable incombustible
          material, suitably sized to allow the required internal separation
          distance, supplied with an appropriate means of fighting fire or its
          surrounding area kept free of combustible materials.

          Both a representative of the Fire Authority and my officer have repeatedly
          made it clear to the club's representatives that the storage is unsafe. I
          now understand that Her Majesty's Factory Inspectorate agrees with our
          findings as regards its unsuitability.

          I would now propose that any future correspondence and communication on
          this matter be considered ineffective and that the club be required to
          fully remedy the problem forthwith.
5.    The derelict fire extinguisher must be removed from the top
      of the stand and suitably disposed of.

6.    Much of the top row seating is In a defective condition and
      should be renewed or repaired.

7.    Some electrical wiring was located to the rear of the stand that
      was not constructed to an appropriate standard. Because it was not
      clear whether or not the Installation had been disconnected    I
      would recommend that It be Inspected by a competent electrical
      engineer and a report of his findings forwarded to ay Department.

8.    The "Press-box" located within the stand   contains an accumulation of
      easily combustible refuse and associated   projectiles, aspects of
      exposed electrical wiring and associated   office furniture. These
      materials must be disposed of and access   to the area appropriately
      restricted.

9.    Many of the radial gangways serving this stand contain areas of
      defective floor covering that require to be repaired.

10.   Some of the corruaged metal sheeting that has been used to face
      the edge of the stand has become severly corroded.

11. There is a hole in the wooden floor opposite the ground floor
    ladies toilet which requires to be repaired as a matter of urgency.

 Bramall Lane Terracings
                                                               «

 1.   The drain cover at the far right hand corner is fractured and
      requires to be replaced.

 2. Some disused steelwork must be removed from this area.

 3. The right hand side entrance roof structure is defective.

 4. A number of the terraces to the Bramall Lane end have become
    defective and require to be repaired.

 5.   The accumulations of refuse adjacent to the exit gangways require
       to be removed.

 South Stand (Cherry Street)

 1.   The loose concrete debris requires to be removed from the top section
      of the stand.

 2.   The catch fence serving the raised press room has become ineffective
      and must be repaired and repositioned.

 3.   An inspection certificate for the mechanical hoist serving    the raised
      press box must be obtained and forwarded to my Department.

 Health and Safety - General

 1. The John Street first aid room was noted to be in an unsatisfactory
     condition and should be repaired, redecorated and brought up to the
     full standard before it is re-used.
                              CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

From    Director of Health and Consuaer         To    Head of Administration and Legal
        Services                                      Department.

Date    18th August, 1987                             For the attention of Mr. D. Bownes
Ref     EPU/DRM/MM
Tel Ext 4621 - Mr. D.R. Moore                   Ref



        THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
        SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB, PENISTONE ROAD, SHEFFIELD
        SAFETY CERTIFICATION INSPECTION, 6TH AUGUST, 1987.

        I write with reference to the above and following our recent site meeting
        and subsequent general inspection of the n u e d football ground. As
        requested, I would now submit my Department's findings to the "Safety of -
        Sports Grounds Advisory Group" and to yourself as Certificating Officer.

         Splon Kop

         1. An area of the corrugated metal sheeting used as cladding
             to the side of the Kop is corroded and torn.

         2. It was noted that in some places the stair nosings serving
             radial gangways had become defective.

         3.    At some positions within the new development there is a
               difference in height between a terraced area and radialgangway
               of over 600mm. As such these areas require to be protected by
               a suitably constructed pedestrian guardrail.

         4.    Some areas of the front terracing were found to be in need of
               minor repairs. It was agreed, however, that this defect would
               be adequately controlled by means of "ongoing" maintenance.

         5. The defective rendering to the final exit gate wall requires
             to be repaired.

         North Stand

         1. It is important to ensure that the groundman's store beneath
             this stand is not used for the storage of potentially inflammable
             fertilisers or weedkillers.

         Health and Safety - General

          1.   At a number of points within the standium various pieces of
               abandoned builders waste were readily available for use as
               projectiles by the crowd. Such material should b6 collected
               and suitably disposed of.

          2.   The main first aid room requires to be supplied with adequate
               first aid equipment for the treatment of spectators should they
               become ill or injured within the sports ground.

          3.   In order to ensure that the football club fully discharge their
               duty to supply an adequate number of first aiders, I would require
               that a minimum of 12 be employed to render first aid to sepctators
               during an activity. If the club continue to use the voluntary
               services of the St. John's Ambulance Brigade, then it would be
               necessary to formalise their relationship with them in order to
               ensure adequate deployment.
                                     C ITY OF SHEFFIELD — M EM ORANDUM

From        The B u ild in g "nrTr     ym i        —III— - J 1111®ea(* °* AdmivxBt:
            D epartm ent o f Land ana HMWNI8BIATKW f t l f f t l l T 111* ^ p a z ’tm ent
Date
                           .
            13th August 1987             nL
                                          > |mD  5T
                                                kt i'W,iSHER^p " PIor Attention of
                                                        /Wyff
Ref.        BSD/A.Biv'G.S./VG             rl rrr. f r Vo fLSAr. D.M. Bownes
Tel. Ext    ifl62 - Hr. Butler            J & l . 1 A ADS f U e L . J
            Safety of Sports QrgfcftL»4et 1975~                   ‘ ,;?r*
            A nnual V is it - S h e ff ie ld We<inesd8^"Footb~^T» Club. B illb o ro u g h . S h e f f ie ld

            D uring th e an n u al v i s i t o f th e above g ro u n d , th e fo llo w in g o b s e r v a tio n s
            w ere n o te d :-

     1 .0   KQP

     1.1     The timber ticket hut adjacent to therefreshment bar on the main means of
            escape exit route from the KOP should be removed, since it is causing both
            a high risk and a narrowing of the escape width.

     1.2     A broken concrete post supporting the     end of a crush barrier adjacentto the
            tunnel exit at the north end ofthe KOP toberemoved,    andthe crush barrier
            be modified to join onto the end of the newsteelsupported barrierdirectly
            adjacent to it.

     1.3    A timber hut at ground level, under the KOP structure should be removed.

     1.4    An additional length of crush barrier is required to be installed adjacent
            to the base of the ramped stairway from the extended terracing. This was
            agreed on site by Dr. Eastwood.

     2.0    WEST STAND
                                                                         •                     ♦
     2.1    Signs over the front parapet wall at the upper level are to be permanently
            secured at the following positions

            a)    between seats 1 and 14
            b)    between seats 20 and 28
            c)    between seats 136 and 150

            Binding wire ties are not considered to be satisfactoryfor this purpose.

            Additionally the sign brackets adjacent to seats 62 and 72 are to be
            correctly bent (or otherwise suitably checked) and secured.

     2.2    Rain water drainage holes through the upper level slab should have a gauze
            inserted so as to inhibit the dropping of missiles onto the crowii below.

     2.3    It is felt that discussion should take place regarding the suitability of
            the gate fastening device at the base of the emergency exit stairway on the
            south end o^Jbhis stand. The fastening consisting of a patent lockable
            barrel borf*cannot easily be unfastened in the direction of travel, and is
            impossible to be unfastened from the other side.

     3.0    NORTH STAND

     3*1    A broken glass panel in the west gable end should be replaced.

     3-2    The step between seats 12 and 13 on row 43 is loose and should be correctly
            bedded down.



                                                                                                               Cont
        C&    ENTIAL                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                 REF:                  ACC(OPS)/HHW
                 Assistant Chief Constable, Operations
                                                                 STA TIO N /D EPT.:    Headquarters
        TO:      See Below
                                                                 DATE:                 2 September 1987

                  SUBJECT:        POLICING OF FOOTBALL MATCHES




                   I enclose a copy of a letter from Mr Johnston, Clerk and Financial
                   Officer to the Police Authority for your personal information should you
                   have to discuss Safety Certificates and attendance of police officers at
                   football matches.




                   Assistant/Chief Constable
                   Operations




                   To:   Chief Superintendents A, B, C, D and F Divisions
                         Superintendent Operations Division




                          ir     e J-     c




                               P 1987




                                                                        OOCUMENT No.    1^0




GEN/2
                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                     POLICE AUTHORITY
R.C. Johnston B.A., I.P.F.A.                                                           P.O. Box 37
Clerk and Financiai Officer                                                          Regent Street
                                                                                          Barnsley
                                                                         South Yorkshire S70 2PQ
                                                                  Telephone Barnsley (0226) 733222

Our Ref:     LEG/POL/GEN/FBA/JW             YourRef:   MS/DD/LK        Date:    11th August, 1987

This matter is being dealt with by    Mr. F. 6. A1 deriTlcin           Telephone ext:   530




             Dear Sir,
             RE: POLICING OF FOOTBALL MATCHES
             I acknowledge receipt of your letter of the 31st July last and confirm
             that Chief Superintendent Lodge has provided me with a copy of the
             Ground Safety Certificate issued in respect of Barnsley Football Club.
              I note that Certificates have not yet been issued in respect of the
              grounds of Sheffield United F.C. and Doncaster Rovers F.C.   I consider
              that as and when these Certificates are issued the condition with
              regard to the attendance of Police Officers at the matches should
              reflect the amendment to Section 2 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act
              1975 effected by Section 21 of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of
              Sport Act, 1987. In other words, the number of Police Officers required
              should be reserved for the determination of the Chief Constable and not
              as the current condition relates be agreed between the Chief Constable
              and the holder. This would enable prosecutions to be brought under the
              Act for breach of certificate and also assist should it ever become
              necessary for a prohibition notice to be served under the amended Section
              10 of the 1975 Act. Such a condition would be in-keeping with the
              provisions of the proposed agreements with the football clubs and
              accordingly I cannot see them having any objection to this.
              I confirm that I have now forwarded instructions to Mr. Philips for his
              advice and will write you when th '!c 1C +n hanr|
                                                                                               POLICE
              Yours faithfully,

                                                                                        k Jo




               R. C. Johnston,
               Clerk and Financial Officer.
      r
               The Chief Constable,
               South Yorkshire Police,
               Police Headquarters,
               Snig Hill,
               SHEFFIELD.
      L-       S3 8LY
                                                                             fib
                                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

        FROM:   CH SUPT MEADOWS     OPS & TRAFFIC DIVISION      REF        OPS TO5/SM
                                                               STATION/DEPT:      OPERATIONS
        TO:     SEE DISTRIBUTION:
                                                               DATE:              24 August 1987

                 SUBJECT:      SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUND ACT 1975 -
                               GATE RELEASE DEVISES




                I attach copy correspondence dated 19 August 1987 from Eastwood and
                Partners to the City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Adninistration
                and Legal Department, in respect of the above. It is proposed that
                this matter is discussed at a meeting (along with other matters) early
                in Septentoer.




                           ^   A
                Chief Superintendent
                Operations & Traffic


                Enc


                Distribution

                Ch Supts           D Division
                                   F Division




                                                                    OOCUMEHTHo.   - n j./    j

GEN/2
                                                                                                     H i e 1>
  E A S T W O O D Cr PARTNERS                                                                                   St. Andrews House
               (C o n s u ltin g E n g in e e rs )                                                              23 Kingfield Road
 Dinctors:                                                                                                      Sheffield S11 9AS
 W. Eastwood                  F.Eng. B.Eng* p h .0 . 0.Eng.                                                     Tel.: (0742) 583871
                              C E ng. F.I.C.E. P.P.I.StruetE.
                              FJ.Mach.fu. F.G.S.. M.Con*.t
                                                                                                                Telex:       547266
 A. A. Wood                   BJEno- P h .0 . C.Eng. F.I.C.E-                                                   Fax:    0742 554330
                              FX StniclE. M.I.W.E.S. M.Cona.E.
 R. C. A. Eastwood            L S c . C.Eng. M.I.C.E. M.I S tn ie tl                                                                     and « t:

 6 . Spir                     C in g . M.I.C.E. M.I.Mach.E.                                                        Premier House
 C. S. Greaves                B £ n g . C.Eng. M.I.C.E. M.I.StmctE                                                 12/13 Hatton Garden
 5. Preston                   B.Eng.. C.Eng.. M.I.C.E., M.I.StructE.
                                                                                                                   London EC1N SAN
                                                                                                                   Tel.: (01) 242 7436
 6 . M. Seaman                B .Se. C.Eng.. M.I.C.E. M.I.StructE.
                                                                                                                   Pax:     01 - 4045424
 C oncdtant:
A . Q . B u rd ett            G.M.. B_Se.(Eni.>, CJEn*..                              o-fRrf:       WE/JAS/SLW/8722/8723
                              f4 .C E ., FI.Struct.E.
                                                                                      Your Rtf:



City of Sheffield Metropolitan District,                                                                        19 August 1987
Administration and Legal Department,
Town Hall,
Sheffield,
SI 2HH.


For the attention of Mr. D. Bownes


Dear Mr. Bownes,

                                            Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975
                                                           Gate Release Devices

             Further to the recent discussions with representatives from
the Police, Fire Service and Building Surveyors Department about
gate release devices,                              at Hillsborough and Bramall Lane, we have
pleasure in enclosing four copies of two sketches showing a
proposal for such mechanisms.
             The sketches shows typical device for the perimeter gates.
A device similar in principle could be fitted tc the folding shutter
gates at Bramall Lane.
             Would you be kind enough to pass copies of the sketches to the
members of the Officer Working Party and then forward their comments
to us.
                                                                 Yours sincerely,




                                                                       \
                                                                           'J


J. A. Stnusgs                   A . J . Clough                                  R . Tandy                   J . M . W ood
CEnf., MJ.Strucc.E.             BA.. C-Ent.. M.CJ.B.S.E., MJ-M«ch-E.            C-Enf. FXStrottE.           BJ5c^ C-Enj„ riJ.C-E..MXStru«.E.
            *   —


<
                    EASTWOOD & PARTNERS
                    Consulting Engineers                                                              Sheet No.
                    PROJECT:                                                            Job No.              Prepared            Date
                                                                                    St a a
                    SAftiy        at               c*dOi.Mtjs   kc~   1515
                                                                                    sn
                    SUBJECT:                                                                                 Checked           Approved
                                                                                DtVMCE.




                             20
                                                                                          to icao               a* a.




    •   k




                                                                                                                           o
                                                                                         TO oO\T)



                                                          ^           kcT M U   i*Jfr




                                                                                        ftwT i
                                                                                        ?LA*rt.




                                              80                                        V'tw^O             tROHI




                                                                                                                    **•V




                         C ATCH        A ll




                                                                                                  S tC T    I OKI
                                           S   v   -   i   f   c




    Mr R Pensam FCIS MBIM
    Solicitor                                                         OPS IWS/SM
    Administration and Legal Department
    Town Hall                                                         4 August 1987
    SHEFFIELD
    SI 2HH



                                                                              ■-*   - — ■—




     Dear Sir

     SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 -
     DRAFT REVISED SAFETY CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

    I refer to your letter of 7 July 1987 and the new draft certificate and
    would conment as follows:-

     1    I assume that no schedules are included as they are not as yet
          'ground specif ic *.

     2    In Section 1 a form of words should be found which puts the role
          of the senior police officer in charge in the stadium and the role
          of the safety officer in context. The safety officer would be in
          charge of the holder's employees but not police deployment although
          his views would be sought.

     3    I suggest that cons ideration should be given to including in the
          safety certificate at paragraph 4:

          'The holder shall notify the Chief Constable of specified
          activity at least 28 days before such an activity takes place
          (or such shorter time as the Chief Constable may reqyire).'

     4    You may also wish to consider including the following in the
          safety certificate:

          'In the event of a fixture being arranged as a result of a draw in
          a football/rugby league or FA Cup competition, which would indicate
          the attendance of a club from a higher division, who by the nature
          of the club or by local interest would attract a crowd well in excess
          of the current ground capacity, or the forward information is such
          that a public order situation may arise, then in consultation with


                                               Supt Stuart          3200
DOCUMENT «o.
         _    2   -




         Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 -
         Draft Revised Safety Certificate Conditions                 4 A u g u st 1987


         the opposing club and the local polios commander, one of the following
         alternatives must be agreed or otherwise roust be inplamented if the
         local police ocntnander so directs:

         a)       insisting the match is 'all ticket'*

         b)       requiring the gswe to be played at an alternative venue;

         c)       controlling the day and time of kick off.'

    5    No vehicle other than emergency (ie police, fire, airibulanoe)
         shall be parked in any part of the stadium except as shown on any
         plan or as agreed with the Chief Constable or senior police officer.

*   «
         Under Section 10 (emergency procedures) of the Safety at Sports
         Grounds Act 1975, a local authority is empowered, if it considers
         that due to any deficiency in safety procedures at a designated
         sports ground, to take certain steps to minimise the risk to
         spectators. The local authority may apply to the courts for an
         order prohibiting or restricting admission to the whole or any part
         of the ground until such steps have been taken to reduce the risk
         to spectators.

     7   If the court is satisfied, on the application of the local authority,
         that the risk to spectators at a sports ground is so great that, until
         steps have been taken to reduce it to a reasonable level, their admission
         ought to be prohibited, or restricted, the court may order, prohibit
         or restrict, to the extent they consider appropriate in the circumstances
         of the case, the admission of spectators to the whole or any part, of
         the ground, until such steps have been taken as, in the opinion of the
         court, are necessary to reduce the risk to a reasonable level.


•    8
         If spectators are admitted to a sports ground in contravention of
         an order made under Section 10 of the Sports Grounds Act 1975, any
         responsible person, and if the safety certificate is in operation, the holder
         of the certificate shall be guilty of an offence.

    9    The Fire, Safety and Places of Sports Bill received Royal assent on
         15 May 1987 and this amends the procedure under Section 10 of the 1975
         Safety of Sports Grounds Act by allowing the local authority to place
         an order of prohibition on sports ground management if in their opinion
         the criteria at paragraph 6 above is satisfied, thus disposing of the
         need to apply to a court for an appropriate order. The club management
         or holder of the safety certificate nay appeal to the magistrates for
         cancellation or modification of the order.

    10   Section 11 should state who is responsible for organising the training,
         notwithstanding the entry at 33(d).

    11   As a minor point I would draw attention to paragraph 33 (e) where I feel
         it should read:

         •In accordance with conditions 35 (b) and 35 (e)' and not as indicated.
Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 -
Draft Revised Safety Certificate Conditions              4 August 1987


I hope that these contents will be of some assistance.

Yours faithfully




Chief Constable    Q   ■S
                SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                              REF:                 F/BLM/DR
Chief Superintendent Mole, 'F' Division                            'F' DHQ
                                              STA TIO N /D EPT.:
Superintendent Stuart, Operations Division
HQs                                           DATE:                14 July 1987


SUBJECT:
             SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 -
             DRAFT REVISED SAFETY CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS




Superintendent Freeman and I have examined the attached draft conditions
and can find little fault with them, although Superintendent Freeman
does consider that there will be difficulties so far as Owlerton
Stadium is concerned: however, I believe the conditions are right and it
is a matter for the stadium to bring themselves up to that standard.

As a minor point I would draw attention to Paragraph 33(e), where I feel
it should read "in accordance with conditions 35(b)'and.'35(c)"- and not
as indicated.         ------------- - "

Forwarded for your information.




Chiel Superintendent
                                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                               REF;    OPS DR/SM
  FROM:   SUPT STUART      OPERATIONS DIVISION                                 STATION/DEPT: OPERATIONS
  TO:     SEE DISTRIBUTION:                                                    DATE:          8 July 1987


           SUBJECT:         SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 -
                            DRAFT REVISED SAFETY CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS




           The attached copy correspondence regarding the above is submitted
           for your connents, please.




                                                                                  t O J U L W


           Superintendent


           Enc


            Distribution

            Ch Supts               D Division
                                   F Division
                                     >7

                                                         ft.




                                                         J
          C.• Chief Superintendent Mole,                 *
          Whilst the provisions of the Safety certificate in relation to police controls,
          detention        areas, and facilities are adequatly covered by the Sheffield Wednesday
          organisation, as is the stewarding and training of the same, I can forsee that

          our only other Stadium, at Owlerton, may present us with problems as to facilities
GEN/2

            ™ _ — J — 4-         'EM C , , V   TV!   ^       -1 O   *7   P*7
City of Sheffield           Metropolitan District                     ___________

Roger Pensam. FCIS, MBIM. Solicitor
                                                                                          Administration and Lagal Dapartmant
Head of Department                                                                        Town Hell,
                                                                                          Sheffield S I 2HH

Our reference           DMB
Your reference

Dete
                         7th July, 1987



  The Chief Constable,
  South Yorkshire Police,
  Police Headquarters,
  Snig Hill,
   SHEFFIELD.
   S3 8LY

   For the attention of Superintendent Stuart

   Dear Sir,

   Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 -
   Draft revised Safety Certificate Conditions

   1 enclose for your attention a copy of the new draft Certificate conditions
   which 1 have prepared. Please bear in mind that these conditions are a first
   draft only and are in a basic form (i.e. they have not as yet been tailored to
   the needs of individual stadia). 1 also enclose a first draft of the
   interpretation section of the Certificate which will help when reading the new
   conditions.

    I would welcome your comments on the conditions, preferably in writing. If you
    feel that it would be helpful to discuss the conditions at a meeting then please
    contact Hr. Bownes on the telephone number given below who will make the
    appropriate arrangements.

 /^Yours faithfully
               :                              ^




       Head of Department

       Encs.




       __                                                                                         734690 - Mr. Bownes
       PB
                             For telephone enquiries on this matter please ring.................................... (STD   0742)
                                                       Telex 54243 (Administration & Legal)
                              SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                         REF    OPS DR/SM
  FROM:   SUPT STUART   OPERATIONS DIVISION              STATION DEPT OPERATIONS

  TO:     SEE DISTRIBUTION:                              DATE:        8 July 1987


           SUBJECT:     SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 -
                        DRAFT REVISED SAFETY CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS




           The attached copy correspondence regarding the above is submitted
           for your ccmnents, please.



•N
            Superintendent


            Enc


            Distribution

            Ch Supts          D Division
                              F Division




GEN/2
                                  SCHEDULE

                                  INTERPRETATION


The Act                   Means the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 or any
                          amendment thereof.

Authorised Person         Means a person authorised in accordance with Section
                          11 of the 1975 Act.

The Certificate           Means the written General Safety Certificate which
                          comprises:




The Chief Constable       Means the Chief Constable for the time being of the
                          South Yorkshire Police or, as the case may require,
                          any Police Officer authorised by him for the purposes
                          of the Act or General Safety Certificate Conditions.

The Council           -   Means the Sheffield City Council

                          Means the current afdition of the "Guide to Safety at
 'P -'t t W 'H            Sports Grounds" published by H.M. Government or any
                          succeeding code or guidance produced by
                          H.M. Government.

The Holder                Means the person to whom the General Safety
                          Certificate has been issued.

Specified Activity        Means




Spectator                 Means any person occupying accommodation provided for
                          spectators at the stadium.

The Stadium               Means
                    S a f e t y o f S p o r t s Gr ounds C e r t i f i c a t e C o n d i t i o n s


The Holder shall appoint in writing at least one Safety Officer who has
full authority to (a) take responsibility for safety at the ground and (b)
implement and supervise safety measures. A Safety Officer shall (a) be in
charge of the Stadium and (b) be in attendance at a central control point
during a specified activity.

The Holder (and the Safety officer(s)) shall take all necessary
precautions for the reasonable safety of spectators admitted to the
stadium and shall ensure that all responsible persons (as defined in
Section 12(2) of the Act) are completely familiar with their duties under
that Act and this certificate.

The maximum number of spectators that may be admitted to each part of the
stadium at any ome time shall not exceed the number specified in schedule

Before the stadium is used on any occasion for a specified activity the
Holder shall make arrangements with the Chief Constable f or the^attendance
of a sufficient number of police officers for the purpose of maintaining
lawful and orderly behaviour among persons attending the stadium. The
extent of the provision of police services is reserved for the
determination of the Chief Constable.

The Holder shall provide for police use:-

 (a)    a c e n t r a l c o n t r o l room ( t o g e t h e r w i t h a p p r o p r i a t e , a n c i l l a r y
        equipment) ;

 (b)    a c c o m m o d a t i o n w h i c h may be u t i l i s e d    as a d e t e n t i o n c e n t r e ;

 (c)    a c co mmo da t io n w h i c h may be u t i l i s e d         for a d m in is tr a tio n purposes.

 No s p e c t a t o r s h a l l be a d m i t t e d t o t h e s t a d i u m i n c o n n e c t i o n w i t h a
 specified a c tiv ity un less:-

 (a)    t he m e t h od s o f a d m i s s i o n and

 (b)    t h e m e t h od s t o be u s e d f o r t h e s e g r e g a t i o n o f s p e c t a t o r s h a v e      been
          a p p r o v e d by t h e C h i e f C o n s t a b l e .

 Where f o r r e a s o n s o f s a f e t y t h e C o u n c i l g i v e s n o t i c e t o t h e H o l d e r t h o t
 t h e s t a d i u m o r any s e c t i o n o r s e c t i o n s of            i t mus t n ot be u s e d f o r t h e
 a c c o m m o d a t i o n o f s p e c t a t o r s t he H o l d e r s h a l l n o t p e r m i t any a r e a s so
 i n d i c a t e d t o be u s e d .

 The H o l d e r s h a l l a r r a n g e f o r t h e a t t e n d a n c e a t e v e r y s p e c i f i e d a c t i v i t y o f
 a C h i e f S a f e t y S t e w a r d and suc h number o f S a f e t y S t e w a r d s a s a r e s p e c i f i e d
 in Schedule

  The H o l d e r s h a l l e n s u r e t h a t t he S a f e t y S t e w a r d s a r e : -
  (a)  f i t and c a p a b l e t o c a r r y o u t t h e i r d u t i e s ;

  (b)     properly       t r a i n e d and i n s t r u c t e d ;

  (c)     readily       i d e n t i f i a b l e by d r e s s ;

  (d)    provided with w r i t t e n            i n s t r u c t i o n s as to t h e i r    tasks/ duties.
The written instructions given to stewards oust include the following
tasks and duties. Stewards must:

(a)   Prevent overcrowding by ensuring the crowd limits in various parts of
      the ground are complied with.

(b)   Prevent spectators, as far as possible, front climbing fences and
      other structures e.g. floodlight pylons, and from standing on seats.
      Where by virtue of the scale of the incident stewards are unable to
      prevent this, they should immediately report the matter to the
      nearest police officer or, if no police officer is present, to the
      chief steward or the safety officer.

(c)   Ensure that gangways and exits are kept clear.

(d)   Identify and investigate any incident or occurrence among spectators,
      reporting their findings to the police or to management.

(e)   Know the location of and be able to operate effectively the
       fire-fighting equipment at the ground.

(f)   Know the location of the first aid room and any first aid equipment
      kept elsewhere.

(g)   Be fully conversant with any methods or signals used to alert staff
      that an emergency has arisen*

(h)   Be capable of recognising potential fire hazards and suspect
      packages, reporting such findings immediately to the nearest police
      officer or, if no police officer is in the immediate vicinity, the
      chief steward or the safety officer.

(i)   Comply promptly with any instruction given in an emergency by a
      police officer, the chief steward or rhe safety officer.

(j)   Remain at their allocated posts as instructed unless authorised or
      ordered to do otherwise by a police officer, the chief steward or the
      safety officer.

(k)   Report to the safety officer any damage or defect which is likely to
      pose a threat to spectator safety eg. a damaged crush barrier.

Training exercises relating to the duties of stewards shall be held at
least once every three months.

The Holder shall ensure that all doors, gates and turnstiles throughout
the stadium are maintained in good working order at all times. Particular
attention shall be paid to doors, gates and turnstiles in spectator
ingress and egress routes and also to pitch perimeter gates. The Holder
shall not cause or permit any exit doors or gates to be altered in type,
design or method of operation without the prior consent of the Council in
writing.

All exit doors and gates    for use by spectators in both ordinary evacuation
and emergency evacuation    situations shall be manned by stewards in
accordance with schedule         .

 The means of ingress and   egress and the gangways in the stadium shall at
 all times be kept unobstructed.
All floor surfaces and steps throughout the stadium which are available
for use by spectators shall have even and non-slip surfaces. Adequate
drainage shall also be provided where necessary.

The number, size and situation of entrance* to and exits from the stadium
and the means of access to those entrances and exits shall be as specified
in schedule

The Holder shall ensure that all parts of the stadium     to which
spectators are admitted shall be illuminated to a sufficient    standardto
enable such persons to enter or leave the stadium safely*

The Holder shall provide to the satisfaction of the Council a system of
emergency lighting which shall, in the event of a failure of the general
lighting be sufficient to enable spectators to leave the stadium safely.

The Holder shall provide such signs or notices of such type, siase and
design as the Council may from time to time require for reasons of public
safety. The Holder shall ensure that the signs or notices so required are
clearly legible so that they can easily be read at all times.

The Holder shall provide a public address system which shall be audible in
all parts of the stadium to the satisfaction of the Council. The Holder
shall permit the Chief Constable unrestricted access to the public address
system should the need arise for the preservation of public safety.

The Bolder shall institute and maintain a fire warning system to the
satisfaction of the Council.

The Holder shall provide and maintain such fire fighting equipment in such
locations as the Council may from time to time specify.

 Except with the consent of the Council in writing the Holder shall not
 permit the storage in the stadium of any compressed gas or liquid except
 fire extinguishing apparatus. The Holder shall comply with any conditions
 attached to such a consent.

 Except with the prior written consent of the Council the Holder shall at
 all times maintain the stadium in a clean condition and shall not permit
 any accumulations of rubbish or any other materials whatsoever.

 The Holder shall take all possible steps to ensure that no materials that
 are capable of being used as missiles are accessible to spectators.

 Without prejudice to the provisions of Section 8 of the Act the Holder
 shall not cause or permit the stadium or any of its installations to be
 altered (which term shall exclude minor remedial works which do not in any
 way affect the safety of the stadium) in any manner whatsoever without the
 prior written consent of the Council. The Holder shall supply the Council
 with copies of such plans and specifications as the Council may reasonably
 require to enable any application for such consent to be considered and
 shall comply with any conditions attached to that consent.

 The Council may at any time by notice in writing, for reasons of public
 safety, require the Holder to carry out such works and/or inspections as
 may be specified in the notice. The Holder shall comply with any
 conditions specified in that notice.

 The Holder shall provide and maintain at the stadium to the satisfaction
 of the Council a suitably equipped first aid room and shall arrange for
 attendance of such numbers of qualified first aid attendants as the
Council may require. The first aid room shall be capable of being lit by
both the general lighting and the emergency lighting and shall be easily
identified by means of signs. The Holder shall also ensure that at all
times a doctor employed or retained by the Holder is immediately available
to attend at the first aid room when required.

Television cameras, cables and other portable equipment shall not be
installed in the stadium except with the prior written consent of the
Council.

The electrical installation for the premises shall be constructed and
maintained in a safe and satisfactory condition in accordance with the
Regulations for Electrical Installations published by the Institution of
Electrical Engineers. No alteration to the installation shall take place
without the prior written consent of the Council.

The Holder shall take all necessary steps to secure the structural safety
of the stadium and shall arrange for a c o m p e t e n t structural engineer to
inspect the stadium in its entirety at least once every 12 months. The
Holder shall supply a copy of the engineers report to the Council and
shall notify the Council in advance of the date of the inspection.

In the event of a spectator being injured in the stadium, the Holder shall
(within 72 hours of the injury occuring) submit to the Council a full
written report on the circumstances of the injury. The Holder shall
also supply such additional information as the Council may require.

 Without prejudice to Section 6 of the Act or any regulations made
 thereunder the Holder shall maintain written records showing:-

 (a)    the number of spectators admitted to each part of the stadium for
        each specified activity;

 (b)    the names and addresses of the stewards employed by the holder;


 (c)    the names of the stewards on duty at each specified activity and
        details of their duties;

 (d)    details of the training exercises organised by the Holder for
        stewards in accordance with Condition 11 - the record shall show
        which stewards attended each exercise and the content of those
        exercises.

 (e)    derails of the crush barriers and handrails tested in accordance with
         conditions 34(b) and 34(c).

. Where any condition in this certificate requires written records to be
  kept such records shall be produced on demand to any authorised person.

  The Holder shall arrange for the following tests and inspections to be
  carried out and where reports are required to be sent to the Council they
  shall be forwarded as soon as possible:-

  (a) general visual inspections of the entire stadium both before       and
       after a specified activity to ensure compliance with this
       certificate.

  (b)   all the crush barriers and handrails within the stadium shall be
        tested in accordance with the guide by a qualified engineer as an
        when required by the Council.
(c) without prejudice to condition 34(b) within each period of 12 months
     a representative sample of 20X of the crush barriers and handrail* in
     all parts of the *tadium shall be tested in accordance with condition
     34(b); the Council *hall be notified in advance of the day* and
     dates of testing and shall be informed in writing of the test
     results. Components tested in accordance with this condition shall
     not be tested again (unless specifically required by the Council)
     within 4i years after testing but shall be tested again within 5?
     years.

 (d) at least once every 12 months the electrical installation of the
      stadium shall be examined by a chartered electrical engineer and a
      copy of his report shall be forwarded to the Council. The report
      shall:- briefly describe the installation; identify areas in which
      the installation does not comply with the current I.E.E.
      Regulations; identify works required to ensure compliance.

 (e)   at least once every 12 months all fire appliances (including
       extinguishers, hydrants and water supplies) shall be tested by a
       competent person or persons. A copy of the test reports shall be
       forwarded to the Council.

 (f)   twenty four hours before a specified activity takes place the
       following installations shall be tested:-

       (i) the public address system(s);
       (ii) all other communication systems;
       (iii) all fire warning and detection systems;
       (iv) all lighting systems (including the emergency lighting);
       (v) all doors, gates and turnstiles throughout the stadium.
       A written record of the tests shall be kept by the Holder.

. If a significant defect is discovered pursuant to any inspection or test
  carried out under the terms of this certificate the Holder shall
  immediately notify the Council and take steps to correct the defect.




        RP2JS
        29.6.87
               City of Sheffield            Metropolitan District                                   .

               Roger Ranaam. FCIS. MBIM. Solicitor                                                      Administration and Lagal Dapartment
               Head of Department
                                                                                                        Town Had,
                                                                                                        ShaffiakJ SI 2HH

               Our rafannca           GP/262/DMB

               Your rofaranca

                                      28th July 1987




%
               Dear Sir,

               Annual inspection of football stadia in Sheffield

               Please note that the annual inspections of stadia will take place as follows

               Sheffield United                         10.00 a.m.                     Tuesday 4th August 19o7

               Sheffield Wednesday                      10.00 a.m.                     Thursday 6th August 1987

               Representatives will be in attendance from the Fire Service, the Police, the
               Building Surveyor, the Health and Consumer Services Department and the
               Administration and Legal Department.

               Yours faithfully,




               Head of Department




                            /     f




                                                                                                                                      Jf/n.
               AA/4                                                                                 734690 - Mr. Bownes
                                         For tatephona enquiriat on this msttar plane ring..................................(STD Cotft 0742)
DOCUMENT No.                                                      Taiax S4243 (Adminiatration ft Lagal)
                    SOUTH           YORKSHIRE                       POLICE
OPERATIONS - IN CONFIDENCE                                                       Police Headquarters
                                                                                           Sheffield
GENERAL ORDERS
PART I - NO 35/1987                                                                      3 August 1987



1        MEMBERSHIP SCHEMES FOR FOOTBALL LEAGUE CLUBS           (P.22/02/12)

1*1       All Football League clubs have been asked by the Football League to develop and
Introduce a membership scheme for designated areas of their grounds by the beginning of the
1987/88 football season. These areas are to be reserved for members only and the scheme has to
cover at least 5 0 f of each ground's capacity.

1.2       To meet this criteria, all five South Yorkshire Football League clubs have made the
following areas of their grounds 'designated membership area' for the 1987/88 season:-

         Doncaster Rovers Football Club    -           'C' Block seating main stand and 'C' Block
         terrace standing.

         Rotherham United Football Club        -       All seats and terrace In main stand and
         MI 11moor Lane stand*
                                                                                  ♦
          Sheffield United Football Club   -John Street stand and terrace.              New South
          stand.
                        /
          Sheffield Wednesday Football Club        -   North stand only.

         Barnsley Football Club   - No scheme has yet been agreed. Discussions are
         continuing with the FA and details will be published when available.

1.3      Every supporter, therefore, must be a member of the scheme In order to gain access to
these areas of the grounds If they wish to attend any of the next season's Footba11 League
matches.

1.4        The 'Membership Scheme' In respect of all the league clubs In South Yorkshire Is being
administered on behalf of the clubs by Coggon Computers Ltd, 145 Bel Ihouse Road, Sheffield. The
system has been devised Incorporating advice from the Police and a specimen card Is shown at
Appendix 'A'. Full membership cards are only available from Coggons.

1.5       Appropriate turnstiles will be designated by the club as access points for membership
card holders. The clubs are responsible for Instituting a turnstile checking system, these to be
stewarded by the club and cards to be shown to     gain access.

1.6       An up-to-date    'register of members' will be available at each club (as will       an
up-to-date blacklist) and whilst membership cards cannot be Issued at the ground, (these are
posted to the applicant by Coggon Computers Ltd) any person wishing to gain access to a
'designated membership area' on the day of a League game should be directed to the club's offices
where temporary 'day membership' can be made available on application for full membership.

1.7       All the South Yorkshire clubs, with the exception of Sheffield Wednesday FC, Intend to
Issuemembership cards to those season ticket holders using designated areas of the ground.
Sheffield Wednesday FC applicants for season tickets will not have a membership card, the season
ticket holders documentation being recognised as a membership scheme card. Those season ticket
holders who are Included on a family application for, say, four season tickets will, except for
the applicant, have a membership card as well as season ticket documentation. The season ticket
documents and membership scheme card will bear a club membership scheme Identification number.
The season tickets and membership cards will, however, be In the name and address of the
applicant, but cards should bear the signature of the Individual holder.
                                                                                      Continued/




                            DOCUMENTf a    "lU-tf
                                                                                                        'Y*'?
                                                                              OPS RW/SM
Qi SUFI’ MBNXJKS   OPS & TRAFFIC DIVISION                                                    OPERATIONS
SEE DloTRIBUTION:                                                                            22 July 1987

                   SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS AC? 1975




                                                                                                     . 'V   ■■■■




  The attached correspondence is
  any contents you may wish to make.                                   -.   I.;-.;..'"'''.
                                                ..   .   •   ■■   ,■




     '        ^



  Chief Superintendent


  Enc


  Distribution

  Qs Sunts         D Division
                   F Division




                        DOCUMENT Ho.   n< + S
City of Sheffield
         Metropolitan District
                                   Administration & Legal Department
                                   Roger Pensam, FCIS, MBIM, Solicitor
      k+sr   '   If .              Head of Department
                                   Town Hall
                                   Sheffield S1 2HH
                                   Telephone 26444
                                   Telex 54243 (Administration & Legal)




                  a     op V
                                 with compliments
EASTWOOD                       & PARTNERS                                                         St. Andrews House
              ( Consul ti ng   Engineers)
                                                                                                  23 Kingfield Road
                                                                                                  Sheffield S11 9AS
Directors:
W. Eastwood                F.Eng.. B.Eng., Ph.D.. D.Eng..
                                                                                                  Tel.: (0742) 583871
                           C.Eng., F.I.C.E.. P.P.I.StructE..                                      Telex:       547266
                           F.I.Mech.E., F.G.S.. M.Cons.E.
                                                                                                  Fax:    0742 554330
A. A. Wood                 B.Eng, Ph.D.. C.Eng., F.I.C.E..
                           F.I.StructE., M.I.W.E.S., M.Cons.E.
                                                                                                                                and at:
R. C. A. Eastwood          B.Sc., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.

G. Spir                    C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Mech.E.                                              Prem ier       House
                                                                                                      12/13 Hatton Garden
C. S. Greaves              B.Eng., C.Eng, M I C E., M.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                      London EC1N 8AN
S. Preston                 B.Eng., C.Eng, M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                      T e l.: (01) 242 7436
G. M. Seaman               B.Sc., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.                                     Fax:       01 -4045424
Consultant:                                                                                  WE/JAS/JAN/9070/8722
                                                                            Our R ef:
A. G. Burdett              G.M., B.Se.(Eng.), C.Enj.,
                           F.I.C.E., F.|.Struet.E.
                                                                            Your R ef:       GP/262/DMB

                                                                                             17 July 1987
City of Sheffield Metropolitan District,
Administration and Legal Department,
Town Hall,
SH E FFI ELD .
S1 2HH

For the attention of Mr. D. Bownes

Dear Mr. Bownes,

                               Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic
                               Hillsborough Tavern - Entrance Lobby

              Thank you for your letter dated 9 July enclosing the letter
from South Yorkshire County Fire Service, dated 15 June.
              The Club are looking into the matter of obtaining consent for
the alterations from the Licensing Justices and if consent is
 required, then they will make the necessary applications for approval.
              We have now received Building Regulations approval for the glazed
 lobby and items a) to d) under the heading "Means of Escape" had
 already been taken care of.
              The comments made by the Fire Service under the heading
 "Emergency Lighting" surprise us.                                       For such a small structure,                             four
 lights seem excessive.                                 Enclosed are two prints of our drawing
 9070/2& to which we have added a second new emergency light.                                                                  It
 was missed off the original drawing but was included in the Specification.
 We believe that the lighting intensities provided by the three lights
  (two new and one existing)                                   satisfy the requirements of BS 5266
 Emergency Lighting.
                                                           Yourjs sincerely,



 c.c.           Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic y M r . G. Mackrell
  Associate*:
  J. A. Strange                  A. J. Clough                             R. Tandy               J. M. Wood                                -. :
  C.Efif., MXStmct.E.            B.A., CEn*., M.C.I.B.S.E., MJ.M«ch.E.    C.£ji|.,FJjtnai.        t i c , C E n t, MJ.C.E..M.I.Struci.E.          ■: :•
                                                                                                           St. Andrews House
EASTWOOD                     & PARTNERS
                                                                                                           23 Kingfield Road
               (Consulting     Engineers)
                                                                                                           Sheffield S11 9AS
W. Eastwood                F.Eng. B.Eng, Ph.D.. D.Eng,
                                                                                                           Tel.: (0742) 583871
                           C.Eng., F.I.C.E.. P.P.I.StructE..                                               Telex:       547266
                           F.I.Mech.E, F.G.S.. M.Cons.E.
                                                                                                           Fax:    0742 554330
A.      A. WOOd            B.Eng, Ph.D., C.Eng.. F.I.C.E..
                           F.I.StructE, M.I.W.E.S., M.Cons.E.
                                                                                                                              and a t:
R. C. A. Eastwood          B.Sc.. C.Eng, M.I.C.E., M.I.StructE.

G. Spir                    C.Eng, M.I.C.E.. M.I.Mech.E.                                                      Prem ier       House
                                                                                                             1 2/13 H atton Garden
C. S. Greaves              B.Eng, C.Eng, M.I.C.E, M.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                             London EC1N 8AN
S. Preston                 B.Eng, C.Eng, M.I.C.E, M.I.StruetE.
                                                                                                             T e l.: (01) 242 7436
G. M. Seaman               B .Sc, C.Eng, M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.                                             Fax:       01 - 4045424
C onsultant:                                                                Our R ef:               WE/JAS/JAN/8722/8658
A . G. Burdett             G.M., B.Se.(En*.), C.En*.t
                           F.I.C.E.. F.t.Struct.E.
                                                                            Your Ref                GP/262/DMB


                                                                                                    17 July 1987
City of Sheffield Metropolitan District,
Administration and Legal Department,
Town Hall,
SHEFFIELD.
S1 2HH

For the attention of Mr. D. Bownes

Dear Mr. Bownes,

                               Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic
                                            Facilities for the Disabled -

               Th a n k you for your letter dated 6 July 1987.
               We see no reason why the ramp should not be constructed in
 timber.               The considerations of cost and ease of manoeuvrability
 outweigh the use of steel.                                       We do not consider that by using
 timber that there is a significant fire hazard.                                                     The timber will
 also be treated with a suitable preservative.
               To introduce mass concrete fill for the wheelchair area is
 likely to overload the existing structural members, hence the
 proposal to use a lightweight construction.                                                      The deck on which
 the chairs run will be sealed with a continuous non-slip material
 which will eliminate the possibility of rubbish, etc.                                                         finding its
 w a y into the void below.

                                                          Yours sincerely




                  Sheffield Wednesday Foo :ball Club pic
                  Mr. G. Mackrell       \,



     J . A. Strange               A.   J. Clough                          R. Tandy
                                                                          C £ n f , FAStruet-E.
     C.Enf„ MJ.StrucfcE.          B.A., C-En», M.CXB.S.E.,

                                     An Unlimited Comoanv, Registered in Enoland -            No 1833144
                               SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                          REF:    OPS TWS/SM
   FROM.   SUPT STUART   OPERATIONS D IVISIO N
                                                          STATION/DEPT:   OPERATIONS
  TO:      SEE DISTRIBUTION:                              DATE:           9 July 1987


           SUBJECT:         SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 -
                            FUTURE ADMINISTRATION OF TOE COUNCIL'S
                            CERTIFICATING FUNCTION




           Please find attached copy correspondence dated 7 July 1987 for the
           City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Admin and Legal Department
           which I forward for your information and attention, please.

           I will be attending from Headquarters Operations and reccmnend that
           divisional representatives also attend.




           Superintendent


           Enc




                                             vORKSHtieg


                                            1 6 JUL1987




                                       OOCIIMENTIto.


GEN/2
City of Sheffield           M e tro p o lita n D istrict

Roger Pensam, FCIS. MBIM, Solicitor                                                      Administration and Legal Department
Head of Department                                                                       Town Hail,
                                                                                         Sheffield S1 2HH

Our reference        GP/262/DMB
Your reference

Date
                      7th July, 1987



The Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police,
Police Headquarters,
Snig Hill,
SHEFFIELD.
S3 SLY

For the attention of Superintendent Stuart

Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 - Future Administration of the Council's
Certificating Function     _____________________________________                                                              _

Please note that I have arranged a meeting for all interested parties on
Thursday 16th July, 1987 at 9.30 a.m. in the Town Hall to discuss the above
matter further. I hope that the meeting will produce a consensus view on future
administrative procedures which will form the basis of a report to the General
Purposes Panel of the City Council. I should emphasise that no decisions have
yet been made on this subject and any comments or suggestions which you have
will be most welcome. I intend that my report to the Panel will be near
completion by the end of July and it is, therefore,important that the maximum
advantage is taken of the meeting on 16th July.

This meeting may also provide a useful opportunity to discuss dates for
inspections of the stadia prior to the beginning of the 1987/88 football season.

Should the need arise please do not hesitate to contact my Chief Licensing
Officer, Mr. Bownes on the number given below.

Yours faithfully,
   \




Head of Department




 P B /1 6                                                                                   734690 - Mr. Bownes
                                                                                       ................
                           For telephone enquiries on this matter please ring.................              (STD Code 0742)
                                                     Telex 54243 (Administration & Legal)
             " Xu > w / | L a o     p t - **«

Mr R Pensam PCIS MBIM                      ACC(OPS)/HMW
Solicitor
Head of Administration and
Legal Department
Town Hall
Sheffield SI 2HH



Dear Sir

Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 - Future Administration of
the Council's Certificating Function

Thank you for your letter dated 14 May 1987 which I have now
had the opportunity of discussing with Superintendent T
Stuart.

As you rightly point out, there is an overlap of interest in
the matters you outline in the draft, and therefore I feel
it would be helpful to have a meeting as soon as possible so
that comments may be made by all parties concerned before
making a final decision regarding this matter.

If I can be of any further assistance prior to the meeting,
please do not hesitate to contact me.

Yours faithfully
 City of Sheffield           Metropolitan Hictrirt
                             K^Afnrmrklitan District
 Roger Pensam, FCIS. MBIM. Solicitor                                                   Administration and Lagal Department
 Head of Department
                                                                                       Town Hall,
                                                                                       Sheffield S1 2HH

 Our reference       GP/ 262/DMB
 Your reference


                     14th May, 1987


The Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police
Police H.Q.,
Snig Hill,
SHEFFIELD . S3 8LY

                                                                                          18 KAYI9S7
For the attention of Superintendent Stuart                                                                          I



Dear Sir

Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 -
Future Administration of the Council's Certificating Function

Following a meeting on Tuesday 10th March I have given some further thought to
the above subject.

Many points were raised at the meeting but I think that the general feeling was
that the roles of each Authority involved in the system should be defined
perhaps along the lines adopted by the South Yorkshire County Council.

I have no objection in principal to roles being defined in this way but I should
make it clear that if it is agreed that particular Authorities adopt particular
roles then they will be under a duty to consult with other interested parties
where there is an overlap of interest. As I see it the Authority which carries
out a particular role will have the responsibility of advising the Council as
Certificating Authority on all matters falling within that Lead Authority role.

I have drawn up a draft Schedule which attempts to define Lead Authority roles.
I should point out that the draft is intended to be open for discussion and I
would therefore welcome your comments on it. Would you please also let me know
if there are any other matters which should be included in the Schedule.

Moving onto the question of inspections of stadia, this point was also discussed
at the meeting on 10th March. My view is that the existing system of bi annual
limited inspections is no longer appropriate; I feel that one major inspection
per year should be carried out on each stadium which should include all the
areas and installations within the scope of the legislation. To back up this
inspection there should be a number of "during performance” inspections by
Officers. I think that there is general agreement in relation to "during
performance" inspections as they would highlight the performance of the safety
system at each stadium whilst it is in operation.
                                                           Cont

                                                                                       734690 - Mr. Bownes
                           For telephone enquiries on this matter please ring....................     (STD Code 0742)
                                                     Telex 54243 (Administration & Legal)
Perhaps "during performance" inspections could be arranged so that each
Authority carries out such inspections independently with a degree of central
co-ordination to prevent two inspections taking place simultaneously. As the
first step towards the development of a programme of inspections it might be
appropriate for me to arrange a joint inspection involving representatives from
all the authorities in order to provide an insight into problems which may be
encountered.

Moving on to the "working party" structure I think it is clear from the meeting
of 10th March that some clarification of its status is required. It is
reasonably clear from the County Council’s records that the working party as
such was actually a decision making body presumably acting under delegated
powers. However, the normal City Council practice is that the principal powers
remain with a Committee or Sub-Committee (in this case the General Purposes
Panel) with routine matters being delegated to a Chief Officer (in this case
myself). I would therefore propose to ask the Panel to accept the working party
as a forum for discussion.

I take a view that the Lead Authority will be able to use the Working Party as
a useful forum for discussion prior to drawing up that Authorities formal view
to be submitted to the Certificating Authority. I propose that when an
Authority feels that a meeting would be appropriate contact should be made with
my Chief Licensing Officer, Mr. Bownes, who will then make arrangements for the
meeting to take place. An agenda will be prepared and circulated prior to the
meeting and at the conclusion of the meeting Mr. Bownes will prepare a list
showing the subjects discussed and the action to be taken by each Lead
Authority. This list will be circulated as well.

Would you please consider the points I have raised and let me have your comments
on them in due course; it will be necessary for me to formulate a report to the
General Purposes Panel on the administration of the Certification system.

Yours faithfully,




 Head of Department
                                      l> £ fi£ T



            Sheffield City Council Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975


                Division of Responsibilities between Authorities


The following Schedule shows which Authority is to be responsible for advice to
the Council in respect of the areas shown. In each case the responsible
Authority will in appropriate instances have to consult with other involved
authorities before arriving at its final advice to the Council.


Authority                                  Area of Responsibility


The Building Surveyor   (Department        All matters relating to the structure of
of Land and Planning,   Sheffield          stadia including crush barriers, walls,
City Council)                              etc.


Fire Service                               Fire precautions, fire alarms, means of
                                            escape, emergency lighting, stadium
                                            capacity.


Police                                      Stadium policing,                ,
                                           ievacuation procedures, access of
                                            emergency vehicles and emergency •
                                            planning.


Director of Environmental Health            Miscellaneous safety hazards such as
and Consumer Services (Sheffield            nosings, trip hazards, floor surfaces,
City Council)                               defective seating etc; electrical
                                                                                        »*. *       :
                                            safety, food safety and nygiene_j toi xer
                                            accommodation and other safety matters
                                            notf^covered by other Authorities.^


                                                                         £     ,<
                                                                                    y           /




 AF
                                                                                       *   •‘V - T    -       " V   1'




Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975
                                   %
Future Administration of the Council's Certificating Function*


Dear Sir,
                I refer to your letter dated 14 May, 1987*
                                                                                                       ■ ' i*<"
                So    far as the ’Division of Responsibilities between Authorities' SB concerned

there isof course, as you point out, an overlap of interest in some areas and                                  this leads

to consultation being necessary with other authorities.

                I feel that wherewer possible the SOSGA 1975 officer working party should meet

asa group      and that the meeting should be minuted by the licensing authority.                             This leads
                                                                                                      C k . 'a? g -vJc<H*
to a good working m&iatiatiship »ed all members of the working party.                            aware of all the

issues that »an he .discussed and hopefully r e soive^-ert the moofringi|xArh4P*f~lotettl<L>a86est
                                                                A'
                     d geTIera           idence etc;,
                                                                      “-v       ^—**
                                                                                                              response"

                                   I   sun in general agreement with the 'Divisions of Responsibility

allowing for some 'Overlap' in for example, means of escape, emergency lighting, stadium
                                                                     UU^ vac.                          v *1
                                                                                                          *
capacity, evacuationprocedures, etcj,                     fco                                        -ic at a meeting^

with all parties present.^aj<riH^Jay<coja^esyoB4CTEr<ta^he^4iHil7±^«ec±~'aKiAqribt±jeggr>v—

I           note that 'Communications' is not included and this is of particular concern to

the police at stadia.

    J ' l   agree that there should be one major inspection of ubc stadia each year by the

officer working party.           So far as 'during performance' visits are concerned, these are

of course constantly monitored by police officers carrying out duties at the grounds.

        I sun, as you will have noted from my previous comments in full agreement with your

recommendations at the penultimate paragraph of your letter, the officer working group

having due regard to the 1 9 8 6 issue of the Guide to Safety at Sports Ground which covers

of course the areas of responsibility.

        Finally, I note, as I understand do the fire service, that the areas of responsibilit

allocated to the Director of Environmental Health and Consumer Services (Sheffield City

Council) are generally covered by 'Means of escape' and that 'Food aagety and hygeine,

toilet accommodation' are not really matters for the Safety of Sports Ground Act Officer

Working Party.
ACC (O)
City of Sheffield             Metropolitan District

Roger Pensam, FCIS, M BIM , Solicitor                                           Administration and Legal Department
Head of Department
                                                                                Town Hall,
                                                                                Sheffield SI 2HH

Our reference             GP/262/DMB
Your reference
                          WE/JAS/JPO/8722/9070
Date
                          9th July, 1987



  Messrs. Eastwood and Partners,                                                            -SuCfc *fc
  St. Andrew's House,
  23 Kingfield Road,
  SHEFFIELD.
  Sll 9AS                                                                                                     N -r


  Dear Sirs,

  Sheffield Wednesday Football Club P.L.C.
  Hillsborough Tavern - Entrance Lobby

   I refer to your letter of 2nd June in which you ask for the comments of the
   Officer Working Party on the above proposal. In addition to the views which you
   seek from the Working Party, the Club will require consent under Public
   Entertainment Licence condition number 13 for the alterations to take place and
   also I am advised that the Licensing Justices' consent is required for
   alterations of this nature to licensed premises. Would you please confirm that
   the Club is intending to obtain these two approvals prior to the commencement of
   works.

   From the Safety of Sports                Grounds point of view the Police have no comments to
   make on the proposal; the                Building Surveyor has indicated that he has no major
   objection in principle to                the scheme (provided of course that the Building
   Regulation application is                successfully progr£ff«ed); the Fire Service has made
   a number of comments in a                letter dated 15th June a copy of which is attached to
   this letter.

   I look forward to hearing from you shortly•                           I have passed a copy of this letter
   on to the Club as usual.

   Yours faithfully,




   Head of Department




   PB                                                                                734690 - Hr. Bownes
                           For telephone enquiries on this matter please ring    .          .....(STD Code 0742)
                                                     Telex 54243 (Administration a Legal)
SOUTH YORKSHIRE FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY


South Yorkshire County Fire Service
H. E. W right, M .l. Fire E., F.B.I.M.                                                   Sheffield (W est) Division
        C hief Fire O fficer                                                             Division Street
K L Mettam JP Grad I Fire E                                                              Sheffield
Divisional Commander                                                                     South Yorkshire S 1 3FG
                                                                                         Telephone Sheffield
                                                                                         STD (0 7 4 2 ) 7 3 1 6 4 5 /6 /7

Our Ref:    C 2 0 8 8 /R W /T P             Your Ref:                                    Date:     15 J u n e   198 7

This m atter is being dealt w ith by     Station Officer                                 Ext. N     o   .   .   .

Mr D Bownes
Administration & Legal Department
Town Hall
SHEFFIELD
SI 2HH




Dear Sir

FIRE PRECAUTIONS ACT 1971
LICENSING ACT 1964
SWFC, HILLSBOROUGH TAVERN - ENTRANCE LOBBY

Further to the letter dated 2 June 1987 and drawings number 9070/1 and 2, regarding
the proposed enclosure to the existing stairway to the Hillsborough Tavern, the
following are the requirements of this Authority and must r»e read in conjunction
with the above drawings.

MEANS OF ESCAPE                                                                                         '

a)    The entrance doors at the top of the stairs to be maintained opening the way
      of egress as they are at present.

b)    The 8 DO mm x 1300 nnn wooden access door under the stairs to be a minimum half
      hour fire resistance and have a notice 'Keep Locked Shut When Not i.n Use' fixed
      upon it. The notice to comply to BS 5378/5499 as appropriate.

c) The construction of the "store" under the stair to provide a minimum half hour
    fire resistance and be imperforate.

d) The ground floor entrance floor level to be maintained 150 mm beyondthe edge of
    the double doors when they are in the open position.

EMERGENCY LIGHTING

In addition to the unit that is shown on the drawing, above the half landing, the
following luminares will be required.

a) Above the matwell
b) Adjacent to the landing indicated No 10, to illuminate the middle area of the stairs
c) Adjacent to the top landing. Note - There is already a luminare insitu in this
    area, but the level of lighting is considered to be inadequate.

 Yours faithfully



 DIVISIONAL COMMANDER
                                  communications to be addressed to the Chief Fire Officer.
       City of Sheffield            M e tr o p o lita n D istrict
                                                                                                                          /' v 4



       Roger Pensam. FCIS, MBIM, Solicitor                                                  Administration and Legal Department
       Head of Department
                                                                                            Town Hall,
                                                                                            Sheffield S1 2HH

       Our reference          GP/262/DMB

       Your n l.r e n c .     w E /J A S /J P O /8 7 2 2 / 8 6 5 8
       Data                   6th July, 1987


        Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,
        Consulting Engineers,
        St. Andrew's House,
        23 Kingfield Road,
        SHEFFIELD.
        SII 9AS

        Dear Sirs,

        Sheffield Wednesday Football Club FLC - Facilities for the Disabled

         I refer to previous correspondence and in particular to your letter of 3rd
         June.

         I believe that both the Fire Authority and the Building Surveyor would prefer
         the minimum ramp width to accord with BS5810 1979 but the Bulling Surveyor has
         commented that the single directional flow in this instance may,however,  be
         satisfied with the lesser dimension of 1025 mm.

         In addition the Building Surveyor has now let me have the following comments on
         the proposal

                   ”1 am however unhappy that the whole of the construction is proposed to be
                   in timber. The longevity of the support legs of the ramp must be
                   questioned, and the creation of a void under the timber boarded wheelcnair
                   standing area appears to create a future fire hazard.

                   Concrete mass filling for the wheelchair standing area would bepreferred.

                    1 note that the ramp is described as being "removable". I would prefer to
                    see this constructed of a metal frame so as to achieve n o n - c o m b u s t i b i l i t y ,
                    longevity and aid fixity between sections.

                    I trust that further constructional details will be received from Eastwood
                    & Partners before the structuue is fabricated.-

          I look forward to receiving your further comments in due course.

          Yours faithfully,                                         /5».




          Head of Department
                                                                                SO
DOCUMENT No.        10^                                                                           734690 - Mr. Bownes
                                  For telephone enquiries on this m sttsr p*ea«e ring         s         ^      Cnd* 0 7 4 ?)
                                                                Telex 54243 (Administration fe Lega!)
          BH
                                                                                                                                             A
City of Sheffield             Metropolitan District
                                                                                                                                                  \


Roger Pensam, FCIS, M BIM , Solicitor                                                       Administration and Legal Department
Head of Department
                                                                                            Town Hall,
                                                                                            Sheffield S1 2HH

Our reference            GP/DMB

Your reference

Date
                         22nd April, 1987
                                                                                                                   ,     //* f       O

                                                                                                                                   P,
  The Secretary,
  Sheffield Wednesday Football Club FLC
  Hillsborough,
  SHEFFIELD..                                                     ■                                 %     ^
  S6 1SW                                                                                        .                 ration '                   ■'

  Dear Sir,

  Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 - Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

  In November 1986 I asked both the Police and Fire Service to comment on the
  condition of your stadium having regard to the provisions of the 1975 Act. I
  have also asked the Building Surveyor to make similar comments but I have not
  received them as yet.

  The Police have indicated that as at 6th January, 1987 they are quite satisfied
  with the stadium and have indicated that the degree of co-operation which they
  receive is very satisfactory.

  The Fire Service have, however, made a number of comments and I attach for your
  information a copy of their letter to me of 18th February. Some points in the
  letter have now been further clarified as follows:-

  (a) The timber buildings referred to should (if still required) be re-sited away
  from the walkways.

  (b) As far as the locked doors in the south stand are concerned they will be
  dealt with by the Fire Service under the Fire Certificate.

   (c) Gates must be unlocked and stewarded at all times, during matches: if this
   cannot be arranged, panic fastenings would probably be insisted upon.

   I think the rest of the letter is largely self-explanatory but I would
   particularly like to refer to the comments which are made in respect of final
   exit gates. As you can see from the letter the Fire Service are concerned about
   the sliding gates and have indicated that as and when they reach the end of
   their useful life they must be replaced with outward opening doors. The Fire
   Service have also produced a drawing (a copy of which I enclose) to show a
   better arrangement for securing the sliding gates against forced entry from t e
   outside during the course of the game. The Fire Service feel that this hook
   type arrangement will be more easily used in the event of an emergency than the
   current locks, about which they are very concerned.

   Encs
   BH                                                                                            734005 - Mr. Bownes

                            For is!sphOR3 enquiries on this ntstter please   r in g ....   . . . . . . . . . . . . ..■•••(S T D Cods 0742)
                                                      Telex 5 4 24 3 (Adminirtration & Legal)
                                         -2 -


    Would you please let me have your comments on the Fire Service letter as soon as
    possible.
f
*Yours faithfully,



    »wuu—   — i/wuaii biucub




                                                                                   ©
                                                                          [0 f t t - l v
                                                                                             St. Andrews House
E A S T W O O D & PARTNERS                                                                   23 Kingfield R oad'V )^
          (C o n s u ltin g E n g in e e rs )
                                                                                             Sheffield S11 9AS
Dmeton:
                                                                                             Tel.: (0742) 683871
W. Eastwood               F.Eng, B.Eng.. Ph.D„ D.Eng.
                          C.Eng., FJ.C.E. P.P.I.StnictE,                                     Telex:       647266
                          F.I.Mech.E, F.G.S.. M.Con*.E.
                                                                                             Fax: 0742 654330
A. A. Wood                B.Eng.. Ph.D.. C.Eng., FJ.C.E.
                          F.I.StrucLt. M.I.W.E.S., M.Cons.E.                                                 and at:
R. C. A. Eastwood         B .Sa. C.Eng., M.I.C.E, MJ.StructE.
                                                                                                Premier House
G. Spir                   C.Eng.. M.I.C.E. M.I.M#ch.E.
                                                                                                12/13 Hatton Garden
Assodataa;                                                                                      London EC1N SAN
C. 8. Greaves             S.En*., CEn*., M.I.C.E., MXStructf.
                                                                                                Tel.: (01) 242 7436
J . A. Strange            C Enf., MXStrucbE.
                                                                                                Fax:     Oi
A. J . Clough             B.A., GEn*., M.CJ.B.S.E., MJ.M«cU.
8. Preston                B.EnS^ CJSae*- M .IC.E, MXStruclX
                                                                               Our Rel :    WE/JAS/SIW/8722
R. Tandy                  C.En*.. FXStruetJ:.
G. M. Seaman              B.Sc., CEagq MACE, MAStruct.E.                       Your R ef:
J. M. Wood                BSc., CEng* MJ.C.E.. M4.Struct-E.

Consultant:
A. G. Burdett             G.M., B.St(Em .), C.Eb*„
                          F.I.C.E., F.I.Struet.£.



 City of Sheffield Metropolitan District,                                                             9 April 1987
 Administration and Legal Department,
 Town Hall,
 Sheffield,
 SI 2 H H .


 For the Attention of Mr. D. Bownes


 Dear Mr. Bownes,

                                    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic
                                                           North Stand Roof

          In the last few days the Club have given the authority to
 re-sheet the North Stand roof.                                    The sheeting is now twenty six years
 old and over the last few years leaks have been troublesome.
          Hie work is to be carried out during the coming closed season
 and will be completed before the start of the 1987— 88 season.
          In essence the work simply involves removing the existing
 sheeting and replacing it with new plastic coated galvanised sheets.
          We doubt that there is any involvement for the Officer Working
 Party but if you wish to receive further details perhaps you would
  let us know.
                                                                Yours sincerely
          m m .        i s o                                                                 •vl-'^4;-'
*/isk 11 Code DB193


              19th March, 1987


The Secretary,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club FLC,
Hillsborough,
SHEFFIELD.
S6 1SW

Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 - Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

In November 1986 I asked both the Police and Fire Service to comment on the
condition of your stadium having regard to the provisions of the 1975 Act. i
have also asked the Building Surveyor to make similar comments but I have not
received them as yet.
The Police have indicated that they are quite satisfied with the stadium and
have indicated that the degree of co-operation which they receive is very
satisfactory.
The Fire Service have, however, made a number of comments and I attach for your
information a copy of their letter to me of 18th February. I think the lette
is largely self-explanatory but I would particularly like to re er o           ,
comments which are made in respect of final exit gates. As you can see           ,
letter the Fire Service are concerned about the sliding gates and ..ave - - - -
that as and when they reach the end of their useful life they must be ^placed
with outward opening doors. The Fire Service have also produced a drawing (a
copy of which I enclose) to show a better arrangement for securing the slidi^
gates against forced entry from the outside during the course of the game. The
Fire Service feel that this hook type arrangement will be more easily used
 the event of an emergency than the current locks, about which they are very
concerned.
 Would you please let me have your comments on the Fire Service letter as soon as
 possible.

 Yours faithfully,




 Head of Department

 Encs.


                                                      734005 - Mr. Bownes

                      /^t>.
 BH


                                                                S H i-R P

      IS I
SOUTH YORKSHIRE FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY


South Yorkshire County Fire Service
H.    E. W right, M.l. Fire E., F.B.I.M.                                                  Sheffield (W est) Division
          Chief Fire O fficer                                                             Division Street
                                                                                          Sheffield
Divisional Commander                                                                      South Yorkshire S 1 3FG
                                                                                          Telephone Sheffield
                                                                                          STD (0 7 4 2 ) 7 3 1 6 4 5 /6 /7

Our Ref: DCM/C2088/EB                        Your Ref:                                     Date: 18th February , 1987

This m atter is being dealt w ith by ..Station Officer                                     Ext. No . . . .   ??.................


     City of Sheffield Metropolitan
       District Council,
     Administration and Legal Department,
     Town Hall,
     SHEFFIELD. SI 2HH


     For the attention of M r . D . M . Bownes


     Dear Sir,

     SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 - SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB

     Thank you for your letter dated 3rd November, 1986, in respect of the above
     Club.

     Please find below my observations in response to outstanding matters.

     An inspection of the ground was carried out on 1 7 th November, 1986.      The
     comments appended below do not take into account the numbers of persons using
     individual areas, lateral and radial gangways or units of exit widths, as
     it is assumed that from previous correspondence and documentation that the
     various working parties and committees have adequately dealt with these items.

     MEANS OF ESCAPE IN CASE OF FIRE

     North Stand

     Timber framed and clad buildings are constructed and located under the stand.

     The only reference as to the acceptance is minuted in meeting dated 7.8.85
     in which one large store for bulky items was agreed on a temporary basis.

     There is also no record to indicate whether these buildings have been treated
     with fire retardant paint or solutions. Confirmation is required as to treat­
     ment of these buildings.

     Spion Kop

     A.     Timber framed and clad unit located on main central exit route has not
            received any approval, no approach has been made by the Club for its
            installation, this should be removed immediately.

     B.     It is understood that the gates in the pitch perimeter fencing form
            part of the emergency exits. The gates for reasons of security, fasten


                               All communications to be addressed to the Chief Fire Officer.
          with barrel bolts secured to the gate both top and bottom and open in
          a sideways direction.    It is doubtful that 1     it       " ec_ tfrg wouid
          evacuate   the stand onto the pitch in an emergency that the gates wo
          open if   pressure were generated by a crowd.      No record can be f und
          in respect of discussion on gate fastenings.      It is recommended t
          a satisfactory security device easily openable from the pitch side shou
          be found and fitted to all perimeter gates.

C         During the inspection it      was observed that several concrete steps on
           the lower '
                     t erracing were in need of repair and in one case the complete
           step had   erroded away.   Every endeavour should be undertaken to ensur
           that all steps are kept in a good state of repair.

D         The wire mesh protecting     the stanchions and bracing supports from being
           climbed
             i     is -ineffective
                       ineffective.      It has
                                        It   has been
                                                  been oo bb ss ee rr vv ee dd that patrons
                                                                                    patrons visiting
                                                                                            visions
           S   Kop cL,      r S g e numbers from the back of the Kop, c l i m b into the
           the Kop ca
           lower half
           lower half of the roof.     The mesh should be extended to alleviate this
           situation.

E.         It was observed         that where the terracing is^ above 1 m ^ g e r ,
           lateral gangways         wire mesh infill had not been located, along the lull
           i S S s . 8 Where        the mesh had been provided this    had been spotwelded
           but the mesh had        not been given an additional vertical supp

           Exit    gates     should      be   unlocked   and   keys held by     stewards manning the
F.
           gate before patrons enter the stands.

    West Stand
    A.     Timber framed and clad units located under this stand have been there
           for some considerable time. No record exists o

            (1 )   acceptance of these units or,

            (2 )   that they have been treated with fire retardant paint or solutions.

    B.     Exit gates to the pitch perimeter as item B under Spion Kop above.


    South Stand

    The accommodation is divided into four areas.-

    A.     Ground        floor   offices,     directors   suite,    players   area,   function    suite,
            kitchen etc.

     B.    First     floor,      upper    stand walkway,       press lounge, players    lounge,    paint
             stores, disused bar area.

     C.    Lower stand, uncovered stand seating.

     D.    Hear stand, covered seating.

     With respect to the four areas, the following observations are made:-

     A.    Ground Floor:-

                   (i)    During normal working hours most doors from *he off,lce
                          are kept locked shut.   All doors marked     Fire Exit
                          be made readily available for use by any person within the area.
 (ii)     A number of rooms at this level i.e. kitchen, laundry, stores
          and directors' suite ventilate via openable windows and/or extract
          fans into the long corridor between areas A and C above.       It
          also appears that a number of the openable windows are protected
          by corrugated, lightweight plastic sheeting.

          The separation between the corridor and such ground floor areas
          should be to a minimum half hour fire resistance, any ventilation
          requirements being met by ducting to outside on the South Wall.

 (iii)    All storage should be removed from stairway enclosures and these
          areas always maintained free from such storage.

First Floor:-

   (i)    Again, a number of rooms i.e. players' lounge, press lounge,
          the store room previously used as a licensed bar and the paint
          store ventilate into this area.     Any ventilation requirements
          should be met by ducting to outside on the South wall.

  (ii)    Valves should be fitted to the gas supply line-to each of the
          five refreshment positions in order that the supply can be cut
          off should an emergency arise.

 (iii)    All timber construction within this       area   should   be   suitably
          treated so as to be flame retardant.

  (iv)    The paint stores contain a quantity of flammable paints and
          mixtures and present a hazard which it is considered should
          be removed from this area.     Proposals to relocate the stores
          should be discussed with the Fire Authority before any work
          is commenced in order that suitable siting and any need for
          licensing under Petroleum legislation can be ascertained.

   (v)    The timber constructed cupboard and      the   portable   sales   kiosks
          should be removed from this area.

  (vi)     In the cleaners'     cupboard to this area, the fire resisting
           separation between    the ground and first floor levels is breached
           by the passage of     cables through a wall.   The area around the
           cables should be     infilled with material to ensure a minimum
           fire resistance of   thirty minutes.

  (vii)   All rooms onto the upper stand walkway should be separated from
          it by minimum half hour fire resisting construction, any doors
          being to the same standard and made self closing onto 25 mm
           rebates.

 (viii)   Spaces above toilet accommodation    are being used for storage
           purposes. Again, these areas must be maintained clear of storage.

 Uncovered Seating Area:-

 The means of escape from this area is along the corridor in front of
 the rear part of the stand.   Should this route not be available then
 evacuation onto the pitch is possible subject to persons having the
 ability to climb over the front wall on to the pitch perimeter track.
 This wall is approximately 1.5 m high at the Spion Kop end decreasing
 to 1 m high at the West end.
       To facilitate easier forward evacuation on to the pitch it is recommended
       that openings be provided in the wall at the foot of radial gangways.

D.     Covered Seating Area (Rear Stand):-

       The means of escape from this area is not considered to be satisfactory
       in that escape is possible in one direction only, this being down through
        areas described in A and B above.

        Subject to all the recommendations outlined in A and B above and made
        later in respect of automatic fire detection being implemented, the
        means of escape from the covered seating area would be acceptable.

AUTOMATIC FIRE DETECTION

In 1979 the working party discussed the provision of automatic fire detection
in the South Stand.

It is recommended that such provision should be made_ in all areas ben® ^
the seated area of the stand as soon as possible.    The system should^also
cover the Tavern Club which has a direct link on to the first floor corr d
of the South Stand.

The automatic detection provided should be tied in to the existing fire warning
system.

In order that persons using the Spion Kop can receive early ^ r n i n g o f a n y
fire occurring in the "Stands" Club, it is also recommended that automatic
 fire detection be provided in that Club.

 EMERGENCY LIGHTING

 Spion Kop

 The emergency lighting has yet to be tested - no test certificate received.

 South, North and West Stands

 In letter dated 12th November, 1980, from Eastwood and Partners, it
 suggested that following test certificates dated 11th August, 1980, a PfrJ;°
 of 5 years should elapse before re-testing for South Stand and 2 years        o
 North and West Stands.  As of today no record appears to exist as to, ^ e t h e r
 these areas have been re-tested or that the test certificates together with
 maintenance records have ever been re-presented.      The emergency
 system should therefore be re-tested for the whole of the ^ ^ f l d conform
 certificates produced.   In addition the whole of the system should conform
 to B.S. 5266.

 FIRE ALARM

 West Stand

     Existing call points to be relocated to accessible P o r t i o n s °“tSid* f
     franchise areas and be increased to cover the upper areas of the stand.

     North Stand

     As West Stand above.
South Stand

This stand appears to be well covered with regard to the provision and siting
of call points.

Indicator Control Panel

The indicator/control panel is situated within the Police control ^ centre
between South and West Stand.    Whilst this is reasonable for match days it
is not considered to be practical for the majority of the time.

This panel        should be duplicated with control   at each location which should
be: -

1.      Police control box

2.      Main office reception area

FIRST AID AND FIRE-FIGHTING EQUIPMENT

The     current    standard   and displacement of First Aid fire-fighting equipment
is considered satisfactory.

GATES

The sliding gates already in situ in the ground have been accepted by this
Authority after due consideration and account being taken both of their location
and the fact that they are of existing construction.     I would wish, however,
to point out that it is the view of this Authority, that doors required for
means of escape should open outwards and it is recommended that notice be
given to the Club to the effect that when any such sliding gates are to be
replaced then their replacements must open outwards even if this involves
structural work to recess the opening to avoid impinging o v e r footpaths.
While the sliding gates remain in use however, they must be immediately avai -
able for use from the inside by any person should an emergency situation
arise. Any method of securing the gates against illegal entry from the outside
must be by way of a simply operated device not requiring the use of a key>
 additional security being afforded by the presence of a steward who should
 be familiar with the emergency evacuation procedures for the ground.

 If there are any queries on these matters please do not hesitate to contact
 the Officer concerned.

 Yours faithfully,




 Divisional C o m m a n d ^
Bibliography

Minutes of Working Party 30-3-79

Page 2 item B para. 1 line 3 Spion Kop
Page 2 item B para. 2 Exits
Page 3 item G para. 2 South Stand

Minutes of Working Party 13.4.79

Page 1 item 2 South Stand

South Yorkshire Fire Service 16.6.79

Page 2 para. 4 (South Stand) internal layout
Page 3 General Requirements

Minutes of Working Party 8.6.79

Page 1 item A Sec. 4
Page 3 item F Sec. 5 South Stand
Page 3 item F Sec. 6 Paint Store
Page 4 item J Fire Extinguishers
Page 4 item K South Stand

Minutes of Working Party 12.11.75

Page 3 item 1 Fire Alarm System
Page 5 South Stand

Minutes of Working Party 18.12.79

Page 1 item 3A Emergency Lighting
 South Yorkshire County 31.3.80
The whole contents

 Eastwood & Partners 11.8.80

 Contents Emergency Lighting
                                                                                                                                            * v

           City of Sheffield             M etropolitan District
                                                                                                                                                              te

                                                                                                                                                             -te
                                                                                                Administration and Legal Department
           Roger Pensam. FCIS. M BIM , Solicitor
           Head of Department                                                                   Town Hall,
                                                                                                Sheffield S I 2HH


           Our reference     GP /262/DMB
           Your reference     WE/JAS/SLW/7672/7593

           Date               16th March 1987




           Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,
           Consulting Engineers,
           St. Andrew's House,
           23 Kingfield Road,
           SHEFFIELD.
           S11 9AS


           Dear Sirs,

           Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 - Sheffield Wednesday -
           New Entrance on Penistone R o a d ______________ _________

           I refer to your letter of 18th December, and now writ« to confirm
           that I have no objections to the proposal outlined in your letter.

           Mr. A. Butler of the Council's Building Surveyor's Division has
           asked me to point out that a Building Regulation application may be
           required in respect of the works and also a Notice of Demolition under
           the Building Act. You will appreciate that these requirements relate
           to the Council's role as Building Authority.

h           I have as usual sent a copy of this letter to Sheffield Wednesday.
    ....




            Yours faithfully,




            Head of Department




                                                                                                                             A R 19 87
                                                                                                                                                      V- '




                                                                                                    734005                     .   0742.
                                                                                                                                              ••• ,
                                         For telephone enquiries on this natter pleese r in g ...                   (STD c o o e o /* * )   ;-‘
                                                                                                                                              -‘lo.
                                                                    Telex 54243 (Admtoi«ratioii ft U g d )     ^       B ow ne^
                                                                     WE/JAS/DFD/8722/8658
City of Sheffield Metropolitan District
Administrat ion and Legal Department                                 ops   mm          -
                                                                                                        . . ••
                                                                                                                 "
                                                                                           ■   ... ••            •• •

Town Hall                                                            iz .m m -im      ■■                             •

SHEFFIELD      Si 2HH                                                                 v.-..        :■■■“



E\ar the attention of, Mr D Bownes




Dear Sir
SHEFFIELD ^IIJDNESDaY ■
                      r*XvmMJ.- CLUB FLC -
facilities for the d: ivixm
 Think * » lav w w       r uair.icaiion Sited 6 March 1987 together with jnclosod
            t.lar£ .     T-,_, ^         which * » « ! *
 discussion towards      f:« end of last season, is a                       ^ a
 the club should be      encouraged to implement before the 1987/8,, season.

 It anpears from the ;1ans to be in an                 o^i^tSre^be^'a^erlous
 renewable, access to -.he pitch should not be impeded should there be a serious
 incident.

 Yours faithfully




 Chaer constauj-u



                                                                           MAR 1987
                                                                      WTJ& n 'S
                                                                                                   :•' "             .

  DOCUMENT No.   1 5 3
SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FC   -   F A C IL IT IE S FOR THE DISABLED


-3-
Chief Superintendent (Operations & Traffic) HQs

I endorse the comments of Superintendent Freeman, attached.




Chief Superintendent
'F' DHQ  11.3.87
                                        SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                 REF:    OPS TWS/SM
FROM:   CH SUPT MEADOWS            OPS & TRAFFIC DIVISION        STATION/DEPT:   OPERATIONS
TO:     CH SUPT MOLE        F DIVISION                           DATE:           9 March 1987

          SUBJECT:            SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY PC - FACILITIES FOR THE DISABLED




          I refer to the attached copy correspondence dated 2 March 1987 from
          Eastwood and Partners to the City of Sheffield Metropolitan District
          Administration and Legal Department in respect of the above. This
          correspondence, together with the attached drawing, has been forwarded
          from David Bownes requesting comments in writing.

          Except for the possibility of spectators behind the proposed new
          enclosure perhaps being able to cane across the top of it to gain access
          to the pitch, it would appear to be a tremendous improvement for the
          disabled.

          I would appreciate your comments as soon as possible so that I can
          reply. It would also be appreciated if you would return the plan
          drawing as only one has been forwarded.




          Enc




             I         10    MAR1987

                                   -f
                      r
                     »•_«   *> r



          2. Chief Superintendent

          A proposal which was fii    rought under informal discussion towards the
          end of last season and which now appears ready for implementation. It is
          an ideal position, and a much needed facility, which the Club should be
          encouraged to implement before the 1987/8 season. Since the ramp is removable
          access to the pitch by an emergency vehicle in a serious incident would not be
          impeded.
          Superintendent.
          FI. Sub Division.                                          „
          11.3.87.
    City of Sheffield  M etropolitan District

                                                         Administration &- Legal Department
                                                         Roger Pensam, FCIS, M BIM , Solicitor
L dU V P   Y0U                                  /*?£     Head of Department
                                                         Tow n Hall
                    U ) w m & a^?         //v            Sheffield S1 2H H

                                                         Telephone 2 6 4 4 4
                                                         Telex 5 4 2 4 3 (Administration & Legal)

            ~ljfo     T H fa k   (ic(A/


                                                       with compliments
                                                                                                    fa*       th/t>
                                 tASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                                                         St. Andrews House
                                                                                                                             23 Kingfield Road
                                            (C o n su ltin g E n gin aars)
            /' -f:                                                                                                           Sheffield S11 9AS
                                 Dtncton:
                                                                                                                             Tel.: (0742) 683871
                                 W. Eastwood             F.Enfl. B.Eflfl* PH.D, D.Eng.
                                                         C.Eng^ FJ.C.E* P.P.LStroctE*                                        Telex:              ■          ■
                                                         F.!.Mech.E* F .G .S. M.Com.E.
.■'/v'-:A
    :                            A. A. Wood              B.Eng* PH.D., C.Eng« FJ.C .L ,
                                                         F.LStfuetE« M.LW.LS* M.Com.E.



                     f           B. C. A. Eastwood
                                 G. Spir
                                                         B .S c. & & # . M .I.C.E. M J.StraclE.
                                                         C.Em u M I C E , M.LMech.E.
                                                                                                                                Pramlar

                                                                                                                                'z z r s r z
                                                                                                                                               House


                                                                                                                                T * .: { « ) 242 M M
                                 C. S. Oraaves           u n * . c x n , n j.c e ., ru s n K te .
                                 J . A. Strang*          C lii|,K J jtn ic ti.
                                                                                                           Out Baf:    W E / J A S / D F D /8 7 2 2 / 8 1
                                 A. J . Clough           ba . cjBfr. acias*
                                 8. P m ton              B in |4 C in |,llL C £ ,H J iv « c ti,            Your Ral:
                                 R. Tandy                Clo^PJitnKtX                                                                    :     '

                                 O. M. Seaman                  CJEn^ HJLC^, HJSsnct£.                        2 M arch,       1987
                                 J. M. Wood                     CEn*» HXCJL, MXScntcUL


                                 A. G. Burdatt
                                                          F.k&Eq F U trw tJ.
                                                                             CJSmgn

                                 City of Sheffield Metropolitan District,
                                 Administration and Legal Department,
                                 Town Hall,
                                 SHEFFIELD      SI 2HH
                                 For the attention of Mr. D. Bownes


                                 Dear Mr. Bownes,
                                                      Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic.
                                                                   Facilities for the Disabled

                                            You will have probably gathered, whilst reading through the
                                  files, that the Club have been actively considering, for some
                                  time now, accommodation for the disabled. Various locations
                                  throughout the ground have been investigated. It seems likely
                                  that the Board of Directors will decide to have constructed,
                                  facilities for the disabled^ at the front of the North stand,
                                  towards the Spion Kop end.
                                      A proposal has been drawn up to show a possible arrangment
                                  of a viewing platform occupying the front three rows over a
                                  length of approximately 30m. Six prints of our Drawing Number
                                  7771/2A are enclosed showing the general arrangements.
                                      The disabled will be under cover, as are paying spectators,
                                  at the front of the stand. The roof projects beyond the front
                                  wall by approximately 5m and it is only under extreme rain and
                                  wind conditions that spectators get wet whilst sitting in the
                                  still very popular first few rows of seats.




                         -V'v:                                   An Unlimited Company, Registered in England - No. 1833144
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




        Access onto the wooden platform will be by way of a ramp
alongside the gable wall.     This is shown on the side elevation.
A guard rail will be erected on top of the existing wall and
a timber partition erected at the back of the area.
        The facility is also within just a few metres of the new
disabled toilet which was completed toward the end of last
year.
        In addition, on big match days, there will also be the
facility to allow more disabled spectators into the ground by
locating them on the perimeter track, where they now sit to
watch matches.
        Car parking is also available at the back of the North stand,
within easy reach of the proposed facility.
        We, therefore, believe that the proposed site for the disabled
is the most readily converted and most convenient situation in
the ground.     It would be much appreciated if the comments of the
Officer Working Party could be sent to us, fairly quickly, so
that     the next stages in the provision of t h e 'facilities can
be started.


                          Yours sincerely,




 c.c.    Sheffield Wednesday! Pootball Club pic., Mr. G. Mackrell
                              SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                         REF:    OPS DR/SM
FROM:   PC 808 RQSEVEAR   FOOTBALL LIAISON OFFICER
                                                         STATION/DEPT:   OPERATIONS
TO:     SUPT STUART   OPERATIONS DIVISION                DATE:           10 March 1987


          SUBJECT:      SOSGA MEETING -
                        SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FC
                        SHEFFIELD UNITED FC




         On Tuesday, 10 March 1987, I attended a meeting at the Fire Station,
         Division Street. Various items were discussed most of which were of
         no direct interest to the Police but I set out below items which are
         of interest and could possibly be examined and resolved at the next
         heme fixture.

          Sheffield Wednesday

          1    The Fire Brigade reported that they made a spot check at Hillsborough
               during the Chelsea match (30 8 8 6 ). They found that stewards were
               not in position at the sliding gates below the South Stand. The gates
               were locked and it would have been impossible to gain egress from
               that area in the event of a fire.

          2    Persons were seen climbing on the girders at the rear of the new kop.

          3    The bolts on the gates at various points in the perimeter fence were
                of the ordinary sliding bolt type.  It would be most difficult to
                undo this type of bolt in a panic situation where people are crushing
                against the gates and putting pressure on the bolt.

          Sheffield United

         A spot check here had shown stewards not in position at locked gates and
         on another occasion stewards from Rotherham were being vised. These
         persons did not have local knowledge of the ground.

         David Bownes said that he would be drafting a letter to each club on the
         various points raised. A copy would be supplied to the Police for approval
         before the letter was sent.




          fu   «u« Kosevear
                                                                CPS T>?n/5M
ojpr           ops   & mwic   division
                                                                      OPERATIONS
CUPT        i.' DIVISION                                              9 March 19S7


             SHEFFIELD WEENESDAY PC - FACILITIES FOR THE DISABLED




I refer to the attached copy correspondence dated 2 March 1987 from
Eastwood and Partners to the City of Sheffield Metropolitan District
Acininistration and Legal Department in respect of the above. This
correspondence, together with the attached drawing, has been forwarded
from David Bownes requesting comments in writing.

Except for the possibility of spectators behind the proposed new
enclosure perhaps being able to cone across the top of it to gain access
to the pitch, it would appear to be a tremendous inprovenent for the
disabled.

I w o u M appreciate your comments as soon as possible so that I can
reply. It would also be appreciated if you would return the plan
drawing as only one has been forwarded.




Chief Superintendent
Operations & Traffic -Division


Enc




                                     DOCUMENT No.   1   5   5
                    S H E F F I E L D    W E D N E S D A Y



                            FOOTBALL CLUB LIMITED



Chairman:      H E McGEE                   Registered Office

Manager:                                   Hillsborough, Sheffield S6 1SW.

Secretary:                                 Telephone: 07^2-3^3123/^

                         rt >              Telegrams: Wednesday Sheffield 6
                                           Registered No 62^-78 England




Crowd Capacity:

The number of spectators admitted to the stadium and to various areas of

spectator accommodation within the stadium shall not exceed the following.




                                                       liot S50                (7i-2l 0 ?
Spion Kop

South Stand Upper
                                                         S',    5*1

South Stand Upper                                        2. SIO
                                                         }.\
West Stand

West Terrace
                                                         r\, %QO

North West Terrace                                        2, <3 0 0

North Stand
                                                                    B 'ol


                                                               ;g      .*1i+
Total Ground Capacity




 Safety of Sports Ground Act, 1975

 General Safety Certificate

 Issued 21 December 1979                    I DOCUmHo.         -IS&
                                                                GP/262/EWJ
Mr R Pensam PCIS M3IM                                           -A   M   M   ■-           -
                                                                                                -


Head of Department                                              OPS w B /8H
Administration & Legal Department                                6 January 1»87
Town Hall
SHEFFIELD                                                                         ■
SI 2 m

                                                       :v-                        -.P'

                                             •         '-:V:.                         :




Dear Sir
SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 - SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB
AND SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB

I refer to your letter dated 13 November 1986.
Both stadia, so far as the Police are concerned, meet our requirements
under the 1975 legislation.
Co-operation afforded by both clubs is very satisfactory with the
exception of the lack of CCTV facilities at Branall Lane. It is hoped
that this can be remedied as soon as possible as it will be a valuable
asset to us in effectively policing the ground.

Yours faithfully




MSisiscaiiL. u u o j . Constable
(Operations)



                                          DOCUMENT No. i s i


                                                                                              I.?;


                                         Supt Stuart            3200
                            SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

                                                       REF:              Fl/CWC/RK
FROM:   Inspector Calvert
                                                       STATIONS®®®       Hammerton Road
TO:
        The Chief Superintendent - 'F' Division        DATE:             1 December 1986

        SUBJECT:      SOSGA 1975 - SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB -
                      HILLSBOROUGH GROUND


        I refer to the attached letter from the Administration and Legal Department
        of the Sheffield District Council, reference GP/262/EMB.

        As far as I am aware, with one exception, Hillsborough meets the criteria
        set out in the above Act.  (The exception being the south stand roof).

        At the moment the public address system to the new Spion Kop is in the
        course of extension and when this is completed, with the exception of the
        aforementioned roof, from a police point of view, the ground will be fully
        in accordance with the conditions set out.




        inspector



         - 5 -
         Chief Superintendent Hole


         Submitted far onward trnasmission to the Chief Superintendent, Operations
         and Traffic.




            4 4 w t
                                                                     OPS KW/SM
      CH SuPr 11IADQV3 OPS ^ OIIAFFlC division
                                                                         OPEKM'IGNS
      SEE DiSTRiBUOIOi,:                                                 17 November 1986

                           ilOGGA 1975




                                                                                                       0 .
                                                                                                             :■   ..


                                                                                 ■'O.OV;. -                ■■■”■
         I refer to the attached cxxcresponctenoe received
                                                             siifssss”"
         Administration and Legal Department dated 13 November
         of Sheffield United and Sheffield Vfednesday Football Clubs.
                                                                                                       .
         I would be grateful for your ccrrmentsas aoori as pc«siblfi ao
         reply.                                                                               ■              '




         Chief Superintendent


         Enc


         Distribution

         Ch Supts          D Division
                           F Division



         ACC (Operations) for information




\


W'^     t- t

                                 yi a




                                                                                                       • vV;
                                                                                                  •■ ■ ■               ■
                                                 sw/                                               .   'vv'c
                                                       2   DECI986                            ■ '■
                                                                                                           W "O? -

                                                                                                  '■■W & h .
                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                             REF:        OPS Rtf/SM
   FROM:   CH SUPT MEADOWS     OPS & TRAFFIC DIVISION
                                                             STATION/DEPT: OPERATIONS
   TO:     SEE DISTRIBUTION:                                 DATE:         17 November 1986

                SUBJECT:        SOSGA 1975




                I refer to the attached correspondence received from the City of Sheffield
                Administration and Legal Department dated 13 November 1986 in respect
                of Sheffield United and Sheffield Wednesday Football Clubs.

                I would be grateful for your comments as soon as possible so that I can
                reply.




                Chief Superintendent


                Enc


                Distribution

                Ch Supts        D Division
                                F Division

                CoP_X
                ACC (Operations) for information
                                                            snuTH YORKS. P0UCE            y


            /
                                                                    1<5 lii'l IQfcA
                                                                                      /
                                                        f
                                                            OPERATIC            RAFF




                                                   *uJLo

             • - W

                l/Vv


GEN/2                                        i
                                                                        \ S \ A ( $ h
City of Sheffield             M etropolitan District

Roger Pensam, FCIS, M BIM . Solicitor                                                        Administration and Lagal Dspartmant
Head of Departm ent ■                                                                        Town Hall,
                                                                                             Sheffield S1 2HH

Our reference           GP/262/DMB
Your reference

Date
                        13th November, 1986


The Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police,
Police Headquarters,
Snig Hill,
SHEFFIELD.
S3 8LY

For the attention of Superintendent Stuart


Dear Sir,

 Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 ~ Sheffield United Football Club and
 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club___________________________________ _

 I am writing to ask for your comments in writing as to the condition of the
 above two stadia under the 1975 Act from the Police point of view.

What I would like from you is written confirmation that as far as the Police
are concerned both stadia meet your requirements under the 1975 legislation.

 If it should be that there are outstanding matters which require attention
 please detail these in your response; I think it would be helpful to all parties
 if any defects outstanding were fully detailed so that action could be taken to
 remedy them.

 Please be advised that I am aware of the south stand roof problem at Sheffield
 Wednesday and as you know I am taking steps to ascertain the Club’s position on
 that problem.

 I hope you will be able to let me have your reply to this letter in the near
 future.

 Yours faithfully,




 Head of Department




 pg                                                                                              734690 - Mr. Bownes
                            For telephone enquiries on this matter please ring.............................     (STDCode0742)
                                                      Telex 64243 (Administration & Legal)
 >
                                                                                                                                                  r
                                                                                                                                                      I
                                                                                                                                               'X y


               City of Sheffield             M etropolitan District

               Roger Pensam, FCIS, M BIM , Solicitor                                                      Administration and Legal Department
               Head of Department                                                                         Town Hall,
                                                                                                          Sheffield S1 2HH

               Our reference

               Your reference

               Date
                                        23rd October, 1986




                The Chief Constable,
                South Yorkshire Police,
                Police Headquarters,
                Snig Hill,
                SHEFFIELD
                S3 80Y



                For the attention of Superintendent Stuart



                Dear Sir,

                 Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
                 Spion Kop Development____________

                I enclose for your attention a copy of a letter which I have received from
                Messrs. Eastwood and Partners in connection with the above development.

                 Please let me have your comments on this matter, if any, as soon as possible.
               u
               ' Yours faithfully,




                 Head of Department




OOCUMENT N a       1   S   S




                 Enc.


                 PGT
                                           For telephone enquiries on this matter please ring.........................       (STD Code 0742)
                                                                     Telex 54243 (Administration & Legal)
EASTWOOD                          &    PARTNERS                                                                 St. Andrews House
 •'           (C o n s u ltin g   E n g in e e rs )
                                                                                                                23 Kingfield Road
                                                                                                                Sheffield S11 9AS
Directors:
W. Eastwood                   F.Eng., B.Eng., Ph.D., D.Eng..
                                                                                                                Tel.: (0742) 583871
                              C.Eng., F.I.C.E., P.P.I.StructE.,                                                 Telex:       547266
                              F.I.Mech.E, F.G.S., M.Cons.E.

A. A. WOOd                   B.Eng., Ph.D., C.Eng., F.I.C.E.,                                                                   and a t:
                             F.I.StructE., M.I.W.E.S., M.C 01W.E.

R. C. A. Eastwood             B.Sfc, C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.StructE.                                              P rem ie r    House
                                                                                                                 12/13 Hatton Garden
G. Spir                       C.Eng., M.I.C.E.. M.I.Mech.E.
                                                                                                                 London EC1N 8AN
Associates:
                                                                                                                 T e l.: (01) 242 7436
C.     S. Greaves             B.En*.. C.En*., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.
J.    A . Strange             C E iif., M.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                    Our Ref:
S.    Preston                 B.Enf., C E ttfM .I.C .E ., M.LStruet.E.                                          WE/KH/6648
R.    Tandy                   C.En*., F.I.Struct-E.                                                 Your Ref:
                                                                                                                GP/262/DMB
G.    M . Seaman              B.Sc., C E iit, M.I.C.E., MJ^truct-E.
J . M . Wood                  B.Sc., C.Enj., MJ.C.E., M.I.Stnia.E.

Consultant:
A. G. Burdett                G.M*, B.Se.(En*.), C.Enf.,
                             F .I.C k, FJ.Struct.E.




The Director,                                                                                                   21 October 1986
Administration & Legal Department^
Town Hall,                  |V   2 3 OEl 1 9 B
Sheffield SI 2HH.           | * | ~ _____      J— ~
                                                                                   T v ' s t:5 »
                                                                               „,                      \ r.c
                                                                         I   i.- ‘ i       mi—r——
 For the attention of Mr. D.


 Dear Sir,
                           Safety of Sports Ground Act 1375 - Spion Kop
                                                                Development
               Thank you for your letter of 13 October, setting out
 the matters which were discussed at the meeting at the ground
 on 12 September.                          Our comments on the various matters are as
 follows            (taking the paragraphs in the same order as your
 letter)
               Return barriers on radial gangways completed a day or
 two after the meeting.

               The continuation of the top crush barrier adjacent to
 grid line 14 is not considered appropriate.                                                             It will be
realised that there has to be a balance}with the need to
permit free movement sometimes being more important than
 slavishly following the recommendation of continuous barriers
at fixed spacing                          (for example the police request during last
 summer that we should remove parts of barriers at the Leppings
Lane e n d ) .


               All perimeter sheeting now has the guard mesh in front
 of it.


                                      An Unlimited Company, Registered in England — No. 1833144
                                                                          SHEET   2.


EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




                The handrail to the concrete wall on grid line 6
         is installed.

         Item 1      Done
                 2   Agreed
                 3   I question whether this is necessary, but
         consideration is being given to the matter, and we
         will inform you of the clubs view shortly,
                 4 Although we do not regard provision of this me s h
         as being justified, we will have it installed.
                 5   I have looked into this matter.    This length of
         crush barrier was omitted for good reason.           The geometry
         of the existing Kop made the layout of the extension far
         from ideal.          It is not easily possible to achieve a
         proper anchorage for a post on the precast concrete deck,
         and it would bs very expensive.         It is accepted that there is
         a small plot which has greater than recommended spacing
         between barriers,        and that this is in a peak viewing
         area.       But your predecessor authority agreed that there
         should be gaps in barriers at a number of places on the
         old Kop for various reasons.         We believe that there are
         equally good reasons in the present case.           Perfection
         should not be expected when marrying new construction to
         an existing Kop.
                 6   Agreed.     We will report to you later in the season
         when a few more reasonably large crowds have been on the
         Kop.
                 7   This particular barrier which was heavily rusted
         was strengthened on the very day it was found.


                                         Yours faithfully,




  c.c.    Mr. R.H. Chester, Sheffield Wednesday F.C.
                                                                                                                                         /\S*'

  City of Sheffield                Metropolitan District

  Roger Pensam , FCIS, M B IM , Solicitor
                                                                                              Administration and Legal Department
  H ead o f D ep artm ent                                                                     Town Hall,
                                                                                              Sheffield SI 2HH

  Our reference             GP/262/DMG

  Your reference            WE/KH/6648
  Date
                            23rd October, 1986




Dr. W. Eastwood,
Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,
Consulting Engineers,
St. Andrews House,
23 Kingfield Road,
SHEFFIELD.
Sll 9AS




Dear Sir,

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC -
Spion Kop Development_________________

Thank you for your letter of 15th October in reply to mine of 9th October
addressed to Sheffield Wednesday.

I am very grateful for the plans which you have supplied which I am sure will
help the Council as Certificating Authority in the exercise of its
responsibilities under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.

I feel that it is important to carefully distinguish between plans, etc., which
are forwarded to the Council in its role as Building Authority and those which
are submitted to it as Certificating Authority.  It is m y janderstanding that the
County Council, when it received plans, ensuredJthat copies were submitted to
the interested Officers for comment; indeed the situation then was somewhat
clearer as the County Council had, as Certificating Authority, no connection
with the Building Authority.

I think that this arrangement should continue - that is plans relating to the
1975 Act should be forwarded to my Licensing Office for distribution.




                                                                                                        Continued                 /




                                                                                            734005 - Mr. Bownes
                                                                                        ...............................(STD Code 0742)
                                 For telephone enquiries on this matter please ring.......................
                                                           Telex 64243 (Administration ft Legal)
                                         -2 -


It may be appropriate where identical plans have already been submitted to the
Building Authority for you to point this out in a letter accompanying the plans;
there would then be no need to forward additional copies of -plans tothem*

I would add that the Council as Certificating Authority wish to see the most
efficient system possible in operation as regards Safety of Sports Grounds, and
obviously this requires a good working relationship with the representatives of
the Clubs. If you have any suggestions for improving the system or saving the
Clubs from unnecessary expense please let me know.

I have, as u s u a l s e n t a copy of this letter to Sheffield Wednesday.

Yours faithfully,




Head of Department




 AF
■i f     tni.,’5
               iw*
                 i   w   KjMutiE’
                                ll   •
                                     »,-         #S^.W»W- j t        R /0fe8
         sia             er »a       *                                                                                                              <"\V9
                                           M e tro p o lita n D is tric t

 Roger Pensam, FCIS, M B IM , Solicitor
                                                                                                               Administration and Legal Department
 Head of Department                                                                                            Town Hall,
                                                                                                               Sheffield SI 2HH

 Our reference                  G P / 2 6 2 /D M B

 Your reference

  Date
                                 17th October 1986



 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club                                         P ic ,
 Hillsborough,
  S H E F F IE L D .
  S6     1SW

  For the attention of Mr. H.E. McGee, Chairman

  Dear Sirs,

   South Stand roof

   I refer to my letter of 25th September in which I asked for details of the
   Club's intentions with regard to the South Stand roof.

   From the copy correspondence enclosed with my letter it is evident that the
   Certificating Authority whilst expressing concern abou. the roo. agreed t
   refrain from taking action to secure a remedy to the problem. The'basis of .he
   Agreement was that the Club would act on the matter by the start of the 1 9 8 6 / 8 7
       season.
       As no proposals have been submitted to the Council as Certificating Authority
             £   Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975, I a. a^tous to find out       «h«
       the Club's intentions in this respect are.

       I look forward to hearing from you shortly. Please bear in mind that I have
       sent a copy of this letter as usual to Messrs. Eastwood & Partners.

       Yours faithfully,




       Head of Department




                                                                                                                    734690 - M r . Bownes
        AA                                                                                                                        ....(S T D Cods 0742)
                                           For telephone enquiries on this matter piaasa r i n g . . . . . . . . . .......... .
                                                                     Taiax 64243 (Administration & Legal)
City of Sheffield
_                    Metropolitan District
                                                                                                 1ST
                                                                                              ■B B M P '
                                                                                                                                          ^A
Roger Pensam. FCIS, M BIM . Solicitor                                                        Administration and Legal Department
Head of Department
                                                                                             Town Hall,
                                                                                             Sheffield SI 2HH

Our reference           G P /26 2/D M B

Your reference

Date
                        1 3 th O c to b e r,        1986




M r. R . H . C h e s te r,
S e c re ta ry ,
S h e f f i e l d W ed n esd ay F o o t b a l l C lu b P . L . C . ,
H ills b o r o u g h ,
S H E FFIELD .
S6 1SW




D ear S ir ,


S a f e t y o f S p o r t s G ro un d A c t 1 9 7 5 -             S p lo n Kop D e v e lo p m e n t


I s e t o u t b e lo w a r e p o r t o f t h e m e e tin g w h ic h was h e l d on 1 2 t h S e p te m b e r 1 9 8 6 a t
t h e a b o v e d e v e lo p m e n t w h ic h was a t t e n d e d b y M r . Swann and H r . B u t l e r o f th e
B u i l d i n g S u r v e y o r s D e p a r tm e n t and M r . S t r a n g e o f M e s s r s . E a s tw o o d a n d P a r t n e r s .

         “ I t was s e e n t h a t t h e w o rk t o t h e r e t u r n b a r r i e r s a lo n g t h e r a d i a l
         gangw ays was s t i l l u n d e rw a y , a lt h o u g h s u b s t a n t i a l l y c o m p le t e .

         The c o n t i n u a t i o n o f t h e         to p c ru s h b a r r i e r a d j a c e n t t o       g r id     lin e   14
         h ad n o t y e t b e e n d o n e .


         The p e r i m e t e r g u a r d in g t o th e i n s i d e o f t h e v e r t i c a l c l a d d i n g was
         a lm o s t c o m p le te d t o t h e E a s t a n d S o u th f a c e s , b u t had n o t y e t
         commenced t o t h e N o r t h f a c e .

         The h a n d r a il     t o t h e c o n c r e t e w a l l a t t h e b as e o f th e r a d i a l gangw ay
         on g r i d l i n e     6 h ad n o t y e t b een d o n e .

         The m e e t in g     a ls o       p ro d u c e d t h e    fo llo w in g   a g r e e m e n ts

         1.      The o u t e r b a l u s t r a d i n g t o t h e new s o u th s t a i r w a y i s               to     be mesh
                 i n f i l l e d o v e r i t s f u l l h e ig h t.

         2.      The t o p r a i l o f t h e s o u th s t a i r w a y b a l u s t r a d i n g           is    to      r e m a in a s
                 e x i s t i n g a t 1 . 0 5 0 m e tr e s a b o v e l a n d in g l e v e l .

         3.      A b o tt o m r a i l i s t o be p r o v id e d t o t h e c r u s h b a r r i e r s                   a d ja c e n t to
                 t h e l a t e r a l gangw ay b e tw e e n g r i d l i n e s 3 and 7 .



         DOCUMENT No.         1 &      I


                                                                                             734690 -         M r.     Bownes

                          For telephone enquiries on this matt r please ring.................                   (STD Code 0742)
                                                           Telex 64243 (Administration 6 Legal)
         4.    Mesh i n f i l l i n g o f t h e c r u s h b a r r i e r s a d j a c e n t t o t h e l a t e r a l
               gangway i s t o b e p r o v i d e d t o t h e w h o le l e n g t h o f t e r r a c i n g
                b e tw e e n g r i d    lin e s   1 0 and 1 2 .

         5.    I n v e s t i g a t i o n t o b e d o n e b y Eastw oo d and P a r t n e r s i n t o t h e
                 p r o v is io n o f f i x i n g s f o r th e re q u ire d a d d i t io n a l    le n g th o f c ru s h
                 b a r r i e r a t t h e b a s e o f t h e new t e r r a c i n g d i r e c t l y t o t h e n o r t h o f
                 g r id   lin e    8.

         6.      The r e t u r n b a r r i e r t o t h e e x i s t i n g t e r r a c e s id e o f t h e l a t e r a l
                 gangway a d j a c e n t t o g r i d l i n e 7 . i s n o t t o be i n s t a l l e d u n t i l               v    :
                 f u r t h e r i n v e s t i g a t i o n h a s t a k e n p la c e o f crow d m ovem ent i n t h i s        ;■•
                                                                                                                            ' "",
                 a re a .     It   is a n tic ip a te d th a t a lte r a tio n s to t h is a re a o f                      A.
                                                                                                                           'V'
                 te r r a c in g   may b e u n d e r t a k e n s h o r t l y t o in c r e a s e cro w d f l o w .

          7.     A le n g th o f c ru s h b a r r i e r in th e e x is tin g t e r r a c in g a d ja c e n t to
                 g r i d l i n e 8 , fo u n d t o be n e a r l y r u s t e d th r o u g h a t i t s s u p p o r t , i s
                 t o be r e p l a c e d . "




W o u ld you p le a s e a d v is e me a s t o t h e u p - t o - d a t e p o s i t i o n on t h e it e m s r e f e r r e d
to i n th e r e p o r t .   I h a v e , a s u s u a l , p a s s e d a copy o f t h i s l e t t e r on t o M e s s rs
E a s tw o o d and P a r t n e r s      fo r   th e ir   a tte n tio n .

Y o u rs f a i t h f u l l y ,




H ead o f D e p a rtm e n t
                        GP/262/DMB




                        9th October 1786




H r . E« R . C h e s t e r ,
S e c re ta ry ,
S h e f f i e l d W ednesday F o o t h a l l C lu b P i c ,
Hillsborough,
S H E F F IE L D .
S 6 1SV

D ear S i r ,

S a fe ty o f S p o rts       G ro u n d s A c t     1 97 5 -      S p lo n K o r D e v e lo p m e n t

The C o u n c il     as   C e r t i f i c a t i n g A u t h o r i t y do es n o t y e t a p p e a r t o h a v e r e c e i v e d a n y
p la n e s h o v in p t h e new t e r r a c e c o n s t r u c t i o n a t t h e P e n is t o n e Road end o f t'ne nev*
kop.       As 1 u n d e r s ta n d t h a t w o rk s e r e w e l l u n d e r way on t h i s new c o n s t r u c t i o n , i
w o u ld appreciate b e im r supplied w i t h f i v e p la n s w h ic h s h o u ld prive as nuch d e t a i l
as p o s s i b l e , p a r t i c u l a r l y i n r e l a t i o n t o t h e p ro p o s e d i n s t a l l a t i o n o f c r u s h
h a r r i e r s , p e d e s t r i a n g u a rd r a i l s , e m e rg e n c y e x i t r o u t e s , e t c *

I t w o u ld be h e l p f u l i f t h i s i n f o r m a t i o n c o u ld be s u p p li e d a t t h e e a r l i e s t
o p p o r tu n ity . 1 h a v e , as u s u a l , s e n t e copy o f t h i s l e t t e r t o
M e s s r s . E a stw o o d & P a r t n e r s .

Yours faithfully,




 C h Si?>t M o le
                                                                                                         1 i OCT 1986
 F D iv is io n

 S u b m itj€ c P !£ < q : i n f o r m a t i o n , p l e a s e .



 Superintendent
                                              DOCUMENT No.            "7 6   Z
 gj?S DR/SM 14 10 86                                                                           75*6*0' - Hr. Bownes
City of Sheffield             M etropolitan District                           _________

Roger Pensam, FCIS, M BIM , Solicitor                                                        Administration and Legal Department
Head of Department     »                                                                     Town Hall,
                                                                                             Sheffield S1 2HH
                        GP/262/DMB
Our reference

Your reference

Date                     25th September, 1986




 Hr. R. H. Chester,
 Secretary,
 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, p.I.e.,
 Hillsborough,
 Sheffield.
 S6 1SW




 Dear Sir,

  Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 - The Roof of the South Stand

  It has been brought to my attention that correspondence passed between the
  County Council and Eastwood and Partners in June, 1985 concerning the South
  Stand Roof.

  I enclose for ease of reference a copy of the County Council's letter of
  25th June and Doctor Eastwoods letter of 26th June.

  Would you please let me know what the Club's intention is with regard to the
  roof as soon as possible.

  Yours faithfully,




  Head of Department

  Enc.




          DOCUMENT No.




                                                                                                   734690 - Hr. Bownes
   PB


                             For telephone enquiries on this matter please ring... . . . . . * • • • • * '
                                                       Telex 54243 (Administration & Legal)
                                                                        c o r \

                        South                                            ire County
                        Chief Executive & County Clerk:                                             Department of Administration
                        J.C. Harris, M A , LLM. (Cantab)                                            County Hall                ,
                                                                                                    Barnsley
                                                                                                    South Yorkshire S 70 2TN
                                                                                                    Telephone: Barnsley
                        Deputy County Clerk & Solicitor:                                            (STD 0 226 ) 286141
                        D. A. Hainsworth, LLB.                                                      Telex: 547 675


                        Our R e f:'.                       Your Ref:                                 Date:
                        D V /M H /5 8 3 / 5 -------- , W E /C M /6 5 1 7                             2 5 th J u n e , 1985

                        This matter is T>eing dealt with by          D . Vaughan                     Ext. No.     4 22




        D ear S ir ,

        S a f e t y o f S p o r t s G ro u n d s A c t , 1 9 7 5
        S h e f f i e l d W edn esd ay F o o t b a l l C lu b L t d .

        I     t h a n k you f o r y o u r l e t t e r d a te d .. 1 2 t h J u n e .

        T a k in g i n t o a c c o u n t a l l t h e f a c t o r s w h ic h y o u m e n t io n ( p a r t i c u l a r l y t h e
        s t e e l s h e e t in g o f t h e w ooden d e c k in g o f t h e u p p e r s e a te d a r e a b y t h e
        s t a r t o f t h e f o r t h c o m in g s e a s o n ) , t h e e x i s t i n g r o o f o f t h e S o u th S ta n d
        w i l l b e r e g a r d e d a s a c c e p t a b le on a t e m p o r a r y b a s is u n t i l t h e end o f
        t h e 1 9 8 5 /8 6 s e a s o n .    A t t h a t t i m e , e i t h e r a new r o o f m u s t b e c o n s t r u c t e d
        o r t h e u n d e r - r o o f t im b e r c l a d d i n g o f t h e e x i s t i n g r o o f r e p l a c e d b y t h e
         s t a r t o f th e      1 9 8 6 /8 7    season.

        D e ta ils      and p la n s o f t h e w o rk w i l l ,        o f c o u rs e , be r e q u ir e d   in   th e u s u a l
         w ay.

         Y o u rs f a i t h f u l l y ,




*               ____________

            C h ie f E x e c u tiv e




                                                                                           r^^erAC<V»«duP..i; ,;strvice, S
                                                                                           |Depww*®''* c*                ’




    r       D r . W. E a s tw o o d ,
                                                                                      “I

            M e s s r s . E a s tw o o d & P a r t n e r s ,
            C o n s u lt in g E n g i n e e r s ,
            S t . A n drew s H o u s e ,
            23 R i n g f i e l d R o a d ,
             S H E FF IE L D *   S ll     9AS.
    L                                                                                 -I
                                                                                                                                  '
                                                                                                  Serving £Jou
                                                                                                   . St. Andrews House
     EASTWOOD                                                                                     i 23   Kingfleld Road
                   (C onsulting   &'p
                                  E n g inA
                                          e e r sR
                                                 ) T N E R fX t!S S ir ™                          I Sheffield S11 9AS
     Directon:                                                             2 7 Ji]-U1985          | Tel.: (0742) 583871
     w . Eastwood          ^   F.Eng, B.Eng, P h.D . D.Eng.. ;
                               C.Eng, F.I.C.E, P .PX StructE ^               w u . m m i( y          Telex:       547266
                               F.I.Mecti.E., F.G.S, M.Coru.Ej
                                                                                     570 2L<                            »nd »t:
     A. A. Wood                B.Eng. Ph-D . C-Eng. F.I.C.E.
                               F.I.StiuctE . M.I.W.E.S., M.Cons.E.
                                                                                                         36 H ig h H o lb o rn
     R. C. A. Eastwood         B .S c, C.Eng, M.I.C.E. M.I.StructE.
                                                                                                         London W C1V 6AA
     G. Spir                   C.EnQ., M.l.C.E^ M.I.Mech.E.                                              T el.: (01) 242 7436
     Assoclttat:
     C.    S. Greaves          B.Enf., C-En*.. M J.CE., MJ.Struct.E.
                                                                                      Our Ref:     WE/KH/6517
     J.   A. Strange           C.Enf., MXStruct-E.
                               C E nfF J.S truct.E .
                                                                                      Your Rof:    DV/MH/583/5
     G.   Doughty
     S.   Preston              B £nf., C E n f, MJ.C.E.. MJ.Struct.E.

     R.   Tandy                   C Enf., FJ.Strutt.E.

     Consultant:
     A. 8 . Burdett            G.M., B.Sc.{Enf.). C.Enj.,
                               FJ.C.E., F.I.Strutt.E.




                                                                                                    26 June 1985
      Chief Executive,
      South Yorkshire County Council,
      Department of Administration,
      County Hall,
      Barnsley,
      South Yorkshire,
      S 7 0 2TN.




       For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan


       Dear Sirs,
                               Safety of Sports Grounds Act,                           1975
4)                           Sheffield Wednesday Football C lub Ltd.
                   Thank you for your letter of 25 June regarding the roof
        of the South stand.                              I am sure the Club will be very a p p r e c i a t i v e
        of the co-operative attitude of the County Council.                                               The
        breathing space wh ic h has been provided will be adequate for
          the Club to take action by the start of the 1986/87 season.


                                                                        Yours faithfully,
                                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
                                         With the Compliments of
                                    THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE S j l
                                                 Wcre»/H,u



                                                  FOR INFORMATION iS L Cj&rC>M-i ©"t \ $ A
                                     n/
                                                  h > u fc        \   U £   ©4



                                                  FOR ACTION          ,
                  -A--,...-a '.»•                  WcMctfld                           fe^JVUK


                                                  FOR COMMENT




                                    From                               fate *2-S • 1
                                    Department o t A d m in is tra tio n
                                    County Hall
                                    Barnsley    Tel. Barnsley 86T41 Ext.
                                    CR/ACE/001




                                                                                               IjV
                                                                                           >     Jf



                                                                                            VlW-


                  DOCUMENT No.
                                                                             f[ ^ (




                                                                             i   »>

                                                              ^              f1




O   5\ f'VT   ^
EASTWOOD                       &       PARTNERS                                                              St. Andrews House
                                                                                                             23 Kingfield Road
              (C o n s u ltin g E n g in e e rs )
                                                                                                             Sheffield S11 9AS
Directors:
                                                                                                             Tel.: (0742) 583871
W. Eastwood                   F.Eng., B.Eng., Ph.D., D.Eng.              lb*(             .v' couam*
                              C.Eng., F.I.C.E., P.P.I.Struct.^,                                              Telex:       647266
                              F.I.Mech.E., F.6.S., M.Cons.

A. A. Wood                    B.Eng., Ph.D., C.Eng., F.I.C.4,                                                                and at:
                              F.I.Struct.E.. M.I.W.E.S., M.Cc u.E.
R. C. A. Eastwood             B.Sc.. C.Eng., M.I.C.E.. M.I.Sti jct.E.
                                                                                                                36 H igh H olborn
                                                                                             2TN                London WC1V 6AA
6 . Spir                      C Eng.. M.I.C.E., M.I.Mech.E.
                                                                                                                Tel.: (01) 242 7436
Associates:
C.   S. Greaves               B.Enf., C.Enf., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                           Our Ref:
J.   A. Strange               C.Eng., M.I.Strucc.E.                                                           WE/KH/6955
S.   Preston                  B.En*.. C.En( ., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.                     Your Ref:
                                                                                                              DV/ADA/583/5
R.   Tandy                    C.Enf., F.I.Struct.E.
G.   M. Seaman                B.Sc., C E iif.. M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.
J.   M. Wood                  B.Sc., C.En*., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.

Consultant:
A. G. Burdett                G.M., B.Sc.(Enf.), C.En*..
                             F.I.C.E., F.I.Struct.E.




Chief Executive & County Clerk,                                                                               22 July 1985
Department of Administration,
South Yorkshire County Council,
County Hall,
Barnsley,
South Yorkshire,
S70 2TN.


 For the attention of Mr.                                                Vaughan


 Dear Mr. Vaughan,
                                        Safety of Sports Grounds Act,                                 1975
                                      Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic
               Thank you for your letter of 18 July and for the copy
 of the letter which you have written to the Club regarding
 the fire protection of the wooden decking in the South stand.
               With regard to the possibility of roofing over the Kop,
 there is no question of that being proceeded with prior to
 re-roofing the South stand.                                                    The Club is unlikely to have
 sufficient money to do both so it is reasonable to assume
 that roofing over the Kop is unlikely to proceed for some
 time.
               However you will need to know what may be involved and
 I enclose three sets of prints for each of the two schemes.
 These m ay be shown to members of your Working Party.                                                           It
 will be seen that neither scheme involves any change to the
 arrangement of the accommodation on the Kop.                                                          Even the roof
 for the enlarged Kop will not involve any changes until some
 date considerably into the future.
                                     An Unlimited Company, Registered in England - No. 1833144
                                                   SOUTH YO RKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
                                                           W ith the Com plim ents of

                                                   THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
                                                   To.


                                                                 FOR INFORMATION
                                                                                     Z ^Z o-



                                                                 FOR ACTI<>N


V
,-.'   -
       v- >V- ■•v.J.vI
                     ,-irf*.



                               m & iifM vsisSI?S
                                                                 FOR COMM
                                                                                                                          Sr*fe^
« S 3 « »
                                                                 *“'
                                                                   “'SSiitl44ll
                                       i *•'-                              V * 0        ,

                                                                   m   m r




                                                   D epartm ent of A dm inistration
                                                   County Hall
                                                   Barnsley      T el. Barnsley 86141 E x t .
                                                   C R/ACE/001




                                                                                                                          llllSlStl




                                                                                                                      -.T’1
                                                                                                                          ?4'

                                                                     i ^ H i                                    j ^   9      | | | | i


                                                                                                                                   i®®




                                                                                      S’®'#-:*?'?1''•>•'' '■■<';■
                                                                                                _ St. Andrews House
EASTWOOD                &         P A R T N E R ^ J ^ ^
                                                                                                123 Kingfield Road
              (C o n s u ltin g Engin eers)           0?
                                                                                                ‘ Sheffield S11 9AS
Directors:                                                            2 7 JUNI985                 Tel.: (0742) 583871
W . Eastwood           F.Eng., B.Eng., Ph.D., D.Eng., ■
                       C.Eng., F.I.C.E., P.P.I.Struct.E./        .C O U W Hun,                 I Telex:        547266

A. A. Wood
                       F.I.Mech.E., F.G.S., M.Cons.E.'
                       B.Eng., Ph.D., C.Eng, F.I.C.E.,
                                                                 ••mitjoiiKmt H a                                    and at:
                       F.I.Struct.E., M.I.W.E.S., M.Cons.E.
                                                                                                     36 H ig h H o l b o r n
R. C. A. Eastwood      B.Sc., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                     London WC1V 6AA
G. Spir                C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Mech.E.
                                                                                                     T el.: (01) 242 7436
Associates:
C.   S. Greaves        B.En*., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struet.E.
                                                                                 Our B e f :    W E / K H / 6 5 17
J.   A. Strange        C.Enj., H.[.Struct.E.
G.   Doughty           C.Eng.* F.I.Struct.E.                                     Your R ef:                  83/5
S.   Preston           B.En*.t C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.
R.   Tandy             C.Eng., F.I.Struct.E.

Consultant:
A. G. Burdett          G.M., B.Sc.(lng.)t C.Eng.,
                       F.I.C.E., F.I.Struct.E.




Chief Executive,                                                                                26 June 1985
South Yorkshire County Council,
Department of Administration,
County Hall,
Barnsley,
South Yorkshire,
S70 2TN.




 For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan


 Dear Sirs,
                      Safety of Sports Grounds Act,                              197 5
                     Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.
             Thank you for your letter of 2 5 June regarding the roof
 of the South stand.                           I am sure the Club will be very appreciative
 of the co-operative attitude of the County Council.                                                 The
 breathing space which has been provided will be adequate for
 the Club to take action by the start of the 1986/87 season.


                                                                 Yours faithfully,




                                An Unlimited Company, Registered in England - No 1833144
                                                    60


            South Yorkshire County Council
                                                              Department of Administration
        Chief Executive & County Clerk:
        J.C. Harris, M.A., LL.M. (Cantab)                     County Hall
                                                              Barnsley
                                                                                         ,
                                                              South Yorkshire S 70 2TN
                                                              Telephone: Barnsley
        Deputy County Clerk & Solicitor:                      (STD 0226) 286141
        D. A. Hainsworth, LL.B.                               Telex: 5476 75


        Our Ref:                      Your Ref:               Date:
        DV/MH/583/5                 ' WE/CM/6517              25th June* 1985

        This matter is being dealt with by     D. Vaughan     Ext. No.   422




Dear Sir,

Sa£ety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd«

I thank you for your letter dated.12th June.

Taking into account all the factors which you mention (particularly the
steel sheeting of the wooden decking of the upper seated area by the
start of the forthcoming season), the existing roof of the South Stand
will be regarded as acceptable on a temporary basis until the end ot
the 1985/86 season. At that time, either a new roof must be constructed
or the under-roof timber cladding of the existing roof replaced by the
start of the 1986/87 season.

Details and plans of the work will, of course, be required in the usual
way.

Yours faithfully,




 Chief Executive




                          DOCUMENT Mo.       ~?66




 Dr. W. Eastwood,
 Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,
 Consulting Engineers,
 St. Andrews House,
 23 Kingfield Road,,
 SHEFFIELD, Sll 9AS.                                     _j
                                                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                                 REF:     OPS TWS/SM
     FROM;        SUPT STUART            OPERATIONS DIVISION
                                                                                 STATION/DEPT:   OPERATIONS
     TO:          CH SUPT MEADOWS               OPS & TRAFFIC DIVISION           DATE:           15 August 1986


                   SUBJECT:              SOSGA 1975 - SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB




                  Please find attached for your information copy correspondence regarding
                  the new 'kop1 development at Hillsborough. It would appear that there
                  are sate serious problems.

                  There is no requirement for the police to attend the meeting on 21 August
                  1986 as it only concerns the Building Authorities and the Fire Service.
                                                                            ■- • ' ' ■ '' -' : ''■/:'

■y




                  Superintendent


                  Enc




              f     SOUTH YORKS. POLICE                  1
                                                                                 ~ IG 1
                                                                                             ]
                           1 £ AU
                               |G I 9 ^              '
                  cwiPF s "PE.: •iCv i t : \ - u i r                 & £ > '
                  OP E R AT I ON S




              f            Q     v                           1

              P,:-vS. POLICE



                                                                                                                       ■

                                                                                                                  :

                                                                 £ > h ^ s L -d -~                                    ■V

O f ’E RAT i n f S S. TRAPF
                                                                                           Administration and Legal Department
Roger Pensam, FCIS, M B IM , Solicitor
Head of Department
                                                                                           Town Hall,
                                                                                           Sheffield S1 2HH


Our reference        GP/262/DMB

Your reference
nata                 14th August 1986




 The Secretary,
 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Limited,
 Penistone Road,
 SHEFFIELD 6

  Dear Sir,

  Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 - Application
  for Increase in Crowd Capacity on the Spion Kop




   ■ s a
   Hall, Sheffield.
                     S                   S                      S
                                  The Panel has the right to decide on your applicatlo .
                                                                                        S                      S                   i
   m    dealing with the application the Panel will also consider the following
   matters
       :ers
                      The new terrace construction                        does not comply with the plans
          (           S U t t e d L the Council for                       Building Regulation Approval, in
                      particular in that the slope                        of the terrace is now steeper
                      than originally proposed and                        as such could be dangerous,

           fM         it is considered that the vertical distance in some places
           w          f ™ terrace level to the new gangway level Is so great that
                       it is a safety hazard;

         - (c)        the sheeting at the rear of the Kop near the "Ozzle Owl" Club
                       should be brought down to ground level;

           (d)         the bearings of the pre-cast concrete unit onto the steel
                       rakers are substandard in at least one case,

            (e)        the provision of a kiosk and toilet underneath the new terrace
                       did not feature in the application;

              rf'k     t-hP Fire Service is concerned that the evacuation time for the
              (        new K od is in accordance with the ”8 minutes" discussion as
                        detailed in the Green Guide, the Popplewell Report and other
                        requirements.   The capacity of the new Kop should b
                         calculated accordingly.
                                                                                                                     Cont’d ...


                                                                                                  734690 - Mr. Bownes
                                                                                                                   ..(S TD Code 0742)
                                  For telephone enquiries on this matter please ring. ....... ..................
                                                                  KA'igi f Administration & Legal)
J                                          -   2 -
/



     I wish to invite you and your representatives to attend the
     your views on these matters and the capacity issue. I appreciate that ttoere are
     discussions already underway on the above points with the approprxate Officers.

      I have sent a copy of this letter to Dr. Eastwood.

      If vou have any general questions to ask about this matter or if you wish to
      fiscuss t S format of the Panel meeting please do not hesitate to contact »y
      Chief Licensing Officer, Mr. Bownes, on the number given below.

    i» r Yours faithfully,




      Head of Department




        CS
  City of Sheffield             Metropolitan District

  Roger Pensam, FCIS, M BIM , Solicitor
                                                                                           Administration and Legal Department
  Head of Department                                                                       Town Hall,
                                                                                           Sheffield S1 2HH

  Our reference
                    GP/262/DMB

  Your reference

  Date
                    27th August, 1986




Mr. R. H. Chester,
Secretary,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club P.L.C.,
Hillsborough,
SHEFFIELD.
S6 1SW




Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 - Capacity of the new Spion Kop

I refer to the meeting of the General Purposes Panel of the City Council which
took place on Thursday 21st August 1986 which you and other representatives o
the Club attended.

I am writing to confirm that the Panel agreed to increase the capacity of the
Kop to 21,000 spectators subject to the following conditions

         (a)      that the infilling of crush barriers takes place prior to the match
               on 25th August;

         (b)   the other work referred to before the Panel be completed within                                                  2
               weeks (i.e. by 4th September 1986);

         (c)    extra stewarding be provided during the next 2matches to                                               the
                satisfaction of the Fire Service and the Police.

 Obviously, all work is to be carried out to the satisfaction of the
 Certificating Authority and the Panel authorised me to take any necessary action
 to secure compliance with the above conditions.




         DOCUMENT No.         *7 6 ^


                                                                                          734690 - Mr. Bownes

                                                                                      ............................... (STD Code 0742)
                               For telephone enquiries on this matter please ring......................
                                                         Telex 54243 (Administration & Legal)
    I
t




        2   .

        During Mr. Bownes' visit to the match on 25th August it was noted that very
        little of the fencing which should have been installed to protect the sheeting
        at the rear and sides of the Kop was in fact in place and it is also understood
        that the P.A. System on the Kop was not in operation during that match.  It was
        also noted that several pieces of fencing were in fact wired to the structure of
        the Kop presumably as a temporary measure. I consider these items important and
        that it is in everyone's interest that they are dealt with immediately and in
        any event before the match on 30th August.

        I have sent a copy of this letter to Dr. Eastwood as usual.

        Yours faithfully,




        Head of Department




            PB
                                                          OPS   DK/SM     'WsA
     STLAifT     OPERATIONS DIVISION

CK SUFI r n uE   F DIVISION                                     1 August 1986


                   SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 - THE SPION RQP -
                   APPLICATION FOR INCREASE IN CROWD CAPACITY




 Submitted for your information, please.




 Superintendent
                                                                                                             k




.«k.3.;ar«ts.jj                                                                                                  •                   ''         '




                                                                                                                     mm
                                                                                                                           I ^ jDl ’•sfcA
                                                                                                                           ;2fe.k~          . '.J-..*>1*—«   -*OV—"
                                                                                                                          m k j.K ,             :. ;

                  * § ^ f V -v:



                                  ■A-       *v
                          *!-(f
                           SS®S®S*iii
                                        *
                                                                   City of Sheffield Metropolitan District
                             isssfiiiis

                                                   I       \jr~-                                                             Administration £r Legal Department
                                                       «..V-A
                                                                                                                             Roger Pensam, F C I S , M B I M , Solicitor
                                                                                                                             Head of Department
                                                                                                                             Tow n Hall
                                                                                                                             Sheffield S1 2H H
                                                   X «*-                                                                     Telephone 2 6 4 4 4
                                                 KiltSt                                                                      Telex 5 4 2 4 3 (Administration & Legal)



                                                  IBs8§ii             4 l~   *   "    T
                                                 WSISiSS
                                                                                                                     with compliments
City of Sheffield               M etropolitan District

Roger Pensam , FCIS, M B IM , Solicitor                                                   Administration and Legal Department
Head of D epartm ent
                                                                                          Town Hall,
                                                                                          Sheffield S1 2HH

Our reference             GP/262/DMB

Your reference

Data
                          30th July, 1986


  The Secretary,
  Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Limited
  Penistone Road,
  SHEFFIELD.
  S6


  Dear Sir,

  Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 - The Spion Kop -
  Application for Increase in Crowd Capacity_________

  I refer to the meeting held at the stadium on 10th July about the above
  development and to Messrs. Eastwoods' letter of 26th June.

  Officers met on 15th July to discuss the application in the light of new plans
  submitted by Doctor Eastwood (which were received on 14th July). The following
  pointsarose from the discussion:-

            (a)     No plan has been supplied showing the remainder of the exit route
                    between the new construction at the north corner of the Kop and the
                    final gate on Penistone Road - this omission means that the capacity
                    of the escape route cannot be assessed;

            (b)     the plan 6648/54 does not show whether or not there will be any
                    handrails or other narrowing of the new escape route;


            (c)        reservations were expressed about the 8 minute rule (relating to the
                       evacuation time of the new terrace) and Officers are making
                       further enquiries into that issue with the benefit of
                       Doctor Eastwood's comments on 10th July.

   Please arrange to supply plans showing the details mentioned in items (a) and
   (b) above




    PB                                                                                         734690 - Mr. Bownes

                              For telephone enquiries on this matter please rin g ...................
                                                        Telex 54243 (Administration & Legal)
2.


It seems to me that the Council will not be in a position to decide on the
capacity issue much before the completion of works; I therefore propose to place
the application before the appropriate Committee when the Kop is complete. This
arrangement will also give Officers a chance to assess the structure when it is
fully operational.

Yours faithfully,




Head of Department




PB
                                                                                                           I ^
                                                                                                                                      " \0


           City of Sheffield               Metropolitan District
                                                                                            @


                                                                                   Administration & Legal Department
         Sheffield Wednesday FC - Kop Development
                                                                                   Roger Pensam, FCIS, M BIM , Solicitor
                                                                                   Head of Department
    An 0 W P meeting has been arranged to discuss the                              Tow n Hall
    attached letter and plans at the Division Street                               Sheffield S1 2 H H                      .
    Fire Station at 2pm on Friday 4th July 1986.                                   Telephone * « W      1 ^ 00^
                                                                                   Telex 5 4 2 4 3 (Adm inistration & Legal)
                      LICENSING SECTION,

                     T e n UsB,
                     BMMI.
                                                                               with compliments
                     W1HB                               3 0 J U N I9 8 6
.14602                                                                                                       ■ -‘.v .'■-■O-'v.: ■’•
                                                                                                                 ... . . ' .'.: '' • V’-.
                                                                                                                           V



                             S'fcssA f


            S > - c \v - v     ^



                                           °c                i., -
                                   ( t w                                                .




                                                                                        DOCUMENT to .      H O



                                                                           j   y    i
                                                                                                      St. Andrews House
EASTWOO D & PARTNERS
                                                                                                      23 Kingfield Road
              (Consulting    Engineers )
                                                                                                      Sheffield S11 9AS
Directors:                                                                                            Tel.: (0742) 583871
VV Eastwood             BCn<* ** Cn<*           n nEnn
                        C.Eng„ F.I.C.E., P.P.I.StructE.,                                              Telex:       547266
                        F.I.Mech.E., F.G.S., M.Cons.E.
A. A. Wood              B.Eng., Ph.D., C.Eng, F.I.C.E.,
                        F.l.StructE., M.I.W.E.S., M.Cons.E.
R. C. A. Eastwood       B.Sc.. C.Eng„ M.I.C.E., M.I.StructE.
                                                                                                        P re m ie r   House
                                                                                                        12/13 Hatton Garden
G. Spir                 C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Mech.E.
                                                                                                        London EC1N 8AN
Associates:                                                                                             T e l.: (01) 242 7436
C. S. Greaves           B.En*., C.En*., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.
J.   A. Strange         C.Enf„ M.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                          Our Bef:
                                                                                                      WE/KH/6648
S.   Preston            B.En(„ C.En*., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.
R.   Tandy              C.En*., F.I.Struct.E.                                             Your Bef:
G.   M . Seaman         B.Sc., C E n*, M.I.C.E., I
J.   M . Wood           B.Sc„ C.En*., MJ.C.E., I                           r r      r~
Consultant:
A. G. Burdett           G.M., B.Sc.(En*.), CEnf.,                 otn,   j 0spuir~7~~~-
                        F.I.C.E., F.I.Struct£.                    -                L.s.


 Mr. R. Pensam,                                                                                       26 June 1986
 Head of Administration
 Legal Department,
 Town Hall,
 Sheffield,
 SI 2HH.


 For the attention of Licensing Section


 Dear Sir,
                            Safety of Sports Grounds Act
                  Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC
                                Assessment of Capacity
              You will know that work on the Kop is proceeding rapidly
 and we hope to have it completed, apart from some minor works
 by the opening of the new season.                                          The first match is due to take
 place on Monday,                  25 August.
              It has been normal practice for the working party to visit
 the ground in July preparatory to the start of the new season.
 You may consider that the visit should still take place at that
  time but there may be advantage this year in delaying the visit
  into August so that the work on the Kop will be nearer to
  completion.               I am sure the Club will have no preference either
 way.
              It will be necessary for the Licensing Authority to approve
  the increased capacity and I therefore enclose five prints of our
  drawing 6648(14)                 for consideration by the various members of your
  working party.                You will see that we have outlined the boundaries
  of the old Kop in red so that the new standing areas are clearly
EASTWOOD 8- PARTNERS




defined.     We have marked on the drawing the dimensions of the
various parts of the new terrace together w i t h our own calculation
of the extra spectators Who can be accommodated.         As you will see
we have included all the steps and space on w hi ch spectators
can stand which is in accordance w i t h the guidance of the    'Green'
Code.     The gangways are, of course, excluded from the calculations.
        It will of course be necessary for the exits to be able to
cope wi t h the agreed new capacity within the eight minutes guideline
laid down in the    'Green' guide.      You will no doubt be aware that
when the Club first sought a safety certificate in 1979 the Fire
Service and the Police accepted the principle that in an emergency
the exits out on to the pitch could be used as these are under the
control of Police officers and there is an exit route through the
space between the North stand on the Kop.        The exits were therefore
included in the calculations.        At that time there were four exits
on to the pitch.      These of course also have the dual purpose
of enabling Police or Ambulancemen to get into the terrace.         At
the summer meeting last year the Police requested an extra gate on
to the pitch surround close to the South stand and this was provided.
You will see from our drawing that there is no gangway leading to
that particular exit but this was considered unnecessary by the
Police as people can walk quite safely down the terrace steps.           There
may conceivably be less danger without a gangway, which would be
set at a lower level.     In view of the considerable increase in the
capacity of the Kop towards the North end, we have considered it
prudent to provide -a further exit onto the pitch surround, which is
labelled    'new exit' on the attached drawing.    We would of course
be pleased to receive any comments regarding its precise location
from either the Police or the Fire Service.        Because the safety
fence has been taken down to facilitate the n ew construction,      a
decision regarding the location of this gate can be made at any time
up to the end of July.
        Over the last few years the working party was very
concerned about the tunnel exit at the North end of the Kop. This
had a less than desirable headroom and in addition, there was
EASTWOOD 8- PARTNERS




 considerable corrosion of reinforcement in the roof slab.
 We undertook that when the Kop was redeveloped that particular
 exit would be demolished and a new one erected in its place.
 This has now been made 5425 wide in order to provide eight
 units of exit although we believe that it is really nine
 units wide even after allowing for the steel column which
 unavoidably had to be placed part way along the exit      route.
       It will be seen that in total there will now be 48 exit
 units.    If our proposal of 5981 new places is added to the
 existing capacity of 16850 the new capacity will become 22831.
 Taking the   'Green'   book figure of 60 persons per minute for
  each exit unit, it will be seen that the calculated exit
  time is about seven minutes,    54 seconds.
       It may be that your working party will decide to meet
  before paying a visit to the ground so as to form a preliminary
  view of the proposals.      If so, I would be very pleased if I could
  be invited to attend for part of the meeting to explain the
  scheme and to answer any comments or queries.


                               Yours faithfully,




  c.c. H.E. McGee
       K. Addy
                                                                                 br>v


                            SHEFFIELD MAGISTRATES- COURT
                                        127731


                          Before the Magistrates' Court
              sitting at The Court House. Castle Street, Sheffield

Complaint has been made by


CEORCE WILLIAM NICHOLSON

being the licensee of the
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, Hillsborough, Sheffield
being licensed premises within the area of a designed sports ground so
designated under the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol Etc.) Act. 1985.
who applies for an order pursuant to Section 3(2) of the said Act that the
permitted hours in the said licensed premises or part thereof, during so
much of the period of any designated sporting event as would (apart from the
said section) be included in the permitted h o u r s . shall be included in the
permitted hours.

It is adjudged that the said complaint is true       and it is hereby ordered:

ill   That the permitted hours in the part o r parts of the premises
      specified in Section A below shall so far as they would be
      included in t hm permitted hours apart from aaction 3 o f the said
      Act include the period or periods specified in Section B below
      and that the admission of persons t o the specified premises shall
      be restricted in the ways specified in Section C below.

i2)   There shall be in attendance at the designated sports ground
      throughout the period of any designated sporting event a person

      (a)   who is responsible for securing compliance with section 3
            of the said Act. being the holder of the Justices' licence
            or a person designated by him or. in the case of
            registered rlub premises a person designated by the club and

      lb)   w r i t t e n notice of whose name and current address has been
            given to the Chief Officer of Police.

<3)   This order shall (unless sooner revoked) cease to have effect:

      (a)   on the coming into effect o f a further order under
            section 3 of the said Act in relation to the said premises,
            or

      lb)   on the expiration of the period of 5 months beginning
            with the day on which it comes into effect.

:4 i This order shall not apply to any part of the premises from which
     designated sporting events may be directly viewed.

i s i 7V)C' conditions of the Justices' licenco for the said premises shall
       be unaffected by this order except in so far as may be necessary for
       trti? o r d e r to take effect.



Section A : The part or parts of the premises to which this order applies
arc o.s follows:-

        Those parts known as the Riverside Suite and The Tavern,
        shown on the plan deposited with the Clerk to the Licensing
        Justices.
Section B : The period or periods to which this order applies are as
follows

       Permitted hours during the period of any designated sporting
       event as defined by section 9(3) and (4) of the Sporting
       Events (Control of Alcohol Etc.) A c t , 1985.


Section C : Admission to those parts of the premises mentioned in Section a
(during the period mentioned in Section B ) shall be restricted to the
following persons, but not exceeding 200 in total at any one time in the
Riverside Suite and not exceeding 150 in total at any one time in
The Tavern

(a)   in respect of the Riverside S uite:                                                ■■   ■■■   . '   ■’




        1.    Those p e r s o n s whose   applications for membership o f the
              Executive Club have         been previously accepted by                           ■■ '- '■■
              Sheffield Wednesday         Football Clu b P L C , but only upon           •      -'":v
              production of their         current membership cards.

        2.    Directors and employees of Sheffield Wednesday
              Football Cl u b PLC.

        3.    The licensee and/or any person acting on his behalf.

        4.     Not more than two bona fide guests of each such member,
             • Director or employee whose names and addresses shall be
               entered in a guest book by the member. Director or
               employee introducing them, such guest book Co be kept
               on the premises for that purpose and to be available at
               all times for inspection by a uniformed police officer.

        5.    On reserve team matches only, persons attending the
              premises, but subject' to condition 6 on th « Justices'
              licence namely that intoxicating liquor may only be
              supplied to persons taking table m e a l s o n t h e premises
              a m i for connuittfidoi, by 3 o ci'i yeri'aO nS a j an c . i c Hilary to
              that m e a l , and to persons attending private conferences,
              seminars. dinners, dances, wedding receptions or similar
              functions.

(b)   in respect of The Tavern:

        6.   Directors and employees o f Sheffield Wednesday Football
              Club PLC.

        7.    The licensee and/or any person acting on his behalf.

        8.    Persons taking substantial meals therein for consumption
              bu such persons as an ancillary to that meal provided
              the meal has been booked at least 24 hours beforehand.

        9.    Any holder of a Sponsor's ticket (up to a maximum of
              40 persons) whose name and address shall be entered in
              a guest book which is to be kept on the premises for
              that purpose and to be available at all times for
              inspection by uniformed police officer.

       It is a further condition of this            Order in respect of The Tavern,
that the door leading to the South Stand            from the lobby o f the toilets serving
The Tavern shall be used aa an exit only            and shall be manned by not less than
2 club stewards at all times whilst this            Order applies.



                       Dated this 18th day o f Feb^Yaty, 1986




                                                         istice ot the Peace for South Yorkshire
( 59 )    7 .1 2 .8 2 .   From    S.Y.C.C. to Police    re procedure re evacuation from ground.          \
( 60) 1 7 .1 2 .8 2 .     From    Police to S.Y.C.C.    re above message.
(61)     22.12.82.        From    S eY.C.C. to Police   re above.
( 6 2 ) 2if.i2.82.        From    Police To S.Y.C.C.    re permanent camera platform at Spion Kopend.
(63)      5. 1 .8 3 .     Ffcom   Police to S.Y.C.C.    no objection to Fire Officer beinginformed  of en^rgenggr
(64)       7 .2 .8 3 .    From    S.W.F.C. to S.Y.C.C. re erection of electronic score board.
(65)     1 1 . 2 .8 3 .   From    C/Supt Broomhead re letter from Eastwood & Partners re above.
( 66)    11. 2 .8 3 .     From    S.Y.C.C. to Police re proposed meeting at S.W.F.C.
(67)     24. 2 .8 3 .     Note    of meeting $eld at S.V/.F.C. 21.2.83.
( 68)    1 3 . 6 .8 3 .   From    S.W.F.C. to S.Y.C.C. apologising for not forwarding detailed drawings.
(69)        .
         2 0 6 .8 3 .     From    S.Y.C.C. to Police re proposed meeting to be held.
(70)     29. 6 .8 3 .     Note    of meeting held at Fire Station. 2 8 .6 .8 3 .
(71)        .
         12 8 .8 3 .      Note    of meeting held atS.W.F.C. 11.8 .8 3 .
(72)        .
         20 2.84.         From    S.Y.C.C. to Police re proposed meeting to be held.
(73)     29. 3.84.        Note    of meeting held at S.W.F.C. 29.2.84.
(7*0     17. 5.84.        From    G Gardener Architect (S.W.F.C) re extensions to Reception Area & Toilets.
(75)     1 8 . 5.84.      From    S.Y.C.C. to Police re above.
(96)        .
         22 6.84.         From    G Gardener to S.Y.C.C. re above
(77)
(78)        .
           5. 6.84.
           8 6.84.
                          Note
                          From
                          From
                                  of meeting held at Fire Station Division Street. 31.5.8^.
                                  S.Y.C.C. to Police re work started at the fenistone Road end of ground.
                                  C/Supt Wain re proposed meeting at S.W.F.C.
(79)     31. 7.84.
(80J     16.8.84.         Minutes of meeting held at Hillsborough on 9.8.84.
( 8?tf?f ^ l 4 . 8 . 8 4 . Memo to C/S moseley re above.
(8 2 ) 8.11.84.           From S.Y.C.C. to Police re plan for gym.
(83)27.12.84.             From G Gardener Architect re enclosed plans.
(84) 4 .1 .8 5 .          From S.Y.C.C. £0 Police re above plans and proposed meeting.
(8 5 )2 5 .1 .8 5 .       From Eastwood & Partners re floodlight pilons.
(86)24.<|.85.             Minutes of meeting held at Hillsborough on 23.1.85.
(8 7 )1 9 .^.8 5 .        Minutes of meeting held at Niagra on 18.4.85.
(8 8 ) 9.4.85.            From Eastwood & Partners re plans for segregation atLeppings Lane End.
(8 9 )1 2 .4 .8 5 .       From S.Y.C.C. to Police re proosed above meeting.
(90) 2 .5 .8 5 .          From S.Y.C.C. to Eastwood & Partners re the segregation at Leppings Lane.
(91) 8 .5 .8 5 .          From Eastwood & Partners re segregation at Leppings Lane.
(9 2 )2 1 .5 .8 5 .       From Eastwood & Partners re estimates for paint work on South Stand.
(93) 7.6.85.              From C/S moseley to A.C.C. OPS repolicing at Football Matches.
(94) 7 .6 .8 5 .          From A.C.C. OPS re Policing at Football Matches.
(95)12.5.85.              From Eastwood & Partners re steel covering of wooden decking.
(9 6 )2 5 .6 .8 5 .       From S.Y.C.C. to Eastwood & Partners aceepting above proposal.
(9 7 )2 6 .6 .8 5 .       From Eastwood & Partners acknowledging above letter.
(9 8 )2 8 .6 .8 5 .       Memo from P.S. Barker to C/S Moseley.
(99!#*7.85.               From S.Y.C.C. to S.W.F.C. re wooden decking.
(100       ?22.7.85.      From Eastwood & Partners re roofing over Spion Kop.
(1 0 1 )3 0 .7 .8 5 .     Minutes of meeting held at Niagra on 29.7.85.
(5102)2 5 .7 .8 5 .       From Eastwood & Partners to S.Y.C.C.re segregation at Leppings Lane.
(1 0 3 )3 1 .7 .8 5 .     From S.Y.C.C. to Police re summer meeting.
(104) 1 .8 .8 5 .         From Eastwood & Partners to S.Y.C.C.re West Terrace.
(1 0 5 ) 2 .8 2 8 5 .     From Eastwood & Partners to S.Y.C.C.enclosed Plans for West Stand.
(1 0 6 ) 8 .8 .8 5 .      Minutes of meeting held at S.W.F.C. on 7 .8 .8 5 .
(1 0 7 ) 9 .8 .8 5 .      From S.Y.C.C. to S.W.F.C. re trianing of stewards.
(1 0 8 )1 5 .8 .8 5 .     From Supt Stuart to S.W.F.C.copy of new Alcohol Act sent to Coach Operators.
(1 0 9 )2 9 .8 .8 5 .     From Eastwood & Partners to S.Y.C.C. via Police re summer Inspection.
(1 1 0 ) 9 .1 0 .8 5 .    From Magistrates Court to S.W.F.C.Iranscript ot Licensing of S.W.F.C.
(1 1 1 )2 5 .1 0 .8 5 .   From Eastwood & Partners to S.Y.C.C. re Spion Kop.
(1 1 2 ) 1 .1 1 .8 5 .    From S.Y.C.C. to Policere meeting to be held at Niagra reS.W.F.C.
(1 1 3 )1 8 .1 1 .8 5 .   From Supt Stuart to C/supt Meadows re match Boxing Day. Newcastle.
C114)1 8 .1 1 .8 5 .      Minutes of meeting held at Niagra 13.11.8 5 .
(1 1 5 ) 4 .1 2 .8 5 .     From C/Supt Meadows to 1F ’Div re letter from Eastwood & Partners re Improvement.
(1 1 6 )1 6 .1 2 .8 5 .    Ffom ’F ’ Divi to F.K).re letter from Eastwood & Partners .Dated 10.12.85.
 (117)39.12.85             From ’F ’Divi to F.L.O. re letter from S.Y.C.C. Dated 1o.12.o5.
 ( 1 1 8 6 6 .1 .8 6 .     From C/Supt Meadows to 'F' Divi re Plans of KOP.


                                                           O O W W Ho.   nnZ-
         *

                                        SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY.

 (1)         13.10.81. From Ch/Supt Herold re putting in more turstiles,
 (2)           2 . 4.79. Notice of meetinf held at Hillsboro. 2.4.79*
 (3)         12.11„79. Notice of meeting tield at Hillsboro. 12.11.79.
 (Zj.)       25.10.79. From S.Y.C.C. to P lice re the installation of       electrical eqp also memo Fire/ser

  (55        11.12.79.           From

  (6)        19.12.79.           From
 (7)      No Date. Note for file.
 (8)    18.12.79. Note of meeting held at S.W.F.C. 18.12.79.
 (9)    21.12.79. From S,Y.C.C. to Police re issue of Safety 0ertificate.
 (1 0 ) 3. 1 .8 0 . From S,Y.C.C. to Police re previous match agaist SUFC.
 (1 1 ) 4. 1 .8 0 . From
 (1 2 ) 7. 1 . 8 0      From
 (1 3 ) 14. 3 .8 0 . From S.Y.C.C. to Police re Semi-Final and memo from C/Supt Herold,
 (14) 2 6 . 3 .8 0 . From S.Y.C.C. to Police and memo fDom 'F1 Division.
 (15) 31. 3.80. From
 (1 6 ) 3. 4.80. From
 (1 2 ) 1 1 . 4.80. Hotic
 ( W “"^3. 5 .8 0 . From
 (1V > ■'NoDate.        Note for file.
 (2 0 ) 1 8 . 7 .8 0 . From
 (2 1 ) 2 .1 0 o8 0 . Note
 (2 2 ) 7 .1 1 .8 0 . From S.Y.C.C. to S.W.F.C. re things to be done for Safety Certificate.
 (2 3 ) 1 0 . 2 . 8 1   Note for file.
 (24) 1 0 . 2 .8 1 . Note of meeting held at S.W.F.C. 10.2.81.
 (2 5 ) 1 8 . 2 .8 1 . From S
  (2 6 )        1 . 4.81.      Fro.
  (2 7 )        7. 4.81.       Note of meeting held at S.W.F.C. 7.4.81.
  (2 8 )      29. 4.81.        From Eastwood & Partners to S.Y.C.C. re public address system,
  (2 9 )        8 . 6 .8 1 .   Note of meetinf held at S.W.F.C. 8.6.81.
  (30)       3 0 . 6 .8 1 .    From Police to S.W.F.C. confirmation of meeting to be held at H.Q.
 (310           3o7o 810      From S.W.F.Co to Police confirming attendacne of above.
((32)          24.7. 8 1 .    From !
 (33)          1 2 . 7 .8 1 . From
 (34)          1 2 . 8 .8 I0  Note
 (35)          19. 8 .8 1 .   Joint
 (3^.          1 0 . 9 .8 1 . Memo From C/Supt Herold re new radial fences on west terrace,
 (5 W        .14. 9 .8 1 .    Note <of meeting held at Fire Station D.H.Q.^n.c
                                                                            11.9.81.
 (38)         3 0 . 9 ,8 1 .  From S.W.F.C.
                                    ;                                       — :>una.
                                              to S.Y.C.C. enclosed plans of grot
 (39)            8 .1 0 .8 1 .Note i
 (40)         3 1 .1 2 .8 1 . Memo '
 (41)         2 0 . 1 .8 2 .  From iS.Y.C.C. to Eastwood & Partners re alterations.
 (42)         2 6 . 1 .8 2 .  From 'Eastwood S: Partners to S.Y.C.C. re alterations being done,
 (43)            1 . 2 .8 2 . Memo from C/Supt Herold re proposed meeting,
 (44)            8 . 2 .8 2 . Note iof meeting held at S.W.F.C. 4.2.82
 (45)            7. 4.82.     From ;S.Y.C.C. to POlice re proposed meeting.
 (46)           6 . 4.82.     Memo from C/Supt Herold re his attendence at meeting & plan of Police room.
 (47)         2 0 . 4.82.     From :S.Y.C.C. to S.W.F.C. re Police Room and First Aid Room,
 (48)         1 6 . 4.82.     Note of meeting held at Fire Station Division Street. 15.4.82.
 (49)         2 9 . 4 .8 2 .  From :S,Y.C.C. to S.W.F.C.re proposed alteration to South Stand and acesses.
 (50)          1 2 . 5 .8 2 . Note of meeting held at Fire Station Division Street. 10.5 .82.
 (51)          1 7 . 5 .8 2 . From !Eafetwood & Partners re alterations to South Stand & Accesses,
 (52<>           9 . 6 .8 2 . Memo from C/Supt Herold re letters from S.Y.C.C.& Eafctwood             §ian§^°^
 (53)          1 6 . 6 .8 2 . From :Police to all clubs re proposed meeting at Police H.Q.
 (54)          1 1 . 8 .8 2 . Memo from C/Supt Herold re proposed meeting.
 (55)            5 . 8 .8 2 . From S.W.F.C.to S.Y.C.C. stating alteration to turnstiles in Penistone Road wj
                                                                                  have to be delayed.
 (56)         2 7 . 8 .8 2 . Note of meeting held at S.W.F.C. 24.8.82.
 (57)         222.11.82.
                2 .1 1 .8 2 . From Insp
                                    !     Calvert re segregation at Leppings Lane end.
 (58)         1 6 .1 2 .8 2 . Memo from C^Supt Herold re message from S.Y.C.C. & Eatswood & Partners re T.V,
                                                                           Platfor.
                                                               OPS TWS/SM          1
 CH SUPT V E M X m   OPS & TRAFFIC DIVISION
                                                                     OPERATIONS
 CH SUP* MOr.E * DIVISION                                            17 February 1986

                  S06QV 1975 - SHEFFIELD WEDNESDMf FOOTBALL CUUB




    Plaase find attached, for your information
    •mC ivSQEtiMHcy iWGw n o n b®8viioos* ©noi.jpBM»cjnfl9Pv                           .V   -


    County Council in respect of ShsfflAld
    ground iqpcovmnti<
                                                                       ■;■■■•::«
                                                                       •           ,




                                                                             .v.;-              : - w



                      i
r-Q Chief Stiperintendent
    Ops t Traffic Division


    Enc
                                                     „ SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
                                                     ^            W ith the Compliments of

                                                     THE COUNTY SOLICITOR: K M
                                                         r„ -   W o T R M .i    l i ^ s tr r a   S E g 'n t r t v i


                                                                     FOR INFORMATION

                                               iS


                                                                     FOR ACTION                                    ’vV
                                                                                                                  ‘
                                                                                                                  Jaifc

 . ,v   ... ....... -,-.,-?^|aw$'v
sSfelfasailSpias^^

             ,   V                   wfc4&'3                         FOR COMMENT
                                                                                                 - ■ ^ 1-i -£#, (

                                                                                                               i$S«J
                                                                                                              *?«?r




                                                IS
                                                -
                                                     From                       Date         13             % if i
                                                                                 1'. ”. - ('
                                                     Department of Admlftistrat on
                                                •]fi
                                                 :H  County Hall
                                                 jfj Barnsley Tel. Barnsley 286141 Ext          M~~2-T
                                                •l'< CR/ACE/001
                                                                                                    St. Andrews House
E A S T W O O D & PARTNERS                                                                          23 Kingfield Road
              (C o n s u ltin g E n g in e e rs)
                                                                                                    Sheffield S11 9AS
Directors:                                                                                          Tel.: (0742) 583871
W. Eastwood                                                                                         Telex:       547266
                             C.Eng., F.I.C.E., P .P .I.S tru d l.t,^ '
                             F.I.Mech.E., F.G.S., M.Coi4.ftu w l
A. A. Wood                   B.Eng., Ph.D., C.Eng., F.I.aE.,
                             F.I.Stmct.E„ M.I.W.E.S., M.(fcn«.E.
                                                                                                      P rem ier House
R. C. A. Eastwood            B.Sc., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Slruct.E.
                                                                                                      12/13 Hatton Garden
G. Splr                      C.Eng.,               M.I.Mech.E.l
                                                                                                      London EC1N 8AN
Astocletes:                                                                                           Tel.: (01) 242 7430
C.   S. Greaves              B.Enf., C .E nf., M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.

J.   A. Strange               C .E nf., M .I.Struct.E.
                                                                                     Our Ref:       WE/KH/6648
S.   Preston                  B.Enf., C .E nf., M.I.C.E.. M .I.Struct.E.
                                                                                     Your R ef:     DV/JD/583/5
R.   Tandy                    C .E nf., F.I.Struct.E.

Q.   M. Seaman                B.Sc.. C E n f., M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.

J.   M. Wood                  B.Se„ C .E nf., M.I.C.E., M .I.Struet.E.

 Com uhtnt:
 A. G. Burdett               G.M., B.Sc.(Enf .), C.Enf.,
                             F.I.C.S., F.I.Struct.E.




 Department of Administration                                                                       12 February 1986
 South Yorkshire County Council,
 County Hall,
 Barnsley,
 S70 2TN.


 For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan


  Dear Mr. Vaughan,
                                             Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975
                                    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club                             PLC
                  I am very grateful for your letter of 11 February which
  I am sure will be helpful to the Club in obtaining grant aid
  towards the cost of reconstructing the tunnel exit from the Kop.
                  You may have seen from the Press that the Club Board
  has now decided to proceed with the contract to provide the large
  roof over the Kop.                               The extra exits, staircases and turnstiles
  to cater for an extra 5000 people are being incorporated in the
  present scheme but it will be necessary to postpone the provision
  of extra suspended terracing until a later date because of a
  shortfall in the grant which is being obtained.
                  The form of the Kop and the various ancilliary structures
  which are being constructed would be exactly as in the drawings
  in your possession.


                                                                           Yours sincerely




                                        An Unlimited Company, Registered In England - No. 1833144
                                                                                        OPS   TWS/SM
CH SUPT MEADOWS             OPS & TRAFFIC DIVISION
                                                                                               OPERATIONS
CH SUPT MOLE           F DIVISION                                                              21 J a n u a ry 1986


                       SOSGA 1 9 7 5 -        SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB




                                                                            .   .
  I n c o n f lr a a t lo n o f te le p h o n e c o n v e r s a tio n
  l e t t e r d a t e d 16 J a n u a r y 1 9 8 6 i n pee— *
  t h e g r o u n d a t 2 . 0 0 pra o n f 2        nuary 1 9 8 6 .

                                                                 '      :           ; ■ Vv

                                                                                                        V ■ v’:                 •
                                                                                                                  ;:   ‘v.s':
                                                                                                                           ■'

  C h ie f S u p e r in te n d e n t
  O p e r a t io n s t> T r a f f i c D i v i s i o n
                                                                                                                       .   r

  Enc
         South Yorkshire County Council
         County Solicitor:                                               Department of Administration
         D. A. Hainsworth, LL.B.                                         County Hall
                                                                         Barnsley
                                                                         South Yorkshire S70 2TN
                                                                         Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                         (STD 0226) 286141
                                                                         Telex: 547675


         Our Ref:   D V /A A /5 8 3 /5   Your Ref:      OPS/GS           Date: 16 January 1986


         This matter is being dealt with by          D. Vaughan          Ext. No.   422




Dear Sir,                                                                                  •:   .   ...   •- . •



Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic

Confirming the ’phone conversation between our respective offices,
a meeting of the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District) will be
held on Wednesday, 22nd January, 1986, at the Hillsborough
Stadium at 2 p.m.

The purpose of the meeting will be two-fold; firstly to discuss
with Messrs. Eastwood & Partners the further details of development
proposals forwarded with their letter dated 23rd December, 1985,
(sent to you under separate cover) and, secondly, to carry out
the "winter” inspection of the Stadium.

As agreed, no doubt you will arrange to be represented at the
meeting at both Headquarters and Divisional levels, as usual.

                                                     Yours faithfully,




                                                     County Solicitor.




The Chief Constable,
                                                          n
South Yorkshire Police,
Police Headquarters,
Snig Hill,
Sheffield.
S3 8LY                                                      .
                                                           OPS TWS/SM               '"'0 ^
      /T MEADOWS    OPS & TRAFFIC DIVISION
                                                                   OPERATIONS
 <5UPT MOLE    P D IV IS IO N                                      6 January 1986


                   SAFETY OP SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
                   SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB PLC


                                                                                               ::K:

                                                                 \        ■         .■■■-■■ ■V
                                                                ■; ■
                                                                   '.....           V ::
Please find attached for your inform*ion, attention and retention                      ■• .••••:
of a letter dated 23 December 1985 f*«» Bast*ood
Yorkshire County Council, togetherwith tha f
relating to proposed iaproveaentsto the ftop%
9A, 17A and 56.

X understand that a letter is to follow
suggested meeting of the Officer Working Party at                        you will
no doubt be able to comment on the proposals*




Chief Superintendent
Operations & Traffic Division


Enc




                                                                    /)




       1 oocuMEinHo.    m -s       \
                                                                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE BOUNTY COUNCIL
                                                                        W ith the Compliments of

                                                                THE COUNTY SOLICITOR
                                                                To.


                                                                               FOR INFORMATION




                                      Hi                                      FOR ACTION

                           ....4/ 'r^fJiS'fi^Kiwr'f.

                                                                                                                           *    .1
fS :l^ i:A f~ }’^ 9 lit:                                                      d %0 l » v M
'’S m s tm ifi& i^ e                                                          fVil       mUmBH I                 ri ..
SfS®fS%S:lS#SiiliSbfe                                                                                            j
              ifeiJSte
                           W s m s g . ‘S M itS iM m S mSSSM
                                                          v'^                                                              *#
                                                       • V

                                                                                    .H e r . .-pyy.^ i.fw...<»



                                                                Fronr                          Date                  t •
                                                                Departm ent of Administrat on
                                                                County Hall
                                                                Barnsley     Tel. Barnsley 286141 E xt.
                                                                CR/ACE/001
                                                                                                       St. Andrews House
E A S T W O O D & PARTNERS                                                                             23 Kingfield Road
                 (C o n s u ltin g E n g in e e rs )
                                                                                                       Sheffield S11 9AS
Directors:                                                                                             Tel.: (0742) 583871
W. Eastwood                      F.Eng., B.Eng., Ph.D., D.Eng,
                                                                                                       Telex:       547266
                                 C.Eng., F.I.C.E., P.P.I.StruotE.,
                                 F.I.Mach.E., F.Q.S., M.Cons.E.
                                                                                                                      and i t :
A. A. Wood                       B.Eng., Ph.D., C.Eng., F.I.C.E.,
                                 F.I.Struct.E, M.I.W.E.S., M.Cont.E.
                                                                                                         Prem ier House
R. C. A. Eastwood                B.Sc., C.Eng„ M.I.C.E., M.I.Struot.E.
                                                                                                         12/13 Hatton Garden
G. Spir                          C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Mech.E.
                                                                                                         London EC1N 8AM
A a o c h tn :                                                                                           Tel.: (01) 242 7430
C.   8. Greaves                  B.Enf., C .E nf., M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.

J.   A. Strange                  C .E nf., M .I.Struct.E.                            Our Ref:    WE/DFD/6517
S.   Preston                     B.En*., C.En*., M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.

R.   Tandy                       C .E nf., F.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                     Your Ref:   DV/ST/583/5
Q.   M. Seaman                   B.Se., C .E nf., M.I.C.E., M .I.Strutt.E.

J.   M. Wood                     B.Sc„ C .E nf„ M J.C.E., M .W truet.E.

Contulltnt:
A. G. Burdett                    G.M., B.Sc.(Enf.), C .E nf.,                          23 December, 1985
                                 F.I.C.E., F.I.Struct.E.



 Department of Administration,
 South Yorkshire County Council,
 County Hall,
 BARNSLEY,
 South Yorkshire      S70 2TN

  For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan


  Dear Sirs,
                                        Safety of Sport Grounds Act, 1975
                                  Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic
                 Thank you for your letter of 18 December, 1985 enclosing the
   comments of the Building Authority to which I would reply as follows


   Disabled Facilities
   a)   There is no doubt that the Kop is covered by the Building
                  Regulations and that we shall need Building Regulations
                  approval.                 However, there has effectively been no change
                  in the 1985 Regulations.
                  Even if there were a change in Regulations, it is obviously
                  commonsense that facilities for the diabled apply to the
                  ground as a whole and not to one particular building.                                             At
                  the moment there are perfectly adequate facilities under
                  the overhang of the roof of the North stand.                                         There is a
                  level approach.                            The disabled are under the            cover, of the
                  cantilever roof.                              Any facilities at the front of the Kop
                 \frould be less sheltered from the rain, and more prone to
                   disruption by the fans immediately behind.                                      It is not a good
                   place at all for disabled people.


                                           An Unlimited Company, Registered In England - No. 1833144
EASTWOOD f t PARTNERS

b)   We have no intention of entering into further discussion
     regarding a way in which the 50 or any other number of
     places could be provided under the new Kop.    There are
     adequate facilities for the ground as a whole at the
     moment.


c)   The Building Authority clearly has no knowledge whatever
     of the cost of football ground structures.     The extra
     £500,000 is made up of several components.     Firstly,
     there is a steel frame supporting a precast concrete
     deck, some of it at very high level.     Very expensive
     piling is required for the columns of.this steel frame
     because most of the columns are high up on the bank.
     Secondly, the main roof girders have to carry very much
     more load, because of the larger area.     The spans of the
     radial girders are also that much greater so they have
     to be stronger.     The cost per square foot of all the
     covered space is increased.     In addition the framing and
     sheeting at the rear of the stand are on average very
     much higher and, therefore, more expensive.     Thirdly,
     the addition of the extra spectators has resulted in
     the need for complete re-organisation of exit routes with
     considerable extra expense.     New turnstiles are needed and
     additional toilet accommodation.     A re-examination of our
     figures shows the additional cost for the 5,000 extra places
     is about £560,000.     To simply roof over the existing Kop with
     no extension would reduce the cost of the scheme to less than
     a half of that for the enlarged Kop.     I trust we shall have
     no more of this uninformed opinion.

     This extra money is being provided to achieve 5000
     extra spectators.     If we give up 1000 of those spaces to
     provide for say 100 disabled plus 100 helpers then over
      £100,000   of the extra cost of the enlarged Kop has to be set
     against the disabled accommodation.     The Building Authority
     must accept that the extra £580,000 the Club intends to spend
     *»is to cater for those days when the ground is full or nearly full
                                                                        r.   #
      to capacity.
EASTWOOD ft PARTNERS

     With regard to the proposal that a glazed shelter might
     be placed over the disabled accommodation in front of the
     North stand, it was not our intention that any seats within
     the North stand would have an obscured view although a few
     of the spectators might have to look through the glass of
     the canopy to see the near touchline.       There are materials
     available for the glazed   r oo f   which might prove to be safe for

     that purpose.
     I regard it as regrettable that there has been such a
     negative attitude on this particular matter.        Me have not,
      of course, taken the design study any further with regard
      to the possibility of a covering for part of the disabled
      area nearest to the Kop end of the North stand, but would
      reconsider the matter if the Working Party has a change of

      heart.


      Enlarged Kop
           With regard to the request for a barrier to protect
      the ladies toilet, it has perhaps not been realised that
      there is handrailing already in place.        A gap will be
      created for an entrance to the ladies toilet.        The
       final version of the proposed arrangements is shown on
       the attached print of drawing number 6648/53.       The new
       brickwork is shown shaded.


       Roofing the Kop
            Me are really surprised by the suggestion that the
       steel frame of the gable walls and presumably the back of the
       stand should be sheeted over.       It is a common feature of
       every stand structure that I know of in any football ground
       in the country that the sheeting rails and other bracing
       members are exposed on the inner face.        In older structures
       they are generally only at 1.2 m centres but in more modern
       structures they are generally at 1.8 m centres.           Mith the
       1.8 m spacing it would be extremely difficult indeed to
       climb up except adjacent to a column.        However, I know of
       no instance where the sheeting rails of an existing stand
        are regarded as being such a hazard that they should be boxed
        in, with an inner skin as well as an outer skin.          I find
        it very surprising that this matter is being pressed.
                                                                  SHEET   4



EASTWOOD fr PARTNERS

          This correspondence on these matters leads me to believe
     that there would be great advantage if the Club's advisers were
     present for part of each of the meetings of the Officer Working
     Party.   Matters of this kind need to be discussed round the
     table rather than in lengthy correspondence.      We can be of great
     assistance in providing information which may result in fewer
     matters becoming contentious.      It is also inevitable that we
     send you plans which are in some ways preliminary in order
     to give the opportunity to comment at an early stage.      The
     plans are incomplete in some respects and this may lead to
     misunderstanding of what is intended or a lack of appreciation
     of the thinking behind what is proposed.      There is also the
                   J fL
     difficulty^in the light of comments received from the Club, and
      indeed those from the Working Party, quite significant
     changes may take place at a very late stage.       It is desirable
      that any late changes be dealt with in as short a time as
      possible.      In this regard I now enclose six prints of each of
      our drawings numbers 7C, 8A, 9A, 17A and 56.      As the Club
      will be wishing to place an order for the new building not
      later than the end of January, it may be that an oral presentation
      to your Working Part of what is proposed might be beneficial
      all round.


                            Yours faithfully,
                                                                              A



                                                                    19 December 198?


                   Ch Supt Hole           SAPBTY OP SPORTS GROUNDS A
                                          SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY
                   P Division




                                  Please find attached for your
A :   r                           copy of a letter dated 18
                                  South Yorkshire
                                  and



                                                            :   .
                                                                           v>r:

                                                                              "v-

          '
                                  Chief Superintendent
                                  Operations & Traffic Division


                                  Bnc




                  :
                  V S i




          —   M
                                                                                    £ £ £ l

                                South Yorkshire County Council
                               Chief Executive & County Clerk:                                     D epartm ent o f Adm inistration
                               J.C. Harris, M.A., LL.M. (Cantab)                                   County Hall
                                                                                                   Barnsley
                                                                                                   South Yorkshire S70 2TN
                                                                                                   Telephone: Barnsley
                               Deputy County Clerk & Solicitor:                                    (STD 0 2 2 6 ) 286141
                               D. A. Hainsworth, LL.B.                                             Telex: 5476 7 5


                               Our Ref:       Dv / S T / 5 8 3 /5   Your Ref:   W E/K H /6648      Date:   18th D ecem ber, 1985.


                               This matter is being dealt with by               D . Vaughan        Ext. No.   ^22




          Dear Sirs,

          Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975
          Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC

          I thank you for your letter dated 29th November.

          The Building Authority in particular has requested me to bring the following
          points to your attention:-

          D is a b le d F a c i l i t i e s

          a)       The roofing in of the Spion Kop would appear to constitute the erection
                   of a new building. Therefore, the Building Regulations 1985 will apply.
                   Hence, with regard to the Disabled, it will be necessary to have regard
                   for Schedule 2 of the Regulations.  (Schedule 2 reproduces Part T of the
                   1976 Regulations - "Facilities for disabled people", until an appropriate
                   Approved Document is issued).

          b)       The Building Authority would like to see a breakdown of the proposals for
                   accommodating the 50 disabled places quoted. How have the arrangements and
                   calculations for area been carried out? e.g. why the necessity for a runway
                   in front of the chairs"? At Bramall Lane, access is from the end of the
                   terrace. At Hillsborough, the front of the Kop could be modified similary
0 ^                in the view of the Building Authority.

           c)      The Building Authority also question your costing of £500,000 just for the
                   additional terracing.

                   The Building Authority refer to the "loss" of 1000 spectators, and your own
                   words that "we must have regard for the usual gates at the ground not the
                   rare capacity occasions". Under normal circumstances the spectators, whatever
                   the correct number, will merely be displaced in their opinion.

                    The Building Authority consider that costing should also include a balance for
                    possible losses resulting from obscured seats in the North Stand if an adequate
                    protected area/shelter was provided in the suggested position in that Stand.




      r             Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,
                    Consulting Engineers,
                    St. Andrews House,
                    23 Kingfield Road,
                    Sheffield,                                                                        Contd...... /
      L             Sll 9AS.                                                           _J


                                                                                                Seizing H      ou
  i
> ■'                               -   2 -



Enlarged Kop

 The ladies toilet does protrude onto the exit route, as even if the route
 increases in width at this point, the corner of the toilets would Present an
 obstruction to "flow". A barrier should simply direct the flow off the corn®^
 and not in itself become an obstruction.  The barrier could also prevent pressure
 on the toilet wall.

 Roofing the Kop

 Having regard to the words of the police that "they will climb anything , the
 Building Authority feel that the provision of rails at the usual 1.8m vertical
 centres and a projecting width of say 2 0 0 mm, would seem to be unacceptable.

                                              Yours faithfully,




                                              County Solicitor.
                                                                 ''X
                                                           '■X




                                               16 December 198f


                        SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 -
Ch Supt Mole            SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB
P Division




               Please find attached for your inforaation
               copy of a letter dated 10 Iteeeittber 1985
               from Eastwood and Partners to South Yorkshire
               County Council and a drawing nuaher 6648/53.




  ©

               Chief Superintendent
               Operations & Traffic Division
                                        S©UYH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
                                                    With the Compliments of

                                       THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE M
                                       t„           T^fcrr&Jvt-U                       ^t^rnerJ



                                                           FOR INFORMATION



                               ' • I


                                                           FOR ACTION



.■ 4 .       v , .'
                                                           FOR COMMENT
         „    ___     f ^ ‘*
                                                                                                    •B W & :
                    i#s^ssi                                                                    !,jr          -




                                                         C^pY ^q>c .^b.ys) lyifevs..$U>P. . caJ &   h   JU j ^



                                       From                      >ate                \i r n     ,4 t
                                       Department of Admmfstration
                                       BAO>BoiWh%^
                                       Barnsley            Tel. Barnsley86141 Ext,       Wzri
                                       C R /A C E /001
                                                                                              St. Andrews Housa
E A S T W O O D & PARTNERS
                                                                                              23 Kingfield Road
              (Consulting Engineers)
                                                                                              Sheffield S11 9AS
Directors:
                                                                                              Tel.: (0742) 583871
W. Eastwood             F.Eng., B.Eng., Ph.D., DEng..
                        C.Eng , F.I.C.E., P.P.I.Struct.E.,                                    Telex:       547266
                        F.I.Msch.E., F.G.S., M.Cons.E.
                                                                                                              and at:
A. A. Wood              B.Eng., Ph.D., C.Eng., F.I.C.E.,
                        F.I.Struct.E., M.I.W.E.S., M.Cons.E.
R. C. A. Eastwood       B.Sc., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                 36 High Hol born
                                                                                                 London WC1V BAA
G. Splr                 C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Mach.E.
                                                                                                 Tel.: (01) 242 7430
Associates:
C.   8. Greaves         B.Enf., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M .I.Strutt.E.
                                                                                 Our Ref:    WE/JAS/DFD/6648
J.   A. Strange         C .E nf., M .I.Struet.E.
8.    Preston           B.Enf., C .En(.t H.I.C.E., H .I.Struct.E.                Your Ref:   DV/AA/5,
R.   Tandy              C .E nf., F.I.Struet.E.
Q. M. Seaman            B.Se., C .E nf., M.I.C.E., H .I.Struet.E.

J. M. Wood              B.Sc., C .E nf., M.I.C.E., M .I.Struet.E.

Consultant:
A. G. Burdett           G.M ., B .Sc.(Enf), C .Enf.,
                        F.I.C.E., F .U tru ct.E .




  Department of Administration,                                                     10 December,     1985
  South Yorkshire County Council,
  County Hall,
  BARNSLEY,
  South Yorkshire      S70 2TN

  For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan


   Dear M r . Vaughan,

                          Safety at Sports Grounds Act 1975
                   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic.
              Referring to paragraph 2(b) of our letter dated 29 November,                                              1985
   we have pleasure in enclosing six prints of our drawing no. 6648/53
   showing the general arrangement of the proposed exit from the
     lower southern part of the Spion Kop.


                                                   Yours sincerely,
                                                                i_________________________




     En e l .




                                An Unlimited Company, Registered In England - No. 1833144
                                                            OPS TWS/SM
SUPT STUART   OPERATIONS DIVISION
                                                                  OPERATIONS
CH SUPT MEADOWS     OPS & TRAFFIC DIVISION                        18 November 1985


              SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB V
              NEWCASTLE UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB -
              THURSDAY 26 DECEMBER 1985




I refer to the attached reports.

I agree entirely with the v i e w s expressed in the attached rtspcjrl#
and recommend that we should do all possible to have the kick-off
for this fixture rearranged to 1 . 0 0 pm.

I am informed that there will be no trains running on Boxing Day
and supporters will therefore travel by coach or private transport.
This season they have taken between 1 - 3*000 supporters but it is
fair to say there have not been many arrests. Some 2,500 Newcastle
supporters attended the Aston Villa fixture in the Midlands, over
1,000 have travelled to London and over 1,000 to Ipswich.

At the present time, it is estimated that at least 3»000 Newcastle
fans will travel but this could, dependent on league positions etc,
increase to 5,000. It must be borne in mind that Sheffield Wednesday
is the nearest First Division fixture to Newcastle, with the exception
of the Manchester clubs.

The last three visits to Sheffield Wednesday by Newcastle are
as follows: —

Date          Attendance      Away Supporters       Arrests        Ejections

18 12 82       1 6 ,3 1 0              2 ,0 0 0        10                8


19 11 83       41,13**          1 1 /1 2 , 0 0 0       13                7

30     3 85    26,524                  5 ,0 0 0         7                8

Newcastle supporters are renowned for consuming large quantities of
alcohol and the potential for disorder and drunkenness offences is,
of course, extremely high, especially with this fixture being played
on Boxing Day.

 By bringing the kick-off time forward to 1.00 pm, this will obviously
 considerably reduce policing problems, in around and en route to the
 ground.

 There are two remand courts sitting at Sheffield Magistrates
 on 27 December 1 9 8 5 , the next scheduled courts being 30 and 31 December
 1 9 8 5 . These courts will obviously be busy with custody cases and
 are not considered suitable for accepting arrests from this fixture.
 It may be possible to arrange a special court if you so wish.




 Superintendent
                                                                5 November 85


Ch Supt Mole
P Division




               C o a n c il I n r e a p e c t o f a M a t i n g t o t > e         v   .
               a t N i a g a r a C lu b a t 2 . 3 0 p a o a 1 3 H o r a * b e r
               1985,




               Chief Superintendent
               Operations & Traffic Division


               Sue
                      South Yorkshire County Council
                      Chief Executive & County Clerk:                                      Department of Administration
                      J.C. Harris, M.A., LL.M. (Cantab)                                    County Hall
                                                                                           Barnsley
                                                                                           South Yorkshire S70 2TN
                                                                                           Telephone: Barnsley
                      Deputy County Clerk & Solicitor:                                     (STD 0226) 286141
                      D. A. Hainsworth, LL.B.                                              Telex: 547675


                      Our Ref: Dy / j j j / 5 83 / 5   Your Ref:      0PS/ GS              Date:   1st November, 1985.

                      This matter is being dealt with by                                   Ext. No.
                                                                    D. Vaughan                     422




         Dear Sir,

          Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975
^        Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic

O.       I have sent under separate cover, copy of a letter dated 25th October and plans
          received frcm Messrs. Eastwood and Partners relating to proposals to develop the
          Spion Kop and to provide facilities for the disabled at the Hillsborough Stadium.

         As discussed on the 'phone between our respective offices, arrangements have been
         made for the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District) to meet on Wednesday, 13th
         November, 1985, at the Police Sports and Social Club, Niagara, Sheffield, at
         2.30 p.m. to consider the proposals.

         As agreed, no doubt you will arrange to be represented at the meeting at both
         Headquarters and Divisional levels as usual.

                                                       Yours faithfully,




                                                       C h ie f E x e c u t iv e .




     r The    Chief Constable,
                                                                                     I

          South Yorkshire Police,
          Police Headquarters,
          Snig Hill,
          Sheffield,
          S3 8LY
     L                                                                          _I

                                                                                         Serving ijou
                                                              ''A '2   °

                                                       31 October 85


                               SAFETY OP SPORTS GROUNDS ACT
Ch Supt Mole
                               SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOT!
P Division

                                                         W

                       Please find attached copy correspondence
                       dated 25 October 1985 from Eastwood and
                       Partners to South Yorkshire County Council,
                       together with copies of drawings 6648/7, 8,
                       9, 16 and 17.

                       1 understand that a
                       South Yorkshire
                               ctWMiht on the




                                 ^
                       Chief Superintendent
                       Operations I Traffic Division




                                                         |#t##l®
        DOCUMENT Ho.




                                        IMS®
                                                       SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
                                                                  With the Compliments of           ^ \|/ / |

                                                       THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE ^ g j
                                                       To.       "WcrrSlH-L    LlA-lS^O     ^^r^tttnvo


                                                                     ■:PQ*tINFORM ATION


                          ’SE
             &$*?&                       *$&?■<**
             "''^?'*,
                    ’!
                     |rS1'5iM^^'l'
                      ',         ’
                                 t
                                 '
                                 .
                                                                      FOR ACTION
                                     ^    r?■/■
                                              .v,..w                                                      y»:
                                                                                                          :&&•#<


^m w m m m                                                            FOR COMMENT (_           t*




                                                             S                              -2.-V M o •«&£'
                                                       From.                      Date
                                                       Department of Administration
                                                       County Hail                      _
                                                       Barnsley    Tel. Barnsley 286141 Ext .       ua-2.
                                                       CR/ACE/001
                                                                                                    St. Andrews House
E A S T W O O D & PARTN ER S                                                                        23 Kingfield Road
              (Consulting Engineers)
                                                                                                    Sheffield S11 9AS
Directors:
                                                                                                    Tel.: (0742) 583871
W. Eastwood             F.Eng., B.Eng„ Ph.D., D.Eng.,
                                                                                                    Telex:       547266
                        C.Eng., F.I.CE., P.P.I.Struct.E.,
                        F.I.Mech.E., F.G.S., M.Cons.E.                                          v
                                                                                                \
                                                                                                                       and at:
A. A. Wood              B.Eng., Ph.D., C.Eng., F.I.C.E.,
                                                                                                    \
                        F.I.Struct.E., M.I.W.E.S., M.Cons.E.
R. C. A. Eastwood       B.Sc., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.Ev
                                                                                                          36 High Hol bor n
                                                                                                        V London WC1V 6AA
G. Spir                 C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Mech.E.
                                                                                                          Tel.: (01) 242 7436
                                                                              :
Associates:
C.   S. Greaves         B.Eng., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.    'i .'
                                                                   > ; -m *’- tju r    fiefT        WE/JAS/KH/6648
J.   A. Strange         C.Eng., M .I.Struct.E.

8.   Preston            B.Enf., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M .I.Stru«.E.                   Your R e f:

R.   Tandy              C.Eng., F.I.Struct.E.

G.   M. Seaman          B.Sc„ C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.

J.   M. Wood            B.Sc., C.Eng„ M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.

Consultant:
A. G. Burdett           G.M., B.Sc.(Eng.), C.Eng..
                        F.I.C.E., F.I.Struct.E.




  Department of Administration,                                                                         25 October 1985
-’South Yorkshire County Council,
  Coujity Hall,
  Barnsley,
  S70 2TN.


 For the attention of Mr> D. Vaughan


 Dear Mr. Vaughan,
                             Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.
                                           Spion Kop Development
              As design of the roof over Spion Kop and the extension of the
 terracing proceeds we thought that the Working Party should be
  given an early opportunity to comment upon the proposals.                                                       At this
  stage the roof, although it will be an impressive structure, does
  not hold the individual interests of all members of the Working
  Party and we will deal with the roof at a later date.                                                     However, we
 would like to discuss the parameters surrounding provision for the
  disabled, the increased capacity of the Spion Kop and the exit routes
  as we see them.                                         ,
       Enclosed are six prints of our drawings 6648/7, 8, 9, 16 and 17
  showing in outline the areas of terracing for the enlarged Spion
  Kop together with the exits.
       It was initially thought that the disabled could be accommodated
  along the front of Spion Kop between the North stand in front of the
  perimeter fence, which would be set back about two metres.                                                        There
  are disadvantages to this proposal.                                The advertising boards would
  need to be mounted well into the perimeter track level reducing
  its width.           The disabled would be in the 'firing line* of mis-cued
                                 An Unlimited Company, Registered In England — No. 1833144
                                                                    SHEEr




EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




 “s


shots on goal but also it would mean that the emergency exit
gates could possibly be obstructed.    Providing suitable
protection for them from the weather would also be difficult.
The new roof cannot be projected forward sufficiently to offer
the protection and a purpose made, low level cover, could
obscure the vision of spectators behind them.
      There are ways round these difficulties and it is not
 one hundred percent certain that the disabled will not eventually
 be accommodated along the front but the present favoured     proposal
 is to leave them where they are, in front of the North stand, and
 provide them with a cover.    The cover may be constructed using a
 timber frame with clear polycarbonate roof sheets so as not
 to obstruct the vision of people sitting behind them in the stand.
      The number of wheelchairs attending matches varies but it
 probably averages about 33.    As you would expect the number
 increases to say 40 or more for the attractive matches.’     The
 ambulant disabled occupy normal seats in the stands.
      .To serve the disabled whether they are placed in front of
 the North stand or eventually along the front of Spion Kop we
 propose that toilet facilities are provided, possibly beneath
 the terracing adjacent to the ramp leading down the side of the
 North stand gable.   We calculate that the new capacity of Spion
 Kop will be 21,850, without the disabled along the front.       This
 is an increase of 5000 on the present capacity of 16,850.
      The number of exit widths required to evacuate the terrace
 in eight minutes is therefore 46.     The unit widths of the exits
 are shown on the prints.
      The tunnel exit on the north side will be increased in width
 to eight clear units whilst a complete new six unit staircase
  is proposed for the south side.
       We believe that drawing 6648/16 is self explanatory but if
 you wish to have a meeting to discuss the proposals we shall
  be pleased to attend.

                                Yours sincerely,



  c.c. R. Chester
                                                 15 Octtier 1985

             ' r* ;   ,1‘ Z   Z \Z n '2 S   ( CONTROL OF ALCOHOL




P l e a s e f i n d attached, for your information
a copy o f the order made under the above
j n ' r e l a t i o n to Sheffield Wednesday Pootbal:




 Hi   S n in ten d en t •
 pe?atiom; & T-raf r ic -D ivision
 SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
          With the Compliments of

THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE                                   m

t„                                            <>Ert^Tunrvj



                     FOR INFORMATION




                     FOR ACTION                              f




                 FOR COMMENT
                 ^   <      V'
     ■>,vs                         i '    • < ,> •-i .
      .■ ?:i‘-

                        . r^T.                    .

Front                              3ate
Department of Administration
County Hall "
Barnsley             Tel. Barnsley 286141 Ext
CR/ACE/001
              SHEFFIELD                                    M A G IS T R A T E S '                                    COURT
                                                                                       y.itnU
  JOHN RICHMAN, B.A.                                                                                                 CASTLE STREET
           SOLICITOR
                                                                                                                     SHEFFIELD S3 8LU
   CLERK TO THE JUSTICES
                                                                                                                     TELEPHONE No. (0742) 78535
      F. S. T. DEALY.
           BARRISTER
DEPUTY CLERK TO THE JUSTICES


Our Ref.      F S T D /0 2 3 8 6                                                                               9th    O cto b e r,       1985

•“ ““ “                        '
                               ~— —        '
                                           —                                   :                                                                R3869 7


   Dear S ir ,


                        S p o rtin g       E v e n ts      (C o n tro l   o f A lc o h o l       e tc .)    A c t,   1985


                 I     e n c lo s e   by       way   o f    s e rv ic e   one      copy    o f    th e     O r d e r made     tin d er
   th e     above A ct          in    re la tio n          to   th e   S h e ffie ld      W ednesday          F o o tb a ll   C lu b .


                  P le a s e    ac k n o w le d g e        re c e ip t.



                                                            Yours      fa ith fu lly ,




                                                D e p u ty      C le rk   to    th e   J u s tic e s




    C h ie f E x e c u tiv e ,
    C o u nty C o u n c il o f
    B a rn s le y .
                                       S o uth       Y o rk s h ire ,
                                                                                                                                   *
                            SHEFFIELD MAGISTRATES’COURT
                                       (27731



                        Before the Magistrates' Court
             sitting at The Court House, Castle Street, Sheffield


Complaint has been made by Martin Edward Cowell, solicitor for and on
behalf of

GEORGE WILLIAM NICHOLSON

being the licensee of the
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, Hillsborough, Sheffield
being licensed premises within the area of a designed sports ground so
designated under the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol E t c . ) A c t , 1985,
who applies for an order pursuant to section 3(2) of the said Act that the
permitted hours in the said licensed premises or part thereof, during so
much of the period of any designated sporting event as would (apart from the
said section) be included in the permitted hours, shall be included in the
permitted hours.

It is adjudged that the said complaint is true and it is hereby ordered:

(1)   That the permitted hours in the part or parts of the premises
      specified in Section A below shall so far as they would be
      included in the permitted hours apart from section 3 o f the said
      Act include the period or periods specified in Section B below
      and that the admission of persons to the specified premises shall
      be restricted in the ways specified in Section C below.

(2)   There shall be in attendance at the designated sports ground
      throughout the period of any designated sporting event a person

      (a)   who is responsible for securing compliance with section 3
            of the said Act, being the holder of the Justices' licence
            or a person designated by him or, in the case of
            registered club premises a person designated by the club and

      (b)   written notice of whose name and current address has been
            given to the Chief Officer of Police.

(3)   This order shall   (unless sooner revoked) cease to have effect;

      (a)   on the coming into effect of a further order under
            section 3 of the said Act in relation to the said premises,
            or

      (b)   on the expiration of the period of 5 months beginning
            with the day on which it comes into effect.

(4)   This order shall not apply to any part of the premises from which
      designated sporting events may be directly viewed.

(5)   The conditions of the Justices' licence for the said premises shall
      be unaffected by this order except in so far as may be necessary for
      the order to take effect.


Section A : The part or parts of the premises to which this order applies
are as follows:-

        That part known as the Riverside Suite shown on the plan
        deposited with t he Clerk to the Licensing Justices .
Section B :    The period or periods to which this order applies are as
follows:-

       Permitted hours during the period of any designated sporting
       event as defined by section 9(3) and (4) of the Sporting
       Events (Control of Alcohol Etc.) Act, 1985.


Section C : Admission to the part of the premises mentioned in Section A
(during the period mentioned in Section B ) shall be restricted to the
following persons (not exceeding 200 in total at any one time):-

       1.     Those persons whose   applications for membership of the
              Executive Club have   been previously accepted by
              Sheffield Wednesday   Football Club PLC, but only upon
              production of their   current membership cards.

       2.     Directors and employees o f Sheffield Wednesday
              Football Club PLC.

       3.     The licensee and/or any person acting on his behalf.

       4.     Not more than two bona fide guests o f each such member.
              Director or employee whose names and addresses shall be
              entered in a guest book by the member, Director or
              employee introducing them, such guest book to be kept
              on the premises for that purpose and to be available at
              all times for inspection by a uniformed police officer.

       5.     On reserve team matches only, persons attending the
              premises, but subject to condition 6 on the Justices'
              licence namely that intoxicating liquor may only be
              supplied to persons taking table meals on the premises
              and for consumption by such persons as an ancillary to
              that meal, and to persons attending private conferences,
              seminars, dinners, dances, wedding receptions or similar
              functions.




                        Dated this 4th day of October,   1985




                                          Justice of the Peace for South Yorkshire
               South Yorkshire Police
                MINUTE SHEET                    date... 29....Ausust....l985
To

                Subject.       SAPETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
ACC                            SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB,
(Operations)

Mr W Jackson




                Please find attached, for your informal
                copy correspondence regarding Sheffield
                Wednesday Football Club.




                Superintendent
                OPS TWS/SM


                Enc



                           I       G p
        South Yorkshire County Council
        Chief Executive & County Clerk:                              Department of Administration
        J.C. Harris, M.A., LL.M. (Cantab)                            County Hall
                                                                     Barnsley
                                                                     South Yorkshire S 7 0 2TN
                                                                     Telephone: Barnsley
        Deputy County Clerk & Solicitor:                             (STD 0 2 2 6 ) 2 8 6 1 4 1
        D. A. Hainsworth, LL.B.                                      Telex: 5 4 7 6 7 5


        Our Ref: D V /L W /5 8 3 /5   Your Ref:    W E /K H /65 17   Date:      22nd August, 1985.


        This matter is being dealt with by    D . Vaughan            Ext. No.     4 22




Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic

Thank you for your letter dated 12th August in connection with the Note of
the meeting in relation to the inspection of Hillsborough Stadium on
7th August.

Your comments and views are noted and I would confirm that these will be
recorded as you suggest.

In connection with the workmanship of the brick wall reported in section 2A
of the notes of meeting, the Building Authority maintain the view that the
portion of wall inspected did not meet the requirements of accepted work­
manship procedures outlined in regulations. Typical of these are CP121 and
BS5628 Pt. 3 where clause 32.7 is quite specific on the question of filling
of brickwork joints.

Additionally it is felt that a structural wall of this nature, although ^
designed as a cantilever, should be provided with lateral as well as vertical
strength in order to spread any applied local loading. A slight loss of
beneficial self-weight would also be lost by non-filling of vertical joints
and, of course, as mentioned in Codes of Practice, weathering and durability
may be a problem with open joints.

A further point noted by the Building Authority was the non-standard bonding
of brickwork at the stepped portions of the wall due to the manual cutting of
individual brick units.

It is considered that your points raised in relation to construction are
relevant, but this type of problem could be avoided by using proper site
 techniques.

                                              Yours faithfully,




                                                  Chief Executive,

 Dr. W. Eastwood, F.Eng.B.Eng. Ph.D.        ~*
 D.Eng., C.Eng., F.I.C.E., P.P.I. Struct. E.,
 F.I.Mech.E., F.G.S., M.Cons.E.,
 Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,
 Consulting Engineers,
 St. Andrews House,
 23 Kingfield Road,                          —I
  Sheffield,  Sll 9AS
                                                                                              St. Andrews House
E A S T W O O D & P ART NERS                                                                  23 Kingfield Road
              (Consulting Engineers)
                                                                                              Sheffield S11 9AS
Directors:
                                                                                              Tel.: (0742) 583871
W. Eastwood             F.Eng.. B.Eng.. Ph.D., D.Eng.,
                        C.Eng., F.I.C.E., P.P.I.Struct.E.,                                    1’elex:      547266
                        F.I.Mech.E., F.G.S., M.Cons.E.
                                                                                                              and at:
A. A. Wood              B.Eng., Ph.D., C.Eng., F.I.C.E.,
                        F.I.StructE., M.I.W.E.S., M.Cons.E.
                                                                                                 36 High H olborn
R. C. A. Eastwood       B.Sc., C.Eng., M I C E.. M.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                 London WC1V BAA
G. Spir                 C.Eng.. M.I.C.E., M.I.Mech.E.
                                                                                                 Tel.: (01) 242 7436
Associates:
C. 8. Greaves           B.En(„ C .Enf., M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.                               WE/KH/6517
                                                                             Our R ef:
J. A. Strange           C .E nf., M .I.Struct.E.

8. Preston              B.Eng., C Eng* M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.              Your R ef:
R. Tandy                C.En(., F.I.Struct.E.

G. M. Seaman            B.Sc., C E n f., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.

J. M. Wood              B.S&, C .E n(„ M.I.C.E.. M.I.Struct.E.

Consultent:
A. G. Burdett           G.M., B.Sc.(Ent.), C .Enf..
                        F.I.C.E.. F.I.Struct.E.




 The Chief Executive,                                                                           12 August 1985
 South Yorkshire County Council,
 Department of Administration,
 County Hall,
 Barnsley.


  For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan


  Dear Mr. Vaughan,
                                             Safety of Sports Grounds Act
                                     Inspection of Hillsborough Stadium
                                                          7 August,   1985
               Thank you for sending me a copy of your notes, which I
  note had been produced on the same day as the meeting.
               I feel I should comment on the third paragraph of section
  2A which records that the Building Authority representatives
  considered that the standard of workmanship of the brick wall is
  poor.           This statement should be clarified.                                The general
  standard of workmanship of this wall was not questioned, and
  the matter which caused concern to the Authority was that the
  perpends and vertical longitudinal joints of the interior of the
  wall were not being filled from the top                                                 as each course of
  bricks is built.                      You will recall that I said this is normal
  construction procedure.                                  I think my statement should have been
  recorded.
        Indeed I would now go so far as to say that what was
  being advocated by the Building Control Authority is in fact
   undesirable.              If the vertical joints are packed with mortar
   as the bricks are being placed, the mortar will set and even
                                  An Unlimited Company, Registered in England - No. 1833144
EASTWOOD £r PARTNERS




dry out before the next course of bricks is placed.     The
interface of the two lots of mortar will be weak, and it would
fail in tension under overturning forces or in shear due to
bending about a vertical axis.
         If the vertical joints are left partly open until the
next course of bricks is laid, the mortar laid on the bed
is pushed down into the joint as the brick is tapped down to
level.    The amount of mortar pushed down into the joint is
unlikely to fill it completely, but it will be sufficient
to obtain a good key, and without a plane of weakness on the bed
of the brickwork.       Some mortar also extrudes upwards thus
filling the lower part of the vertical joint of the latest
brick to be laid, although the amount forced upwards is likely
to be less than that forced downwards.
         It would be appreciated if my views on this matter could
be reflected in some way, either by an addendum to the Note or
by an addition to the next Note in February 1986.
         One other small point needs clarificaiton.    In the
section headed Spion Kop, the word 'removed' in the fourth line
should perhaps read 'remodelled1.       There will still be an exit
at that point.


                                Yours   sincerely,




 c.c.    R.H. Chester
Dear Sir

SPORTING EVENTS (CONTROL OP ALCOHOL) ACT 1985

Please find enclosed for your information a copy of a letter, together
with an extract from the above mentioned act, that I have forwarded to
coach operators and football supporters clubs.

yours faithfully




Chief Constable


Enc

                      | POCUHEHT Htt-   ~TS3    I
              South Yorkshire County Council
 @            Chief Executive & County Clerk:                           Department of Administration
                                                                                                       ✓

              J.C. Harris, M.A., LL.M. (Cantab)                         County Hall
                                                                        Barnsley
                                                                        South Yorkshire S 7 0 2TN
                                                                        Telephone: Barnsley
              Deputy County Clerk & Solicitor:                          (STD 0 2 2 6 ) 2 8 6 1 4 1
              D. A. Hainsworth, LL.B.                                   Telex: 5 4 7 6 7 5


              Our Ref:   DV/AA/583/5        Your Ref:       RC/CB        Date: 9 August 1985


              This matter is being dealt with by        D. Vaughan       Ext. No. 422



Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

I write to confirm the concluding paragraph of my letter of 13th May, the
discussion which took place with all the South Yorkshire Football League
Clubs at Police Headquarters, Sheffield, and the comments made at the
recent "summer" inspection of your Ground by the Officer Working Party.

Now that the Interim Report of Mr. Justice Popplewell has been published
and advice has been received from the Home Office, the County Council would
draw the following initial measures to your attention

(a)   evacuation procedures should be reviewed in consultation with the
      South Yorkshire Police and the South Yorkshire County Fire Service
      should this not have been done already following previous discussions;

(b)   safety stewards should

      (i)      be trained and instructed to deal with any emergency relating
                to fire or evacuation,
      (ii)     be given written instructions about the action to be taken in
                cases of emergency,
      (iii)    receive practical instruction and training appropriate to
                their responsibility,
      (iv)     not be so employed unless they have been so instructed and
                trained, and
      (v)      be adequate in number, physically and mentally capable of
                performing their duties, effectively deployed, effectively
                supervised and readily identifiable

                NOTE - as previously indicated, the South Yorkshire County Fire
                       Service and the South Yorkshire Police are willing to
                       assist Clubs in these matters and, of course, paragraph 9
                       of your Club’s General Safety Certificate specifically
                       relates to safety stewards,

                                                        /Contd . . .


Mr. R. Chester,                                              “J
Secretary,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic,
Hillsborough,
Sheffield.
S6 1SW                                                                 OOCUMEWTWo.      n<d<+    " I
                                                             J
%



    Mr. R. Chester                             - 2                        9 August 1985


    (c)   adequate first aid and first aid room facilities should be available
          (NOTE - paragraph 8 of your Club's General Safety Certificate requires
          that a suitably equipped First Aid Room must be provided and maintained,
          that such First Aid assistants as the Chief Constable may require - and
          not less than one such assistant for each 2,000 spectators - shall be
          available, a doctor employed or retained by the Club is available to
          attend at the First Aid Room if required and that his whereabouts are
          known to those in the Police Central Control Room, and that the First
          Aid Room is adequately signed and capable of being lit by the
          emergency power supply),

    (d)   where stands made of combustible materials are in use, "no smoking" signs
          should be prominently displayed and that this should be a condition of
          entry to the Ground,

    (e)   along with the emergency services and appropriate authorities, the County
          Council have been requested to consider the practicability and enforcement
          of a no-parking zone around the Ground.


                                              Yours faithfully




                                              Chief Executive




                                                     A
                                           South Yorkshire County Council 0
                                           ...... .....____________________
                                           Chief Executive & County Clerk:
                                                                                                                                           v v \c
                                                                                                    D e partm en t of A d m i n i s t r a t o r
                                           J.C. Harris, M .A., LL.M. (Cantab)                       County Hall
                                                                                                    Barnsley
                                                                                                    South Yorkshire S 7 0 2TN
                                                                                                    Telephone: Barnsley
                                           Deputy County Clerk & Solicitor:                         (STD 0 2 2 6 ) 2 8 6 1 4 1
                                           D.  A. Hainsworth, LL.B.                                 Telex: 5 4 7 6 7 5


                                          Our Ref:                        Y o ur Ref:               Date:
                                          DV/JC/583/5                    OPS/JB                     31st July, 1985.
                                          This m atter is being dealt with by                       Ext. No.

          7 Y ;                           D. Vaughan                                                42Z-<


                     Dear Sir,

                     Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975
                     Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic

                     I write to confirm the arrangements for the "summer"
                     inspection of the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield. This
                     will take place at 10.00 a.m. on Wednesday, 7th August,
                     1985.

                     As agreed, no doubt you will arrange to be represented
                     at the inspection at both Headquarters and Divisional
                     levels as usual.

                                                                                 Yours faithfully,




                                                                                 Chief Executive.
                                                                                ts-*




                                                                                                                                    —        /
                                                                                         * -
                   r The Chief Constable,
                     South Yorkshire Police,
                     Police Headquarters,
                     Snig Hill,
                     SHEFFIELD.      S3 8LY




                                                                 V'v;-


                             '           > V'- ■
                                               ' -
                                                         -
                  ■■•
                    ■ ■■■■■■



                     DOCfflfflllfe
                                     -
                         •     ■ •
          7, ■           =:.77;,.7


■ :   7
                        SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

Note of a Meeting of the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District) held at
the Police Sports* and Social Club, Niagara, Sheffield, on 29th July, 1985

PRESENT:     S. Allcock (South Yorkshire County Fire Service).
             N. Atkinson (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council).
             Ms. J. Barker (South Yorkshire Police).                               •-
             J. Freeman (South Yorkshire Police).                                  i
 -           D. Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council^.
             D. I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council).

1.     Purpose of Meeting             .

The purpose of the meeting was to consider the detailed plans submitted by the
letter dated 25th July from Messrs. Eastwood and Partners of arrangements
for the segregation of visiting spectators at the Leppings Lane End of the
Hillsborough Stadium of the Sheffield^Wednesday Football Club. I t w a s , -
recalled that consideration of outline proposals had taken place by the
Officer Working Party on 18th April, 1985. Whilst formal application had been
made for Building Regulation approval and some of the work had actually
commenced, Messrs. Eastwood and Partners had apologised by 'phone that
submission of the detailed proposals for Safety of Sports Grounds Act
approval had apparently been overlooked due to pressure of work and staff
holidays.  The plans also included details of repairs to certain crush
barriers on the Spion Kop.

2.         Consideration of Proposals

The   14 detailed.'plans submitted were (Bach considered and discussed-individually.

IT WAS AGREED - that, subject to the following points and to the submission of
the necessary detailed calculations to the Building Authority, the proposals
for segregating visiting supporters at the Leppings Lane End of the
Hillsborough Stadium were generally acceptable:-

(a)    Plan No. 6705/6 - for both security access and emergency egress purposes,
a pitch perimeter fence gate to be provided;

(b)    Plan No. 6705/8A - the new handrail by Turnstile 23 to be either
shortened or re-aligned so as to maintain the exit width between the outer
(river) wall and Turnstile 23, and the exit width between Turnstile 16 and
the new handfail not to be less than the width of the roller shutter gate
between Turnstiles 16 and 17;

(c)     Plan No. 6705/9A - the single block thickness of the interal walls
(e.g. the cubicles) is not considered to be substantial enough, and a
substantial stud partition (timber or steel - suitably faced) is felt to
be required;

(d)    Plan No. 6705/10A     - same comments as for plan 9A;

(e)   Plan No. 6705/11A      - no objection in principle, but details of exact
location required;

(f)    Plan No. 6705/12 - no objection in principle, but no barrier height
indicated;

(g)   Plan No. 6705/14A - so long as increased thickness is achieved by steep
slopes as indicated on the plan and not by "stepped" arrangements to give


                           DOCUMENT No.
       foothold, the proposals are satisfactory but the possible need to take
       measures on top of the wall to discourage persons from attempting to climb
       over will have to be borne in mind;

       (h)       Plan No. 6705/16A - in view of experiences last year, the front
       c o m e r of the Spion Kop (by the crush barriers numbered 5, 8 and 22) to
       either have a Pitch Perimeter Fence Gate or radial barrier(s) to overcome
       possible lateral crushing hazard when large crowds are present;

       (i)    Plan. No. 6705/17;- for both security access and emergency-’egress
       purposes, a pitch Perimeter Fence Gate to be provided;

       (j)    Stewarding of New Gates - as mentioned in my letter of 2nd1May, 1985
       it is essential that all the new gates are fully supervised by Stewards,
       who must be fit, able and properly trained.




'
“"Tv




                                           -2 -
                                                                                                                 St. Andrews House
E A S T W O O D & P ARTNERS                                                                                      23 Kingfield Road
               (Consulting Engineers)                                                                            Sheffield S11 9AS
                                                                     ih   r z i 'x ', !
Directors:                                                                      I:.;,;                   !       T§f.: (0742) 583871
W. Eastwood              F.Eng., B.Eng., Ph.D., D.Eng.,
                         C E ng., F.I.C.E., P.P.I.Struct.E..
                                                                                                                 Telex:       547266
                         F.I.M ech.E., F.G.S., M .C onsE .                      ^J        1                                      and at:
                         B .E ng , Ph.D., C.Eng., F.I.C.E,
A. A. Wood                                                                            ppi


                                                                                                             J
                         F.I.Struct.E., M.I.W.E.S., M.Cona
                                                                                                                    38 High Holborn
R. C. A. Eastwood                                                         'ft                 S70 21#
                         B.Sc., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M .I.Stru                                                         London WC1V BAA
G . Spir                 C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Mech.E.                                                              Tel.: (01) 242 7430
Associates:
 C.   S. Greaves         B.Efif., C.En*., M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.                            Our Ref:       WE/CM/ 6 5 1 7
 J.   A. Strange         C .E nf., M.I.Struct.E.
                         B.Enf., C.En*., M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.
                                                                                              Your R ef:
 S.   Preston
 R.   Tandy               C .E nf., F.I.Struet.E.

 G.   M. Seaman           B.Sc., C.En*., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.

 J.   M. Wood             B.Sc.. C.En*., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.

 Consultant:
  A. G. Burdett           G.M ., B.Sc.(En(.), C.Ent „
                          F.I.C.E., F.I.Struct.E.



                                                                                                             12 June, 1985
   The Chief Executive,
   South Yorkshire County Council,
   Department of Administration,
   County Hall,
   Barnsley.


    For the attention of Mr. D. E. Vaughan
                                                                                                             DOCUMENT No
    Dear Sir,
                            Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic

                 Thank you for Mr. Vaughan's note of the informal meeting

      on 6 J u n e .
             The comments of the Fire Services with regard to steel
      covering of the wooden decking are noted.
                  First I sh#<JJclexplain that the 2mm thick sheeting is
      not expected to wear significantly for very many years.                                                               There
      will be some slight loss of metal due to rusting, but corrosion
      rates for steel under cover are now very low in Sheffield due
      to the drop in sulphur in the atmosphere and we do not expect
      serious loss due to rusting for at least 10 years.
                  Our responses to the five comments near the foot of the
      first page are as follows:-
              (i)  It is agreed that the horizontal surfaces of
                              the steel sheets need a treatment to prevent
                               slipping.                    We shall be experimenting with
                               epoxy and carborundum on a small area which the
                               Fire Service will be invited to inspect.                                                    If
                               this is successful, the whole area will be

                                       An Unlimited Company, Registered in England - No. 1833144
                                                                          SHEET



    EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




                  treated before the start of the new season.

           (ii)   The edges of the sheets are being screwed
                  at 75mm centres, and we think this will
                  prevent lifting.

          (iii)   We are looking into the possibility of providing
                  a quarter-round beading to close any small gap
                  at the junction of the rise and the tread.

Q          (iv)   It is not considered appropriate to ventilate
                  beneath the timber decking.   The prevention of
                  the spread of fire is the paramount requirement,
                  and free ventilation under the deck would create
                  a hazard.   There is no significant danger of the
                  timber rotting as there is no source of water to
                  start an attack of either wet rot or dry rot.
                  The average relative humidity of the air under
                  the steps will be about the same as that of the
                  free air (unlike a cellar or beneath a house floor
                  where moisture is available from the ground).         The
                  moisture content of the air beneath the timber will
                  vary less from night to day, and with the weather^
                  than the free air, and will be   at 100%   relative
                  humidity less often.    We shall however be observing
                  whether in strong wind it is possible for light
                  rain to drift in below the cantilever of the roof.
                  The overhang is very   good, but if rain   can enter
                  the floor it will be   necessary to do some opening
                  up from time to time to check that all is well.

                  It is not expected that it will be necessary to
                  check the steel sheeting after every match.      We
                  believe the fixings we are specifying will perform
                  well.   Experience will show how much inspection is
                  necessary, but we think that it will be found that
                  perhaps twice per year will be adequate.
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




      The club has now instructed us to accept a tender for the
installation of the steel sheeting on the deck, and we
anticipate that work will be finished by mid-August.
     With regard to the timber in the roof the Club has
received our report and there is considerable concern at the
extent to which the existing steel trusses are overstressed.
We suspect that the steelwork was originally designed for only
10 lb/sq.ft. snow load, but even under that load one or two
members in each truss would be overstressed.     It is likely that
the present day requirement of the Code of 15 lb/sq.ft. snow load
will be reduced for this part of Sheffield in the next few years,
but not enough to entirely remove overstressing.     The trusses
are old and there has been some loss of metal due to rusting over
the 65 years or so since the stand was built.    Mr. Sheriff has
expressed concern over the fact that some of the trusses lean
quite markedly.   We have pointed out to the Club that the
proposed changes to the roof are such that a Building Regulations
approval is probably required, and the local authority will need
to be somewhat indulgent if it is to grant such an approval.
We have also asked the Club to indemnify us against claims
in the event that the roof should fail in snow or wind.
      In the face of this situation the Club requires a little
more time to consider the matter.   Obviously a decision to spend
a large sum of money on the existing roof, which would still
leave it sub-standard cannot be taken lightly.     There is some
feeling that a completely new roof should be provided so
as to remove all possible sources of criticism on safety
grounds.   This would also fit in better with long term plans.
      Time was already very tight if the timber was to be
replaced this summer.   The full Board will not be able to
consider the situation for some weeks due to holidays.     I
therefore request the Licensing Authority to give the Club
time to come to a decision, with a view to constructing the new
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




roof, or alternatively replacing the timber in the existing
roof, during the period May - August 1986.
      It is anticipated that the decision will be taken within
a matter of weeks.    If a completely new roof is to be installed,
the planning and Building Regulations approvals will be sought
later this year, and tenders obtained sufficiently early for
work to commence in May 1986.
      This will involve the South stand continuing to function
with the timber in the roof remaining for the coming season.
But the position will be considerably improved compared with
the past.    It is obviously very unlikely that the roof could
catch fire once the seated area has been covered with steel
sheets.     The timber in the roof is protected from fireworks
or smoke bombs by the asbestos sheets which overlay the timber.
It does not, of course, have the hazard of bituminous felt
covering as at Bradford.     The Club hopes that a sympathetic
view can be taken on this particular matter for the coming
season.
      Should your working party or its representatives wish to
 see the work on the deck in progress they will be very
welcome to visit at their convenience.


                                  Yours faithfully,
                               FILE NOTE

Informal meeting held at the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield on 5th June 1985

PRESENT:     S. Allcock (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
             B. Mincher (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
             D. Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
             J. Strange (Messrs. Eastwood & Partners)
             D. I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)

1 ._____ Purpose of Meeting.

The purpose of the meeting was to inspect the mock-up of the proposed steel
covering to the wooden decking to  the Upper South Stand seated area, and to
consider the future of the timbered under-roof cladding to the asbestosroof
of the Stand.

2 ._____ Proposed Steel Coveirlng to the Wooden Decking.

To achieve fire resistance of the wooden decking (which sat on   concrete
decking), the Club were considering covering it with steel sheeting.

The Fire Service felt that whilst this would be a short-term answer to fire
resistance, there would be a Slipping hazard if the steel sheets were not
surfaced in some way and a tripping hazard where the sheets were joined and,
as time passed, by the sheets lifting at the edges. In time, the sheets
would also wear, and queried what form of maintenance would be suitable.
The mock-up also had a small gap where the sheets were joined which would
enable small items to pass through and fall into the small void between the
wooden and concrete deckings. Whilst the Building Authority felt that there
were no objections to the proposal from a structural point of view, they
supported the points raised by the Fire Service.  (NOTE - subsequent to the
meeting, Mr. Sheriff 'phoned to say that to avoid deterioration of the
woodwork, it would be necessary to allow some form of ventilation if it were
to be covered by the steelwork, and that he had mentioned this to John
Strange; he would also make the point to Steve Allock).

IT WAS AGREED that, subject to the following points, there was no objection
in principle to the Club's proposal to encase the wooden decking of the
upper South Stand seated area with steel sheeting:-

 (i)     the horizontal areas of the sheets to be sprayed or covered with a
         non-slip substance,

 (ii)    the lateral ends of the sheets to be securely fastened to prevent
         lifting;

 (iii)   the vertical ends of the sheets to have an overlay to prevent articles
         passing through into the small voids between the wooden and concrete
         deckings;

 (iv)      some form of ventilation to be provided to overcome deterioration
           of the encased woodwork;

 (v)       inspection of the steel sheeting to take place after every match and
           maintenance carried out as necessary.




                          DOCUMENT Ho.   “ 7 S 'S
3.     South Stand Roof.

The under-roof area of the asbestos roof of the Stand consisted of wooden
cladding which had been treated with creosote or similar at some time in the
past. The Club had long-term proposals to replace and extend the roof to
cover both the upper and lower seated areas. However, they were actively
considering replacing the roof as existing by metal sheeting.

The Fire Service considered that recent events had illustrated the necessity
of some form of action on timbered roofs, even though originally it had
been accepted.on certification. Encasement of the wooden decking to the
upper seated aJrea would Jreduce the fire risk, but it was considered that
action would still be necessary.

The Building Authority pointed out that the proposal would be acceptable
from a structural point of view and would considerably reduce the loading on
the roof. Other factors, such as Reverse loading in wind conditions, would
also have to be taken into account.

IT WAS AGREED that the Club's proposals to replace the existing roof with
steel sheeting were acceptable in principle.

4.     Time       Scale.

It was     felt   that so long as the    wooden decking was encased     with steel
sheeting   on     the lines agreed by    the start of the season in    mid-August, work
on the     roof   could be on-going with a view to completion shortly after the
start of    the   season.
                                                                                       V.
                                                                                 ' V

                                                                  30 May 1985

                                        SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB
     Cli Supt
    jMoseley

    P Division




                               Sir

                               Please find
                               Eastwood and
                               above *entioned clab, for your information
'




                                 /Lzn
                               PS
                               OPS JB/SM


                               Enc




                                                            . ~ w ' . . ' I ,*
           OOCUMEBT HO.




                                                             gsppiiip




                      ; , ^(
                            SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
                                     With the Compliments of

                            THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE S j J


                                         FOR INFORMATION




                                         FOR ACTION
      Vi
                                                                                ^ ^ *tvHf7
           c it r ^   ■■^
                                                         V      r'?K,. , r ,-• y / £
                                                        stir         -      •      ’■?
                                                       f *” ^          )      ‘“ ‘   Vv '
' f
                                                                <- *‘
                                                                    V‘* %


                                                     w a s h U uv .
                                                     »


                               . A

                            From'                        ►ate         "l-M- ♦ C          ♦%
                            Department of Administration
                            County Hall
                            Barnsley    Tel. Barnsley86141 Ext.            ..if.’iTL''
                            CR/ACE/001
                                                                     i'
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                                                                  St. Andrews House
                                                                                                          Kingfield Road
              (Consulting Engineers)                                       5 y o u . - v r n n coiiifiW
                                                                                        , . . . ..  ^ ^ ffie ld S11 9AS
Directors:                                                                Hepzrlr'
W. Eastwood            F.Enfl., B.Eno. Ph.D., D.Eng.,
                                                                                                     Te     (0742) 583871
                       C.Eng., F.I.C.E., P .P .I.S tructE ,                         .... j           Te ex:        647266
                       F.I.Mach.E., F.G.S., M.Corw.E.
A. A. Wood                                                                 COIJ*
                                                                                                      _
                       B.Eng., Ph.D. C.Enfl, F.I.C.E,                                                                end at:
                       F.I.StructE, M.I.W.E.S., M.Con*.E.                 s o irr.                A     I 38 High Hol born
R. C. A. Eastwood       B.Sc. C.Eng. M.I.C.E, M.I.StrucLE.
G. Spir                 C.Eng., M.I.OE, M.I.Maeh.E.
                                                                                                          London WC1V 6AA
                                                                                                          Tel.: (01) 242 7436
Associates:
C.   S. GnavM           B.Eng., C E fif., M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.
                                                                                      Our R ef:        WE/KH/
J.   A. Strang*         C .E nf., H J jtru a E .

G.   Doughty            C .Enf., F.I.Struct.E.                                        Your Ref:
S.   Preston            B.En(., C .E nf., M.I.C.E., M J.Struet.E.

R.   Tandy              C E n (., F.I.Struct.E.

Consultant:
A. G. Burdett           G.M ., B.Sc.(Enf.), C.Eng.,
                        F.I.C.E., F.I.Struct.E.




 South Yorkshire County Council,                                                                       21 May 1985
 County Hall,
 Barnsley,
 S. Yorks.
 S70 2TN.


 For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan


 Dear Sirs,
                          Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC
                          Painting of Woodwork beneath South Stand
              Following our telephone conversation on Friday, 17 May,
 I have looked into the paint treatment of the timber at
 first floor level beneath the upper tiers of seats.                                                      This is
 the area through which the general public have to pass when
 leaving the stand and making for the main staircases.
              Round about 1980 a number of works took place in the
 refreshment areas and the players dining room under our control.
 All the new woodwork and the existing partitions in this area
 were painted using Nullifire intumescent paint                                                   (attached is
 a photo-copy of the Bill of Quantities).                                               You may possibly
 remember that during progress of the works, Mr. Sheriff
 paid a site visit and found the painters applying paint from
 a can labelled with some other manufacturers name.                                                   However, on
 checking, it was established that the Nullifire had been delivered
  in 5 litre drums and had been poured into smaller cans of another
 manufacturer by the painters.
              Not all the woodwork was treated at that time.                                           However we
  did check that all woodwork in that area was either intumescent

                                 An Unlimited Company, Registered in England - No. 1833144
                                                }


                                                                  SHEET   2,


     EASTWOOD &- PARTNERS




     or of class O from the point of view of flame spread.   So
     far as we know, that is still the position.


                            Yours faithfully,




•k
                                                                               P A I N T I N G & DECORATING

Number                           Item Description                       Unit
                                                                                                                      Amount
                                                                                 Quantity             Rate


           The work in this section is to
           include all preparation and work
           described in the Specification.
           The rates for painting are to
           include for cutting in all edges
           and cleaning existing surfaces.
           Prepare and apply two coats of
                                                                                                ■jx^vv.«tr
           emulsion paint on        "
                                                                                                      * o*4l
           Vertical plaster surfaces.                                   m2          477
           Horizontal soffit plaster sufaces. m2                                      14        l-                    t* ~ 7     So
           Knot, prime, stop and paint one
           undercoat and two alkyd gloss
           coats on woodwork

           Horizontal skirting not exceeding
           300mm.                                                   m               111     <3-                        <St
  4        General surfaces of flush doors                          m2               10     Z        'Z S             22        S o
  5        Door frames not exceeding 300mm                          m                  7                                  S ' 2 5
  6        Glazing beads                                            m                97     c>>55                 S     S       5£
           Prepare and apply two alkyd gloss
           coats on Woodwork

           Horizontal existing moulding
           not exceeding 300mm                                      m                75                           S o
           Prepare and apply
           Nullifire W-D paint in two
           undercoats and one top sealer
  8   II   General surfaces of flush doors                          m2             * 74     'Z .      4-0        nn             6c
  9 M      Door frames not exceeding 300mm                          m              112      0 - 8 5                            X Z ^=>
10         Superficial area of existing
           partitions indicated II to 15
           including all timber panels,                        &
           frames, beads, ledges moulding /                      vTv®’             128-5
           etc. 5*4 ( S r | •+ifyfD -I44U5 4<o +■ 2.0 + S--J j    m2                90 'Z                       234
                $ - 1 $ (_V3 +4*5 -+1*5) 7' >             ■L'1'-3
11         Hardwood lipping round glazing
           to joiners shop in North Stand
           not exceeding 300mm.                                     m            19.5                            iI            lc >
12         Fascia board around cushion stores
           W1 & W2 in West Stand not
           exceeding 300mm.                                         m            11.2



                                       52
                                                         To Collection Page                           53       12 .
                                                                                                                  4 -0
                          SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

                Note of a meeting held at the Hillsborough Stadium,
                         Sheffield, on 23rd January, 1985

PRESENT:   Representing the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic

           R. Chester (Secretary)
           Dr. W. Eastwood (Messrs. Eastwood & Partners)              I

           Representing the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)

           S.    Allcock (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
           N.    Atkinson (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
           R.    Grimshaw (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
           G.    Robins (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
           D.    Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
           G.    Stanley (South Yorkshire Police)
           D.    I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)

1.    Purpose of Meeting

The purpose of the meeting was to carry out the "winter" inspection of the
Stadium in accordance with the policy of twice yearly visits to Football
League Grounds in South Yorkshire.

2.    Ground Inspection

A.    South Stand

The alterations and extensions to the understand area of the Stand (which
had been completed since the "summer" inspection) were shown to the Officer
Working Party.

IT WAS AGREED -

(i)   That any further areas of spalled concrete on the vertical columns at
the rear of the Stand would continue to be monitored and receive attention
by the Club as a matter of maintenance.

(ii) That the unsecured wire to the illuminated "Exit" sign in the Match
Day Sponsors Lounge would receive attention by the Club.

(iii) That the remaining bridge between the Stand and the Club at the rear
of the Stand (now used solely as a means of escape from the Kitchen area)
should be infilled with mesh from a safety point of view to accord strictly
with the appropriate Regulations.

(iv) That the two emergency lights in the Club not operative at the time
of the inspection would receive urgent attention by the Club.

B.    West Stand and Terrace

The Club recalled the practice followed in consultation with the South
Yorkshire Police of separating home and visiting supporters at the rear
of the Stand at certain matches (such as with Liverpool) by erecting
temporary barriers.  This worked well but on all other normal occasions it
was the policy of the Police to aim for exclusive use by visiting supporters
of the West Stand and Terrace. On those occasions when the number of
visiting supporters was small and the weather was inclement, it was
obviously desirable to allow home supporters access to a sheltered area.


           DOCUMENT Mo.     "7 9 0
IT WAS AGREED -

(i)   That the Club would consider at some future date a scheme for
permanent barriers at the rear of the Stand, subject to any proposals
being submitted for prior approval by the Officer Working Party in the
usual way.

(ii) That the cracked brickwork (adjacent to the concrete vertical column
at the rear of the Stand adjacent to the North-West Terrace) should continue
to be monitored.

(iii) That the apparent rusting of the steel columns at the rear of the
Stand should receive appropriate treatment by the Club.

C.    North West Terrace

No comments.

D.    North Stand

IT WAS AGREED that so long as larger, not easily combustible, materials
continued to be stored in the timber screened store area under the Stand,
the area would be regarded as acceptable.

E*    Spion Kop

It was noted that the remedial work to the roof of the tunnel exit from
the Kop had stabilised its condition for the time being (pending the
Club s development proposals proceeding; that the loose coping stores
had been removed from the top of the wall between the Spion Kop and the
South Stand, and that the damaged corrugated metal sheeting between the
Spion Kop and the South Stand had been replaced.

IT WAS AGREED -

(i)   That the condition of the roof of the tunnel exit from the Kop should
continue to be monitored.

(ii) That the Club would carry out the pointing work to the outer perimeter
wall on Penistone Road once the frosts had ceased.

F.   Lighting Pylons

The visual inspection of the lighting pylons (first mentioned at the
inspection on 29th February, 1984) had yet to be carried out by the Club.

IT WAS AGREED that the visual inspection of the lighting pylons would be
carried out by the Club in the near future (weather conditions permitting).

3.____Public Address System

The Club pointed out that an improved public address system had been installed,
and the Police confirmed that reports received indicated that it was noticeably
better than the previous system.
4.    Toilet and Catering Facilities

The Officer Working Party confirmed that plans for the revised catering
facilities at the rear of the West Stand had been received from the Club's
Architect and had been formally approved.

The Club reported that the scheme for the general up-grading of toilet and
catering facilities (particularly in the South Stand) was shortly to be
considered by the Board.

IT WAS AGREED that the Club would submit the proposals for improved toilet
and catering facilities for approval in the usual way, subject, of course,
to the Board's decision whether to proceed with the scheme.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                f-i''




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     “ -■          ■''*>’ ''-     "■ -V v ]


                         gpwfe                                                                                                                    I W i                                                                                           * "-             .   " ^ *3&9?«W ■*? *& *&• ^V,
                                                                                                                                                                                            ■\*«,..'V'.”«....
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4t\/^ ^ „ y y ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ses
                                                                                                                                     ,£-NSsr                                                                                                                                                  \ k --J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    s*'V*
             *£-:♦ *. " -                                                                                                          ^ S v f;
                                -"

J -5 r     >2'V-                      ‘v ^ > .
V. «“       -        r''.■.....-iVW.‘
            ■■'■;*••■■              " *'-- *
-\«"* "~              J' *                                ~   „..t.
                 'r                -                -


                                                                                   '   rr-'l-

                                                                                                                       •*?$>W..J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              &M M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 i .
                                                                                                  SBKSa
                                                          &*&&#&££
                                                                        * - - ‘-T'i^*’ _ *

                                               SC^i                            .       —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ? M ’M


                                                                      $«£& &


                                                                      * ». ’ -r-*-                                    j.--"A -
                                                                                                        L.*       .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ;s'V.3A^^-k-'




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              * ,*y^ ..£       , \ . ^ ‘i'^
                                                                                                                                                                                   A-vtv.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    •"‘Wi.f
                                                                                                    'S&jKfev;vViSps

                                                                                            3Mg                                                                            ! » \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ^ **“**to^9,-«V "*                    ‘1       ‘ *w-*
                                                                                                                                                               ^^IfllSlg^
                                                                                                                                                  ,                                                                                                 WT

                                                                                                                                   -~r '   ’’ -           'V                                                    /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ■S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t /-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      s'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       r1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        :..'■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '   :^s<-^-;:<V'V3i
                                                                                           <• -    *          ‘ r % ” “ "-
                                                                                                                                                                     m m                                                                                                                                 llm S m
                                                                                                    v*''.»<:.e*-
                                                                                                                                                      S r^S km i
                                       '   ’-v-<.   * -
 E A S T W O O D & P ARTNERS                                                            St. Andrews House
              (Consulting Engineers)                                                    23 Kingfield Road
 Directors:
                                                                                        Sheffield S11 9AS
 W. Eastwood            F.E ng, B.Eng., Ph.D ., D.Eng.,
                                                                                        Tel.: (0742) 583871
                        C.Eng., F.I.C.E, P .P .I.S tru c tE ,
                        F.i.M ech.E., F.G.S., M .Cons.E.                                Telex:       547266
 A. A. Wood             B .E ng, Ph.D., C .E ng , F.I.C.E.,
                        F.I.StructE ., M.I.W.E.S., M.Cons.E.                                            and at:

    c« A. Eastwood      B .S c, C.Eng., M .I.C.E, M .I.StruclE .
                                                                                           36 High Holborn
 G. Spir                C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M .I.M ach.E.
                                                                                           London WC1V 6AA
Associates:                                                                                Tel.: (01) 242 7436
C.    S. Greaves       B.En*., C E n f , M.I.C.E., M.I.Strucc.E.
J.   A. Strange        C .Enf., M .I.Struct.E.                             Our Ref:
                                                                                       WE/KH/6517
G.    Doughty          C E n f, FJ.Scriicc.E.
                                                                           Your Ref:
S.    Preston          B .E nf, C E n f , M.I.C.E., M.I.Strucc.E.
R.   Tandy             C E n f.r F.l^cruet.E .

Consultant:
A. G. Burdett          G .M , B.Sc.(Enf .), C .E nf.,
                       F.I.C.E, F.I.Strucc.E.




R. Chester Esq.,                                                                          _
S e c re ta ry ,                                                                       25 J a n u a r y 1985
Sheffield; Wednesday Football Club,
Hillsborough,
Sheffield;
S6 1SW.




Dear Mr. Chester,
                                    Inspection of Floodlight Pilon
        After the visitation by the South Yorkshire Working Party
the weather had cleared up a bit and so I made an inspection
of the pi].on immediately behind the South stand.
                 #                  ^
        I am pleased to, say that the steelwork is generally in a
very good condition bi^t there is localised breakdown of the
paintworkimainly near the joints.                                   I had the tail end of a
film in my- camera and the three pictures which I took showing
typical corrosion patterns are attached.                                  Photograph 1 shows
rusting b<pth above and below a bolted splice and also some
rusting between the splice plates.                                    This is just about the
worst of the damage in the tower and although it looks quite
bad, the actual loss of metal is probably still quite
minimal.
       Photograph 2 is a close-up of another joint where there -'is
similar rusting between the splice plates and the main angles.
This kind of damage occurs because it is virtually impossible
to seal the gaps between the edges of the pieces of steel forming
the splice with paint so that the steelwork inside the joint
is almost unprotected.

                           An Unlimited Company, Registered in England - No 1833144
                                                                    SHttl   2.



EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




     Photograph No. 3 shows some rusting developing on top
 of one of the angles forming diagonal bracing.      Although
 this looks father bad it has to be kept in mind that rust
 expands compared with the original thickness of steel
 from which it has been derived and     I doubt whether rust
 has penetrated more than about half a millimetre.
     The situation is not such that immediate action is required
 except that if you are wishing to maintain the life of
 the towers for the very longest possible period into the
 future, more than a century say, then it is important that
 maintenance be carried     but before the damage has progressed
 too far.       On the other hand, you are only thinking of
 say another 50      years life then I think it likely that it will
 be another three or four years before the amount of deterioration
 makes it imperative that the steelwork be treated to remove
 the localised rusting and then completely repainted.
     Part of the equation is that the cost of painting the
 towers is probably about a quarter of the cost of a new set
 of towers.    Thus, by extending the time between successive
 paint treatments, the money saved will in due course pay for
  some new pilons possibly of & more modern kind.
      Unless the Club has in mind that it wishes to obtain the
  longest possible life from the present pilons,    I suggest that
  there is no need to paint at the present time and that you may
  well find       is three or four more years before work becomes
  essential.j

                                 Yours sincerely,
Photograph 1
Corrosion between joint
plates and also above and
below the joint (this is
worst damage which was
found.




Photograph 2
Another instance of
rusting between joint
plates.
                                                             sheet   4 ^



     EASTWOOD &■ PARTNERS

«
i
i
a
«
«
#
a     Photograph 3

a    A patch of rust on top of a diagonal member, probably
      caused by a localised area of thin paint.

a
§
I

*


II


i
a
                                                                                                      " \

            South Yorkshire County Council
                                                                           Department of Administration
            Chief Executive & County Clerk:
            J. C. Harris, M.A., LLB.(Cantab)                               County Hall
                                                                           Barnsley
                                                                           South Yorkshire S 7 0 2TN
                                                                           Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                           (STD 0 2 2 6 ) 8 61 41
                                                                           Telex: 5 4 7 6 7 5

            Our Ref:                     Your Ref:                         Date:
            DV/JAS/563/5                 OPS/JB                            4th January, 1985
            This matter is being dealt with by                             Ext. No.

            D. Vaughan


Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Ground Act, 1975 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic.

I passed to you under separate cover on 27th December, 1984, copy of                        a
letter and plans which I had received that day (dated 18th December)                        from
Mr. G. Gardner, Chartered Architect,           relating to proposals                        for
revised Refreshment Bar facilities and store at the Rear of the West                        Stand
at the Hillsborough Stadium.

As you will recall, the possibility of such proposals were outlined at the
"Summer" inspection of the Stadium (see paragraph 4 of the Note dated
9th August, 1984).

In view of the scope and nature of the proposals, I do not intend to
convene a formal meeting of the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District),
but should be glad to receive by Monday, 14th January, 1985, any comments
which you may wish to make.

                                                      Yours faithfully,




                                                      Chief Executive




                                 DOCUMENTS.          1 S 2 ,




The Chief Constable,
                                                               n
South Yorkshire Police,
Police Headquarters,
Snig:Hill,
Sheffield.
S3 8LY
                                                               j

                                                                        S jervin g tjo u
G. G A R D N E R , R.i. b.a .                                Tel.
Chartered Architect



                                                             Nr. SHEFFIELD




               December 18th 1984
                                                                             o is n couicii ;
               For the attention of Mr. P. Vaughan.          Department of Acmlmitraaan

                                                                    2 7 0
               J. C. Harris Esq.,                              COUHTf HAU. BARNSLEY,
               Chief Executive & County Clerk,                tm rn Y O E K S y
               South Yorkshire County Council,
               Department of Administration,
               County Hall,
               Barnsley,
               South Yorkshire S70 2TN



                Dear Sir,
                Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic.
                Refreshment Bar and stores.

                I thank you for your letter of ?8tb Fovember, ond
                nov enclose plans of the above for your consideration.

                The plans have been approved un^rr             Regulations,
                pnd Town & Country Flqnning, TJo. B4/4793-




                Yours faithfully,




   I



                                     BBlllBTIto.
                                     ,iM           1^3
                South Yorkshire County Council
                Chief Executive & County Clerk:                              Department of Administration
                J. C. Harris, M.A., LLB.(Cantab)                             County Hall
                                                                             Barnsley
                                                                             South Yorkshire S 7 0 2TN
                                                                             Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                             (STD 0 2 2 6 ) 86141
                                                                             Telex: 5 4 7 6 7 5

                Our Ref: D V /S H /5 8 3 /5   Your Ref: O P S /JB            Date: 8th November, 1984.


                This matter is being dealt with by      D. Vaughan           E x tN o . 422


    Dear Sir,

    Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975
    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd

    I attach copy of a letter dated 1st November and plan from Mr. G. Gardner,
    Chartered Architect, relating to the proposed extension of the Multi-Gym
    and Store at the Hillsborough Stadium.

    In view of the scope and nature of the proposals, I do not intend to
    convene a formal meeting of the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District),
    but should be glad to receive any comments which you may wish to make.

    An additional copy of this letter and enclosure is attached for the use of
    your Divisional Commander.

                                                         Yours faithfully,




                                                         Chief Executive.




                                              DOCUMENT H i     "7^ 4-




r   The Chief Constable,
                                                                    n
    South Yorkshire Police,
    Police Headquarters,
    Snig Hill,
    Sheffield,
    S3   SLY.                                                       j
                    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

Note of a meeting held at the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield, on
9th August, 1984.

PRESENT:   Representing the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic
                                                         *               --------

           R. Chester (Secretary)
           J. Strange (Messrs. Eastwood & Partners)

           Representing the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)

           S. Allcock (South Yorkshire CouMty Fire ServieieX
           N. Atkinson (City of Sheffield Ifetr-opol£taw Mstrict Co«ncil)
           Ms. J. Barker (South Yorkshire Police)::
           C. W. Calvert (South Yorkshire Police)
           R. Grimshaw (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
           D. Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
           D. I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)

  ________ Purpose of Meeting

Thepurpose of the meeting was to carry out the "summer"inspection   of the
Stadium irj accordance with the policy of twice yearlyvisits toFootball
League Grounds in South Yorkshire.

2._____    Ground Inspection

A*         South Stand

The progress of the alterations and extensions to the understand area of the
Stand (ndtified by the letter dated 16th May from Mr. G. Gardner, Chartered
Architect, and commented on by the Officer Working Party through the Chief
Executive's letter dated 31st May) were noted. The Club reported that the
contractors had stated that all except the Banqueting Suite would be finished
by the start of the season.

IT WAS AGREED that the areas of spalled concrete on the vertical columns at the
rear of the Stand required attention.

B.         West Stand and Terrace

IT WAS AGREED   -

(i)       That the cracked brickwork (adjacent to the concrete vertical column
at the rear of the Stand adjacent to the North-We-st Terrace) should continue
to be monitored.

 (ii)     That the damaged angled support brackets to the pitchside security
 fence at the front of the Terrace should be repaired or replaced.

 C.        North West Terrace

 The wire mesh barriers on the inside of the upper access desk had been
 test-loaded (as suggested at the meeting on 29th February, 1984) , and had
 satisfactorily met the Green Guide requirements.



                                             DOCnTlio. ^ 5 .
D.       North Stand

It was noted that a metal water storage tank had been installed adjacent to the
ramped access to the upper stand level.  It was also noted that a store area
had been formed by timber screening under the stand between the outer edge of
the walkaway and the Gymnasium building.

IT WAS AGREED that the County Fire Service would investigate the acceptability
of the timber screened store area and/or the items stored, and inform Hr.
Vaughan of the outcome.

E.        Spion Kop

That part of the perimeter fencing erected at the norther end of the ramp at
the rear of the Kop to prevent aeees& to the roofs of Che new facility (seferre#
to at the meeting on 29th February, 1984) had been up-graded and satisfactorily
tested to the Green Guide requirements.

The brick built screening wall in front of the Male Toilets underneath the
"Stands" Club had been braced by metal supports.

It was noted that the condition of the spalled concrete and corrosion of the
roof of the tunnel exit from the Kop had continued to deteriorate, as had the
dividing wall between the Spion Kop and the South Stand and the outer perimeter
wall at the Penistone Road ead of the Stadium.

IT WAS AGREED   -

(i)       That Mr. Strange should let Mr. Sheriff have proposals in writing
for stabalising the condition of the roof of the tunnel exit from the Kop (in
view of the Clubfs reported intention of proceeding with development proposals
in the comparatively near future), following which Mr. Sheriff will let
Mr. Vaughan have detailed comments.

(ii)      That the removal of loose coping stones and the pointing of the wall
between the Spion Kop and the South Stand (mentioned at the 11th August, 1983
inspection) should be carried out as an urgent maintenance item.

(iii)     That, as it apparently now serves no useful purpose, the damaged
corrugated metal sheeting between the Spion Kop and the South Stand should be
removed.

(iv)      That pointing work should be carried out as a matter of urgent
maintenance to the outer perimeter wall pending agreement between the Building
Authority and Dr. Eastwood as to its stability (during the present close season,
as mentioned at the 29th February, 1984 inspection).

(v)       That the redundant wooden post and loose wire adjoining the: walkaway
at the top of the Spion Kop should be removed.

F.        Lighting Pylons

The visual inspection of the lighting pylons during the present close season
(as mentioned at the 29th February, 1984 inspection) had not yet been carried
out.

IT WAS AGREED that, pending the visual inspection of the lighting pylons,
corrosion of the base of the pylon at the rear of the West Stand and of the
adjoining fence posts and manhole cover, required attention.
G.       Crush Barriers

It was pointed out that the sets of tests carried out in June had completed
the five year test cycle at the Stadium. The cycle would re-commence next
year.

3.________General Safety Certificate

The numerous alterations to the Stadium since the is sue *of the General Safety
Certificate on 21st December, 1979, were recalled.

IT WAS AGREED that up-dated plans were required for incorporation into the
General Safety Certificate in order to indicate the present facilities at the
Stadium.

A. _______ Toilet and Catering Facilities

The Club gave an advance indication of the likely up-grading of toilet and
catering facilities (particularly in the South Stand), subject to the outcome
of an application for grant from the Football Improvement Trust. In the more
immediate future, the caterer in question had expressed a wish to serve food
from the rear of the West Stand through serving hatches instead of from inside.
The area used would remain the same. If structural alterations were required,
the Club would also require building regulation approval from the City Council.
               South Yorkshire County Council
               F.   A . M allett, LL.B., Chief Executive                       County Hall
                                                                               Barnsley
               J.C. Harris, M .A ., LL.B., (Cantab), County Secretary          South Yorkshire S70 2TN
               Departm ent of Administration                                   Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                               (S T D 0226) 86141
                                                                               Telex: 547675


               O ur Ref:                        Your Ref:
               DV/MH/583/5                      EE/CB                          8th June
               This m atter is being dealt w ith by




 Dear Sir, ■                                                                                                -
                                                                                                  'V -

  Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975                   ^    J
                                                                                                . •"
                                                                                                       .   -■ ‘ .


  I understand that the Club has commenced re-development work on the
  Penistone Road side of the ground, involving new turnstiles, toilets
  and refreshment area, etc.

  As you will recall, the proposal was first raised on a temporary basis
  by the Club's letter dated 25th September, 1981. Subsequent correspondence
  and meetings of the Officer Working Party indicated that, whilst the
  temporary proposals could not be supported, the County Council supported
  in principle the need on public order_ and safety grounds for improvement
  of the Penistone Road side of the Stadium.

  However, except for a sketch plan of the temporary proposals forwarded
  with your letter dated 30th September, 1981, the County Council has not
  had formal notification as required by the General Safety Certificate or
  detailed drawings and calculations of the Club's permanent proposals for
  consideration under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act.

  It may well be that, because of the County Council's support in principle
  of the need for improvement of the Penistone Road side of the Stadium,
  that this has been overlooked by the Club or its Consultants.

  Perhaps you would kindly arrange to let me have five copies of the detailed
  drawings and calculations of the work now in hand.

                                                           Yours faithfully,




                                                      L ^ (C )


                                                           Chief Executive




r Mr. E. England,
  Secretary,
  Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic,
  Hillsborough,
  SHEFFIELD,
  S6 1SW.                                                               I
                             SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
                                  With the Compliments of
                             THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE                                        m

                             -r„ W o T & f t u L      U t^iS trvA         S & C T 7Tt>^


                                           FOR INFORMATION
                              <   /




S S lplllIltilllllP S                      FORACTtON

                                                                                                 tfsli
 •
 >*-■
    ’
    ■ ~ -J\* ,,' r
Ii a a ^ p l l S S S s a i                 FOR C O M M E N T



                                                        '^tyr
                                             t*\i>.Q, .. fpCGuE^e^1..............



                             From                        3ate                                  “Sq-
                             Department of Administration
                             County Hall
                             Barnsley    Tel. Barnsley 66141 Ext.                   MK’Z-’g-
                             CR/ACE/001
                                        SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT,                       19 73                                  77
      Note      of    a m e e t i n g o f t h e O f f i c e r W o r k i n g P a r t y ( S i t e I'I I «■ I •■ x            ■   <
                      h e l d a t t h e D i v i s i o n S t r e e t F i r e S t a t i o n , S h e I' I i c M ,
                                                  on 3 1 s t May, 1 9 8 4 .
                                             «•

P Rl ’. SRNT:        S.
                    A llco rk (South Y o rk sh ire County F ire S erv ice )
                     Ms .
                      J. Barker (South Y orkshire Police)*
                     D.
                    S h eriff (City of S h effield M etropolitan D istrict                                       ( <nn        i 1)
                     D.
                    I . Vaughan (South Y o r k s h i r e County C o u n c il)
                     F.
                    W aterhouse (South Y o rk sh ire County F ir e S erv ice )
                                                /
                                               V
1.           Purpose of Meeting* *

T h e p u r p o s e o f t h e m e e t i n g w a s t o c o n s i d e r t h e p l a n s ' o f ' t h e ‘- p r o p o s e d . e x t e n s i o n s
Lo Lite R e c c p L i o n A r e a , t h e E x t e n s i o n a n d T o i l e t s a t t h e R e s t a u r a n t * a n d f l i c
P r o p o s e d C l u b Ro om a t t h e H i l l s b o r o u g h S t a d i u m f o r w a r d e d b y l e t t.<■ i d a L e d l lie
1 6 t h Ma y f r o m M r . C . G a r d n e r , C h a r t e r e d A r c h i t e c t , c>n b e h a 1 f o f t lu* S h e f f i e l d
W e d n e s d a y F o o t b a l l C l u b PLC.

2    .______C o n s i d e r a t i o n   of   Proposals

D i s c u s s i o n o f t h e p r o n o s a l s r e v e a l e d t h a t g e n e r a l 1y t h e r e w e n - ho •.!> j e e l i i t n s         is
p r i n c i p l e 1 to them.       B u i l d i n g R e g u l a t i o n a p p r o v a l had been given               - n. l i i i <■>u . *1
u p o n c e r t a i n f u r t h e r d e t a i l s b e i n g s u b m i t l e d , b u t i t w a s m i d . - r s i o. . . | t l i . i t n o
L i c e n s i n g Act a p p r o v a l had y e t been o b t a i n e d .

T he C o u n t y F i r e S e r v i c e r e p o r t e d t h a t t h e y h a d a l r e a d y h ad d i s c u s s i o n s w i t h tin
A r c h i t e c t a n d p o i n t e d o u t t h e n e c e s s i t y o f e x t r a d o o r w i d t h s , . uni t lie B u i l d i u : ’
A u t h o r i t y r e p o r t e d o n t he ' d i s c u s s i o n s t h e y h a d h a d w i t h r h e : M i n . u m . i !
E n g i n e e r s ( M e s s r s . K ast wood & C o . ) r e g a r d i n g t h e a p p a r e n t si gns oi d i s i i v s n m
th e e x i s t i n g column s u p p o r t s o f th e              Restaurant.

C e r t a in o th e r m a tte rs which co u ld be in c o rp o r a te d                     in    the    adaptal ions            and/or
co n seq u e n t re fu rb is h m e n t were a l s o d i s c u s s e d .

I T WAS AGRFKD t h a t M r . V a u g h a n s h o u l d               reply formally              t o Mr .           :       t o I In-
e f f e c t t h a t no o b j e c t i o n in p r i n c i p l e        is seen to the              proposals,         s u b j c r I. I n : -

(a)         i n v e s t i g a t i o n s b e i n g m a d e i n t o t h e a p p a r e n t d i s t r e s s i n i i».• e x i s t i n g
c o l u m n s u p p o r t s o f t h e R e s t a u r a n t and t h e n e e d f o r s p e c i a l f o u n d a t i o n s in view
o f t h e f i l l e d g r o u n d f a c t o r ( a l r e a d y n o t i f i e d t o t h e S t r u c t u r a l *-;i x i n e e r s by
the B uild in g A u t h o r i t y ) ;

(b)            the need for e x tra               d o o r w id th § (4 n o t      2 unit exit            w idths      a ; readv
n o t i f i e d to Ihc A r c h ite c t            by t h e C o u n t y F i r e    Service);

(c)     t h e r e p l a c e m e n t a n d / o r a d d i t i o n a l f i r e a l a r m s o u n d e r s lie in;,’, n r o v i d e d
under the South Stand (to co v er c e r t a i n "dead" a r e a s - d e t a i l s a v a i l a b l e
from th e County F i r e S e r v i c e ) ;

(d)          the glass being                 protected       (or   safety        glass     to be       provide.!)        in     those*
areas       of high risk ;

(e)          the lin in g         m a t e r i a l s in the      Restaurant         areas        being    to    (Mass       "0"       level
where       not already           to such le v e l;

(f)    the            open a r e a s o f th e b a l l u s t r a d e s to          the    existing        bridge       to       the
Restaurant            b e i n g , s e a l e d by w i r e m e s h , e l c .


                                                                                         DOCUMENT No.
G. G A R D N E R ,       R.I.B .A .                                  Tel.
Chartered Architect




                                                                    Nr. SHEFFIELD




                      June- 14-th 1984




                      J. C. Harris Esq.,
                      Chi ef Executive & County Clerk,                                        : '-v
                                                                                    ' -
                      Department of Administration,                                                ",
                                                                                          -      •
                      County Hall,
                      B a r n s le y ,
                      South Yorkshire S70 2TN


                      Your Ref DV/JD/583/5


                      ■Dear T ,ir ,

                      Sveffield 'Wednesday Football Club Ltd.

                      I thsnk you for your letter of 1st. June referring
                      to t'r<' i ’; v .                  .........

                      r*i'~ it. -tt, you ne^tion in your letter are fceinp




                                                           DOCUMENT No.     ~)°?5
        South Yorkshire County Council
                                                                                    H e a r t m e n t o f A d m in is tra tio n
        C h ie f E x e c u tiv e & C o u n ty C lerk: , - * • *
        J . C . H a rris , M . A . , L L .B .(C a n ta b )!       uJ                Coi n ty Hall
                                                                                    Bar i:isley
                                                                                          tl
                                                                                           h Y o rk shire S 7 0 2 T N
                                                                                  ■ Tel< p h o n e : Barnsley
                                                                                   , (S T > 0 2 2 6 ) 8 6 1 4 1
                                                                                    Telekc: 5 4 7 6 7 5
                                                              I        "
                                                              \                   ! Bat#
        Our R ef:                                Your Rejf:-.
                                                                                   ‘ 18th May, 1984
        DV/ADA/583/5                             OPS/R^
                                                                                   sEx$. |lo,
        T h is m a t t e r is b eing d e a lt w it h b y                           '4 22S        :
            D. Vaughan

                                                                   CO


Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC

X have sent under separate cover copy of a letter dated 16th May and
plans from Mr. G. Gardner, Chartered Architect, Oxspring, relating to
extensions and adaptations to be carried out by the Club at the
Hillsborough Stadium.

Confirming the telephone conversation between our respective offices
today, arrangements have been made for the Officer Working Party
(Sheffield District) to consider the proposals at 2.30 p.m. on Thursday,.
31st May, 1984, in the Conference Room at the Division Street Fire
Station, Sheffield.

As agreed, no doubt you will arrange to be represented at both
Headquarters and Divisional levels as usual.

                                                              Yours faithfully,




                                                              Chief Executive




The Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police,
Police Headquarters,
Snig Hill,
SHEFFIELD.
S3 8LY
                                                                                                                               300
                                                                                         3 0 K ay 1 9 8 4



Ch Supt                     SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB LTD -
                            PROPOSED ALTERATIONS -
Moseley
P Division                  SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1 9 7 5




              Sir

              Please find enclosed copies of the plane of
              extensions and adaptions to be carried out
              by Sheffield Wednesday Football C   *z.
              yonr Information and retention.




   i     ’J
              OPS JB /S M



              Enc




         .j
       ‘S



                                                                                      « S>
                                                                                     ■                            < '      -       ».J| s •
                                                                              (      ‘4 *f -1 •                    *k          .         J

                                               ..              t _*■*   .j.       jft,,. ,'St/iJ...............                _j
                                                                                                                         ftl


                                                                                                                        JSSfeiiSssi


                                                -v         '      .,



                                   •   -            v
                                           .        - ’ c "m? \


                                   V
' SQUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
       With the Compliments of
TH E CHIEF EXEC U TIVE                           m

 To


               r o R lN W M A T I O N




               FOR ACTION



                                                         \
               FOR C O M M E N T            To
                                                         '£ r


              O hP-f " & C ^ w f> i^v\ e il^ o   aVUeJUMt



 From                        Date    \*1 ' £         '
 Department of Administration
 County Halt
 Barnsley    Tet. Barnsley 86141 Ext
 CR/ACE/001
G. G A R D N E R ,    r i b a.                                 Tel.
Chartered Architect



                                                               Nr. SHEFF




            May 16th 1984



            Kr. David Vaughan,
             S o u t h Yorkshire County Council,
             County Hall,
             Barnsley,
             South Yorkshire,
             S7C 2TN              .1


             Bear Sir,

             Sheffield Wednesday Football Club ltd.
             fcxtensions to Reception Ares,
             r'.ytension & toilets to restaurant,
             Proposed Club Room etc.       (Safety of Sports          Ground/.ct 1975)

             I enclose six copies of the plans of the above
             for your information and approval, and I vould bp
             pleased to provide any further information should
             you so require.
             In viev? of the short close season, .the Contractors,
             Gleeson (Sheffield) Ltd., will be'commencing on the
             site next week.




             Yours faithfully
                                                                                                  17th May, 1984
                DV/ADA/583/5
                                  '

                                  '                                                               422
                D. Vaufehan
                                                                            ■^ V   .V-                  ....
                                                                                                               :
                                                                                                               ' - '   - ■
                                                                                                                             :   "      ••
                                                                                                                                              :■


                                                                                                        ::';vvV-;: Vvv^vV' - v v       n
                                                                                                   ' ■ , \                     ■■ ■ -v
                              v.. iU: ~'1
Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Gi __
Sheffield Wednesday Footb*

I am in receipt of your litter;
                              ■Mlyiaterdaty** date and copies of the
plans of extensions and adaptati6§»to be carried out by the Club at the
Hillsborough Stadiua.                                                V'.


Whilst Hr. D. Vaughan of ^|i«pH^l.'ar»axiia for the Officer Working *
Party (Sheffield District) to cottaider the plans as soon as possibli% I
would point out that'          S         Schedule 2 of the General Sat*t$
Certificate granted to                ^ . December, 1979 requires the '
County Council to be given^t laait 21 days written notice before any
alterations or extensions are cariefied out.
                                      [   •' '               '-f/                   , '.                                     ' •• :
                                          .                                 ..Yours faithfully,



                                                              ,>J;. ■
                                                     i        ’■r*
                                                V-




                                                                            Chief Executive
                                            ■            ■    'fr           ■■




                                                                                                                                 ■' /        v- '   '


                                                                                                                                 ■■■■
                                                                                                                                              '■ ::■

Chartered Architect, ;;
                                                                        I

S H E F F IE L D .
                     SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975   .

             Note of a meeting held at the Hillsborough Stadium ,
                      Sheffield, on 29th February, 1984

PRESENT:   Representing the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Pic

           Mr. R. Chester (Secretary)
           Dr. W. Eastwood (Eastwood & Partners)

           Representing the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)

           S. Allcock (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
           N. Atkinson (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
           Ms. J. Barker (South Yorkshire Police)
           C . W. Calvert (South Yorkshire Police)
           M. Johnson (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
           D. Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
           D. I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)

1 •___ Purpose of Meeting

The purpose of the meeting was to carry out the "winter" inspection of the
Ground in accordance with the policy of twice yearly visits to Football League
grounds in South Yorkshire by the appropriate Officer Working Party.

The Club reported that the majority of the items listed as normal maintenance
items following the "summer" inspection had yet ’to be carried out. This wa^s
due to a combination of the change in Club Secretary and certain development
proposals (outlined on a confidential basis) which the Club had in mind.
However, those which the Club's staff could undertake would be commenced shortly
and tenders had been invited and received for the urgent remaining larger
items (to be carried out commencing in May). The exception was the roof of the
tunnel exit from the Spion K.op (towards the North Stand end) in view of its
possible inclusion in the development proposals outlined.

2.____ Ground Inspection

A.     West Standand Terrace

It was noted thatthe former ARP building adjacent to the boundary wall was
in the process of demolition and the site cleared and levelled. This would
have the additional benefit of improving the access/egress.

B.     North West Terrace

It was noted thatwhilst generally the sealing of the cracks beneath the Terrace
to prevent seepage of water had been successful, there was still a slight
seepage from one of the repairs.

The possible need for protection of the wire mesh on the inside of the upper
access deck was also discussed.

IT WAS AGREED -

(i)    That the Club would continue to monitor the slight seepage of water
from the repaired ci*acks under the Terrace.

(ii)   That the possible need for lateral bracing to the frame of the*wire
mesh barriers on the inside of the upper access deck be investigated by a
test loading during the forthcoming close season.    r-— —— -— -—
                                                     ) oocmiHEMTMo. "gro 7
C.     Spion Kop

As previously indicated, the Club confirmed that the remedial work to the
existing access ramp and barrier rails required as the result of the
construction of the new refreshment and toilet* together with the erection
of barriers to prevent access to the roofs of the new facilities, had been
carried out.

The present condition of the spalled concrete and corrosion of the roof of
the tunnel exit from the Spion Kop was inspected.

The stability of the perimeter wall at the Penistone Road end of the ground
was also discussed.

IT WAS AGREED -

(i)   That the Building Authority and Mr, J. Strangeof Messrs.Eastwood &
Partners should discuss and inspect that part of the perimeter fencing
erected at the northern end of the ramp to prevent access to the roofs of the
new facilities.

(ii)   That the Club would undertake continuous maintenance work on the roof
of the tunnel exit, pending a decision on any development proposals.

(iii) That the Building Authority and Dr. W. Eastwood should discuss and inspect
the stability of the perimeter wall at the Penistone Road end during the
forthcoming close season.
                                                                               i'

D.    Lighting Pylons

The Club undertook to carry out a visual inspection of the lighting pylons during
the forthcoming close season and to make more detailed inspections should this
prove to be necessary after the visual inspection.

E*    Emerge-icy Lighting, Fire Alarm and Public Address Systems Test

IT WAS AGREED - That the County Fire Service in conjunction with the South
Yorkshire Police and the Club's staff, would carry out a test of these systems
at the evening match against Fulham to be held on 7th March.




                                                                                    ■'W
                     SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

             Note of a meeting held at the Hillsborough Stadiun,
                      Sheffield, on 29th February, 1984

PRESENT:   Representing the. Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Pic

           Mr. R. Chester (Secretary)
           Dr. W. Eastwood (Eastwood & Partners)

           Representing the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)
                                   .
           S. Allcock (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
           N. Atkinson (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
           Ms. J. Barker (South Yorkshire Police)
           C. W. Calvert (South Yorkshire Police)
           M. Johnson (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
           D. Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
           D. 1. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)
                                                                        .    . .   ..



       Purpose of Meeting                                                                  : ■■■'" *


The purpose of the meeting was to carry out the "winter" inspection of the
Ground in accordance with the policy of twice yearly visits to Football League
grounds in South Yorkshire by the appropriate Officer Working Party.

The Club reported that the majority of the items listed as normal maintenance
items following the "summer" inspection had yet -to be carried out. This wa,s
due to a combination of the change in Club Secretary and certain development
proposals (outlined on a confidential basis) which the Club had in mind.
However, those which the Club's staff could undertake would be commenced shortly
and tenders had been invited and received for the urgent remaining larger
items (to be carried out commencing in May). The exception was the roof of the
tunnel exit from the Spion Kop (towards the North Stand end) in view of its
possible inclusion in the development proposals outlined.

2.     Ground Inspection

A.     West Stand and Terrace

It was noted that the former ARP building adjacent to theboundary wall was
in the process of demolition and the site clearedand levelled. This would
have the additional benefit of improving the access/egress.

B.     North West Terrace

It was noted that whilst generallythesealing    of thecracksbeneath the Terrace
to prevent seepage of water had been successful, there was still a slight
seepage from one of the repairs.

The possible need for protection of the wiremesh   onthe inside    of the upper
access deck was also discussed.

IT WAS AGREED -

(i)    That theClubwould continue to monitor the slight seepage      of water
from the repaired cracks under the Terrace.

(ii)   That the possible need for lateral bracing to the frame of the‘wire
mesh barriers on the inside of the upper access deckbe investigated by a

                                 ■ '           ^          '■' ''                        ■ "■■■ ",
test loading during the forthcoming close season.           -
C.     Spion Kop

As previously indicated, the Club confirmed that the remedial work to the
existing access ramp and barrier rails required as the result of the
construction of the new refreshment and toilet* together with the erection
of barriers to prevent access to the roofs of the new facilities, had been
carried out.

The present condition of the spalled concrete and corrosion of the roof of
the tunnel exit from the Spion Kop was inspected.

The stability of the perimeter wall at the Penistone Road end of the ground
was also discussed.
                                                       ■     .V
IT WAS AGREED -

(i)    That the Building Authority and Mr.‘ J. Strange of Messrs, Eastwood &
Partners should discuss and inspect; that part of the perimeter fencing
erected at the northern end of the ramp to prevent access to the roofs of the
new facilities.

(ii)   That the Club would undertake continuous maintenance work on the roof
of the tunnel exit, pending a decision on any development proposals.

(iii) That the Building Authority and Dr. W. Eastwood should discuss and inspect
the stability of the perimeter wall at the Penistone Road end during the
forthcoming close season.
                                                                             *‘
D.    Lighting Pylons

The Club undertook to carry out a visual inspection of the lighting pylons during
the forthcoming close season and to make more detailed inspections should this
prove to be necessary after the visual inspection.

E.    Emergency Lighting, Fire Alarm and Public Address Systems Test

IT WAS AGREED - That the County Fire Service in conjunction with the South
Yorkshire Police and the Club's staff, would carry out a test of these systems
at the evening match against Fulham to be held on 7th March.
                                                     5 March 198%

Ch Supt                      w m m pahn m sm m
Moseley                      sm sB O w a m w om m L L gedokd - 2 5 2 ^
F Division



             S ir

             Pleaa« find attached co®gr       of tfe* Working
             Party HwfcSag      at Hillabarw#i Football - :
                                                          '
             Ground <n 29 Fotomry 198%. A eojtf has b e «
             r s t & is a d S t




             !®l
             OS'S dJS/SR
                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
                     v-^   With the Compliments of
                     THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
                     To.


                                 FOR INFORMATION




                                 F OR ACTION
           mm
mm


                                 FOR C O M M E N T

 .
     r~l <.■'f
      V iS-      •

                                           '4er<     ^   KAJ     0V1A




                     Fronr ________             fete    > ^        W
                     Department of Admintetration
                     County Hall
                     Barnsley    Tel. Barnsley86141 Ext   \J r ‘2-~2-




                                                               A^&ksm.:
                                                                           p    '1'


                                                             20 February 84

                     ^                 SHEFFIELD \£EDHESMX FOOTBALL CUJB
                     Ch Supt
                     Moseley




    - ' V > '"’Hr-




                               OPS JB/SM


                               a te




                                                              --- ------ ----




                                                                M B W i




’-X'S
                   South Yorkshire County Council
    <>
    8
                   F. A . M allett, LL.B., Chief Executive                              County Hall
                                                                                        Barnsley
                   J.C. Harris, M .A., LL.B., (Cantab), County Secretary                South Yorkshire S70 2TN
                   Departm ent of Administration                                        Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                                        (S T D 0226) 86141
                                                                                        Telex: 547675
                                                                                                           7
                   Our Ref; DV/AA/583/4 & 5 Your Ref:             OPS/JB                D ate: 14 February 1984


                   This matter is being dealt w ith by       D . Vaughan                Ext. No.   4 22




        Dear Sir,

        Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

        Confirming the 'phone conversation which Mr.                           D. Vaughan of my
        staff had with your Football Liaison Section                           today, arrangements
        have been made for the Officer Working Party                           (Sheffield District)
        to carry out the "winter" inspections of the                           two Sheffield
        Football Clubs as follows

                        2.30 pm Monday,                      Bramall Lane Ground of the
                        27th February 1984                   Sheffield United Football
                                                             Club Ltd

                        2.30 pm Wednesday,                   Hillsborough Stadium of the
                        29th February 1984                   Sheffield Wednesday Football
                                                             Club pic

        As agreed, no doubt you will arrange to be represented at both Head­
        quarters and Divisional levels, as usual.


                                                              Yours faithfully,




                                                              Chief Executive.




                                                                                                               /l______




r       The Chief Constable,                                               1
                                                                                                           "      i
        South Yorkshire Police,
        Police Headquarters,
        Snig Hill,
        Sheffield.
        S3   8LY
u                                                                     _1
                                                               15 August 1983

                                   OFFIOKl V/OBKIISG '9kSi:i MtiBxIfiG    KSLD A'f
        i Ch Supt
        ! Moseley                  S1E2EFIEID \JEDKESDAY FOOTBALL GROUND

         F Division


                      Please                                             id le
.--xv                 O ffic e r
                                                                  on
                      11 August 1983 fo r your
                      re te n tio n .                                                    --rv ■

                                                                                    ..    ■:




                                                                                 ■■ 7:         "
                                         ■or
                      OPS J3/SM


                      Enc




                                                               w am aam m ^




              ,




                                                           H IH
                        SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUND ACT, 1975

           Note of a meeting held at the Hillsborough Stadium,
                  Shieff'ield on 11th August, 1983

PRESENT:   Representing the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC

           Dr. W. Eastwood (Eastwood & Partners)
           E. England (Secretary)

           Representing the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)

           M s . J. Barker (South Yorkshire Police)
           C. W. Calvert (South Yorkshire Police)                    •
           J. Miles (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
           A. Roberts (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
           D. Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
           D. I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)

1 ._____ Purpose of Meeting

The purpose of the meeting was primarily to carry out the ''summer"
inspection of the Ground in accordance with the policy of twice yearly
visits to Football League grounds in South Yorkshire by the appropriate
Officer Working Party.

In particular, the Officer Working Party wished to see the position with
regard to the effect of the carrying out of the improvements at the
Penistone Road end of the Ground (considered by the Officer Working Party
on 28th June, 1983 and agreed subject to certain reservations contained in
a letter to the Club dated 29th June). Reports being received from the
Building Authority had indicated extensive movement of existing retained ear
material, apparently of sufficient magnitude to impair the stability of the
adjacent access ramp and associated perimeter walls and barrier rails.

2 ._____ Ground Inspection

A.      Electronic Score and Message Board

It was noted that, since the agreement indicated at the "winter" inspection
of the Stadium on 21st February, 1983, the electronic score and message
board had been erected between the South and West Stands. Evidently, it
was proving to be a most welcome feature.

B.     West Stand and Terrace

The Club's intentions with regard to the brick built former A.R.P. building
at the rear of the Stand and adjacent to the boundary wall (now used as a
store) were again discussed in view of its condition.

The condition of the crack in the brickwork at the rear corner of the Stand
(nearest to the North West Terrace) raised at the last meeting was inspected

Dr. Eastwood reported that the crush barriers on the Terrace had been tested
completing the first cycle of crush barrier testing at the Stadium. One had
failed and been replaced.
IT WAS AGREED -
(i)     That, if the Club intend'  to continue to use the former A.R.P. building
adjacent to the boundary wall, the lintel over the door would require attention
in particular, as would the general maintenance of the building.
(ii)    That the condition of the crack in the non load bearing brickwork at
the rear corner of the Stand (nearest to the North West Terrace) should continue
to be monitored.
(iii)   That the Club would give attention during normal maintenance to the
loose concrete rendering apparent in places.
C.      North West Terrace
As the Terrace and the West Stand were separate structures, the Club were of
the opinion that there would continue to be movement between the structures
caused by changes in weather conditions, thus making it difficult if not
impossible to achieve a seal sufficient to permanently prevent the seepage of
water between the two.
IT WAS AGREED that this was not a matter of safety and that the Club would
continue to monitor the position.
D.      North Stand
The Club reported that the further attention to the crack at the expansion
joint adjacent to Stand entrance "R" requested at the last meeting was in hand
as a matter of maintenance.
E.      Spion Kop
As requested at the last meeting, the Club had investigated the spalled concrete
and corrosion of the roof of the tunnel exit from the Spion Kop (towards the
North Stand end). Action would be taken shortly to cut off the front (and
worst affected) portion of the roof, which would also have the effect of
increasing the headroom.
Whilst certain remedial work had already been undertaken by the contractor to
stabalise the banking at the rear of the Spion Kop following digging out
to provide new refreshment and toilet facilities, the Officer Working Party
were of the firm opinion that further work was essential. Measurements had
shown that in places there had been as much as four to five inches of
movement. Simple visual inspection showed that there was a lack of the
former retained earth material underneath the access ramp in places, and
consequently there had also to be doubts about the stability of the foundations
of the existing barrier rails. The Club would have to look to the contractor
(or his insurers) to meet the cost of the remedial work to the existing access
ramp and barrier rails.
As pointed out in the letter to the Club dated 29th June, measures would
require to be taken to prevent the public gaining access to the roofs of the
new facilities (as they were not load bearing). Barriers would have to be
provided or other measures taken to enable the new facilities to withstand
crow«l pressures where these were capable of being generated (as also pointed
out in the letter of 29th June).
IT WAS AGREED:-
(i)     That the Club's proposals for dealing with the spalled concrete and
corrosion of the roof of the tunnel exit from the Spion Kop be supported in
principle.
(1 1 )  That as soon as possible, and certainly prior to the first home
match on 3rd September, the condition of the existing ramp and barrier
rails must be stabilised (possibly by drilling holes at intervals and
inserting grouting under pressure) and the resultant success or otherwise
of the measures tested by test loading the barrier rails (or a representative
sample) to the Green Guide requirements.

(iii)   Also prior to the first home match on 3rd September, measures must
be taken (a) to prevent access by the public to the roofs of the new
facilities and (b) to enable the new facilities to withstand crowd pressures
where these are capable of being generated.

(iv)    That the new buttresses to the existing boundary wall in connection
with the new turnstiles and exit gate must be sited so as not to reduce the
support to the wall, and that the need for pointing of the wall externally
in places must also not be overlooked.

F.     "Stands" Club

It was noted that there was spalling of the concrete surrounds to the steel
beams underneath the "Stands" club. It was understood that the premises
were leased on a full repairing basis to Mansfield Breweries Ltd.

It was also noted that there was a certain amount of deflection in the brick
built screening wall in front of the Male toilets underneath the Club if
pressure was applied to the top of the wall.

IT WAS AGREED:-

(i)     That the Club would request Mansfield Breweries Ltd. to give
attention to the spalling of the concrete surrounds to the steel beams
under the "Stands" Club in accordance with the terms of their lease.

(ii)    That the brick built screening wall in front of the Male toilets
should be test loaded to the Green Guide requirements.

G.     South Stand

It was noted that some of the loose coping stones on the top of the
dividing wall between the South Stand and the Spion Kop had been removed,’
and that a certain amount of pointing of the wall had been undertaken.

It was also noted that there was severe corrosion at the bottom of both
steel  supports to the sides of the concertina-type exit gate from the
Stand   (nearest to the Spion Kop).

IT WAS AGREED:-                                          '

(i)   That the Club   would remove the remaining coping stones and arrange
for the remainderof the pointing to the upper level of the wall to be
undertaken as a matter of maintenance.

(ii)    That the Club would shortly consider a scheme to beprepared by
Messrs. Eastwood & Partners forreplacement of bothsteelsupports      to
the exit gate from the Stand (nearest to the Spion Kop).
H.      Ground Fitness Certificate

Dr. Eastwood pointed out that many of the matters discussed at the meeting
were contained in his Annual Ground Fitness Certificate. However, he had
delayed submitting this to the County Council, las required by the General
Safety Certificate, in view of the situation on the Penistone Road end of
the Stadium.

IT WAS AGREED that Dr. Eastwood would submit his Ground Fitness Certificate
to the County Council, excluding the Penistone Road end of the Stadium at
the present time. -
                                                                                            /'*’ ^
                                                                                       SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
                                                                                        •»  With the Compliments of
                                                                                      THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
                                                                                      To.


                                                                                        v     /
                                                                                                     FOR INFORMATION

                                                                        v" ‘ O-** A
                                                                 ”V "YjVV         ^

                                         f.SiAf?...
                                           vu*f                flfltlSfe
                                         *. ’ ^
                                                                           S8SS3S                    FOR ACTION
             *S ,T» - *   a a ii4 iiis ^ » i
                                   V,
                            Wrj':^ iwra?                                                                                          30 JilsM
                                                      aaiiil
                                                                                                     FOR C O M M E N T
i§ j§ ^ |5
                                  n»&m        .:-i*>5
                                                    «?




                                                                                                     (&^>l    7^0- f   \s > vvi       A. iso a J ta d U *

                                                                                      From                       Date              2 ° ( • fc • €."5

                                                                                      Department of Administration
                                                                                      County Hall
                                                                                      Barnsley    Tel. Barnsley86141 Ext             Mr
                                                                                      CR/ACE/001
                                                                            ■go'*

                  SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

Note of a Meeting of the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District) held at
     the Division Street Fire Station, Sheffield on 28th JuTlft, 1983.

PRESENT:   N. Atkinson (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council),
           Ms. J. Barker (South Yorkshire Police),
           C. Calvert (South Yorkshire Police),
                                                                                    :
           B. Ellis (South Yorkshire County Fire Service),
           M. Johnson (South Yorkshire County Fire Service),
           D. Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)^
           D. I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)/

1.     Purpose of Meeting.                                         •

Whilst the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC and/or their Arfch||:ict
(Mr. G. Gardner of                            Sheffield) had evidently
obtained the necessary planning and building regulation approvals, they had
overlooked the necessity of seeking approval under the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act, 1975, to the proposed improvements at the Penistone-Road end of
the Ground. Through the Officer Working Party, the County Council had
indicated to the Club over 12 months ago that they supported the improvements
in principle, particularly the provision of additional turnstiles, but the Club
had not previously supplied any details or plans.

2._____Penistone Road End Improvements.

The Officer Working Party considered the detailed plan now supplied by the
Club of the proposals to provide additional turnstiles, new toilet facilities
and new refreshment facilities at the Penistone.Road end of the Hillsborough
Stadium by demolishing the existing toilet facilities, re-siting one of the
existing sliding/folding egress gates and digging into the rear of the
existing Spion Kop.

IT WAS AGREED that D. Vaughan should reply to the Club that the Officer
Working Party sees no objection to the proposed Penistone Road end improvements,
subject to:-

(a)    the possible additional new exit gate adjacent to the proposed new
refreshment facility being omitted, as indicated on the plans;

(b)    the sliding/folding egress gates being regarded as acceptable only on
condition that they continue to be permanently manned while ever the Stadium
is open to the public (outward opening egress gates being preferable, as
recommended by the Green Guide);

(c)    the upper level of the wall of the new refreshment facility being
capable of withstanding crowd loading levels or protected by a barrier to
the same standard where such pressures are capable of being generated;

(d)    generally, the new refreshment facility, new egress gate and new.
turnstiles being capable of withstanding the appropriate crowd loading where
these are capable of being generated;

(e)    the plastic fall pipes being sited so as to prevent damage by the public
or metal fall pipes used as an alternative;

(f)    measures being taken to prevent the public gaining access to the roofs
of the new facility as they are not load bearing;

(g)    the possibility of using vandal-proof glazing in the new facilities
being considered, and

(h)    the perimeter wall generally receiving attention from a maintenance
point of view (pointing etc.)
          South Yorkshire County Council
          F. A . M allett, LL.B., C hief Executive                        County Hall
                                                                          Barnsley
          J.C . Harris, M .A ., LL.B., (Cantab), County Secretary         South Yorkshire S70 2TN
          Departm ent of Administration                                   Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                          (S T D 0 226) 86141
                                                                          Telex: 547675


          O ur Ref:                        Your Ref:                      D ate:
           DV/MH/583/5                     OPS/TS                          20th June, 1983
          This m atter is being dealt with by                             Ext. No.




    Dear Sir,

    Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975
    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic

    Confirming the 'phone conversation between our respective offices
    today, arrangements have been made for the Officer Working Party
    (Sheffield District) to meet in the Conference Room at the Division
    Street Fire Station, Sheffield, at 10.00 a.m. on Tuesday, 28th June,
    1983, to consider the Club's proposals for improving the Penistone
    Road end of the Hillsborough Stadium (see copy letter and plan
    attached).

    As agreed, no doubt you will arrange to be represented at both
    Headquarters and Divisional levels as usual.

                                                             Yours faithfully,




                                                             Chief Executive




                            DOCUMENT No.     B   O   S




r   The Chief Constable,
                                                               “i
    South Yorkshire Police,
    Police Headquarters,
    Snig Hill,
    SHEFFIELD,
^   S3 8LY.
                                                                          2% February 83

                                                   SOSGA 1975 - SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FC
                       Vs^pt
                       Broomhead
                       F Division


                                    Sir

                                    Pl«u»_fto4


                                          on
                                                            '5
                                               ■
                                               '     ■■■■


.                . .
    V •"■'';v/     '


                                    OPS TWS/SM


                                    Enc
            SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
                 With th e C om plim ents of

            THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
            To



                         FOR INFORMATION




                         FOR ACTION



                         FOR COMMENT
it© V'Xj-
                                                          ttiiH



            Frorr                        Date    ■2 1 -
            D epartm ent of Adm inistration
            C ounty Hall
            Barnsley     Tel. Barnsley 86141 E xt.
            CR/ACE/001
                   SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

Note of a Meeting held at the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield, on
21st February, 1983

PRESENT:   Representing the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd,

           D. Knights (Assistant Secretary)                -        V   ^
           J. Strange (Messrs. Eastwood & Partners)

           Representing the Officer
                                 — — Working ..
                                              Party
                                              . . ^ (Sheffield~©xsrtrict)
                                                            ^         ^

           N.   Atkinson (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
           K.   Blount (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
           K.   Brewster (South Yorkshire Police)
           C.   W. Calvert (South Yorkshire Police)
           A.   R. Park (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
           D.   Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
           T.   W. Stuart (South Yorkshire Police)
           D.   I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)
           F.   J. Waterhouse (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)

1.     Purpose of Meeting

The visit was the usual winter inspection carried out of the Football
League grounds in South Yorkshire (originally referred to in the Chief
Executive's letter to the Club dated 10th January, 1981), as well as to
discuss and comment on the Club's proposal to erect a new score and
message board (referred to in the letter and plans from Messrs. Eastwood
& Partners dated 7th February, 1983).

2_.    New Score and    Message Board

The new board was to be erected in the south west corner of the ground
between the South and the West Stands at a height of some 7 metres above
the terrace level. The siting and construction of the supporting pillars
were such that there would be no appreciable effect on the number of
spectators who could be accommodated onthe terrace.

The Building Authority regarded the detailed drawings and calculations as
satisfactory, and Messrs. Eastwood & Partners outlined the steps taken to
take effect of wind and ice-loadings on the structure. The South Yorkshire
Police were satisfied with the assurances given that the structure would,
for all practical purposes, be climb proof. The South Yorkshire County
Fire Service saw no objection to the proposal.

IT WAS AGREED That the Officer Working Party saw no objection to the
proposal, and that Mr. D. Vaughan would reply to Messrs. Eastwood & Partners
to this effect.

3._____Ground Inspection

A.    West Stand

It was noted that, whilst the foot of the steel supporting pillar had been
cleared of light surface corrosion and its gusset plate had been covered
by a concrete haunch (as agreed at the summer inspection on 24th August,
1982), it still required to be painted.
                                                                            *

It was also noted that the crack in the concrete adjacent to stand entrances;
"W" and "X" had been made good.

The Club had also been requested    at the summer     inspection on24th August,
1982, to consider whether any useful purpose would be served by retaining
the store shed at the rear of the Stand and adjacent to the boundary wall.
This point was repeated, and the South Yorkshire Police added that at
some time in the future they hoped the Club would be able to provide some
form of segregation, as well as separate bar and toilet facilities, to
separate home and visiting supporters at the rear of the Stand.

IT WAS AGREED that the new expansion crack in the brickwork at the rear
corner of the Stand (nearest to the North West Terrace) should be
monitored to ensure its condition did not worsen.

B.    North West     Terrace

It was noted that the seepage of water between the N orth‘West Terrace and
the West Stand in heavy rain (also raised at the summer inspection) apparently
continued to occur.

IT WAS AGREED that, whilst not being a matter of safety, the Club should
be recommended to replace the bituman impregnated fibre board as a matter
of maintenance to overcome the seepage problem.

C.     North Stand

The crack at the expansion joint adjacent to Stand entrance "R" (which the
Club had been requested to investigate and make good at the summer
inspection) had received some attention but could not be regarded as
satisfactory.

IT WAS AGREED that the Club would give further attention to the crack.

D.    Spion Kop

All of the crush barriers had been tested since certification, the main
problem having been rusting of some of the clips over the top tubes on
certain barriers.

IT WAS AGREED that the Club would investigate and make good the spalled
concrete and corrosion of the roof of the tunnel exit from the Spion Kop
(at the North Stand end).

E.    South Stand

In view of recent adverse weather conditions, the agreement to visually
inspect the roof trusses for apparent deflection after exceptional gale
or snow loading was recalled. It was noted that the sixth roof truss from
the East Gable (including the Gable) particularly appeared to have deflected
since the summer visit.

IT WAS AGREED -

(i)    That some form of measuring the evident deflection in the roof
trusses was desirable, and the Club were requested to consider whether some
form of quick and/or economic method of doing so could be devised.

(ii)  That the ChiefFire Officer    berequested toconsider thesuitability
from a fire resistance point of view of thecladding in the first floor
enclosed link bridge from the Stand to the Restaurant.

F.    Police and First Aid Facilities

The new police and first aid facilities under the North Stand had been
welcomed by the users and were proving to be most useful.

G.    Maintenance

It was noted that certain items of maintenance throughout the ground
required attention.                                       ,

IT WAS AGREED that under this general heading the Club would look particularly
into the loose wiring at both ends of the South Stand, at the pointing and
spalled concrete in the Male Toilets at the Spion Kop end of the South
Stand, and at the pointing required to the wall (including coping stones)
and the loose metal sheeting between the South Stand and the Spion Kop.

II.   Floodlighting Pylons

Whilst the electrical contractor's staff obviously had to elimb the flood­
lighting pylons from time to time, it appeared that no regular inspection
of the pylons took place from a structural safety point of view.

IT WAS AGREED that a regular inspection of the floodlighting pylons from
a structural safety point of view was desirable, say, every, two or three
years, and that to establish the present position, an inspection of one of
the pylons should be carried to see what was revealed.

I.    Painting of Structural   Steelwork, Roof Trusses, etc.

Whilst not being a matter of immediate concern, the Officer Working Party
felt it would be in the Club's own interests to institute a programme for
the painting of structural steelwork, roof trusses, etc.

IT WAS AGREED that the Club should be requested to consider instituting a
programme for the painting of structural steelwork, roof trusses, etc. on
a regular basis.

J.    Penistone Road Side

The Club were not yet in a position to say when the proposed improvements
at the Penistone Road side of the Ground were likely to be implemented.
                                                                                                        go-
                South Yorkshire County Council
               F. A . M allett, LL.B., Chief Executive                            County Hall
                                                                                  Barnsley
               J.C . Harris, M .A ., LL.B.,(Cantab), County Secretary             South Yorkshire S7<
               Departm ent of Administration                                      Telephone: Barn
                                                                                  (S T D 0226) 86;
                                                                                  Telex: 547675
                                                                                                  'k
               O ur Ref:                         Your Ref:                        D ate:
               DV/MH/583                         OPS/TS                           10th February, 1983
               This m atter is being dealt w ith by                               Ext. N o .




  Dear Sir,

  Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975

  As you are aware, it is the policy for the Officer Working Parties to make
  routine inspections of the Football League Grounds in South Yorkshire twice
  yearly, roughly on a summer/winter basis.

  Accordingly, arrangements have now been made for the following inspections to
  take place:-

  Date                                                        Time and Ground

  Monday, 21st February, 1983.                                2.30 p.m. at the Hillsborough
                                                              Stadium of the Sheffield
                                                              Wednesday Football Club PLC.

  Wednesday, 23rd February, 1983.                             2.30 p.m. at the Millmoor Ground
                                                              of the Rotherham United Football
                                                              Club Ltd.

  Thursday, 24th February, 1983.                             2.30 p.m. at the Bramall Lane
                                                             Ground of the Sheffield United
                                                             Football Club Ltd.

  Perhaps you would kindly arrange to be represented at both Headquarters and
  Divisional levels as usual.

  So far as the Oakwell Ground of the Barnsley Football Club Ltd. is concerned, you
  will recall that this was inspected as recently as 21st December. Unless you
  have any views to the contrary, I intend to regard that visit as the routine
  winter visit.

  This leaves the Belle Vue Ground of the Doncaster                     Rovers Football Club Ltd.
  As you will recall, it appeared in October, 1982,                     that the Club were now anxious
  for the Officer Working Party to prepare a Report                     on the Ground for them. However,
  since that date, the climate has cooled, possibly                     connected with the on—going




r Chief  Constable,
                                                                 n
  South Yorkshire Police,
  Police Headquarters,
  Snig Hill,
  SHEFFIELD,
| S3 8 LY.                                                          i
Chief Constable.                      - 2 -                  10th February, 1983




discussions between the Clubs and the Police Authority on police charges. As it
appears likely that these will soon be concluded to the Clubs' advantage, I will
raise the Safety of Sports Grounds Act aspect again with the Club shortly. The
Ground is not, of course, yet designated by the Secretary of State. Accordingly,
in the absence of conditions being such that there is a need for the County
Council to seek an emergency order under Section 10 of the Act from a
Magistrates Court, real progress can only be made with the Club's voluntary
co-operation.
                                                                      7 -'XV-V •
                                         Yours faithfully,



                                                                                   ■>V



                                         Chief Executive
                                        Hj
          >
                                                                                                                     2d 3


                                                                                                          11 F e b ru a ry   85

                                        SOSGA 1975 SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB




Ch S upt Broomhead                                                                                                           V::?
                        S ir
F D iv isio n ,
                        P le a s e f in d a tta c h e d f o r y o u r in fo rm a tio n and a t t e n t i o n
                        copy l e t t e r d a te d 7 F e b ru a ry 1983 from Eastw ood an d “
                        to S o u th Y o rk sh ire C ounty C o u n c il and copy             ‘
                        *♦699/1 r e l a t i v e to th e New S c o re and M ess
                        d raw ing i s th e o n ly one %re have t o j ^ t e , )

                         I do n o t s e e th e p ro p o sed s t r u c t u r e c a u s in g any problem s
                         o th e r th a n some m inor in te r f e r e n c e to t h e v i s i o n o f tlie
                         s p e c ta to r s in th e a r e a and assum ing t h a t s p e c ta to r s w i l l
                         n o t be a b le to clim b th e s u p p o rts .

                         I n s p e c to r C a lv e r t i s co n cern ed t h a t th e i n s t a l l a t i o n may
                         c au se in te r f e r e n c e w ith P o lic e ra d io com m unications.
                         H e a d q u a rte rs C om m unications do n o t fo r e s e e any such d i f f i c u l t i e s *

                         I would be s u r p r is e d i f th e m essage on th e b o a rd e v e r a p p e a rs !




                     A l C h ie f In s p e c to r
                        ! OPS TWS/SM


                         Enc
•A50UTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
       With th e C om plim ents of

THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
T-                                 ^ tv t St



                    FOR INFORMATION




                    FOR ACTION



     X              FOR COMMENT L           I     f
                       MCT i e - a t tfe 'K w iS .W v




                                   Ao   \Aije.U


From
D epartm ent of Adm inistration
C ounty Hall
Barnsley     Tel. Barnsley 86141 Ext _ —
C R /A C E /0 0 1
E A S T W O O D & PA R T N E R S                                                                              Bowmaker House
                 Consulting Engineers                                                                         23 Kingfield Road
                                                                                                              Sheffield S11 9AS
W. Eastwood                B .E ng , Ph.D.. F.Eng., F.I.C.E.,                                                 Tel.: (0742) 583871
                           F .I.StructE ., F.G.S., M.Cons.E.
                                                                       i i S k-   k                           Telex:       547266
A. A. Wood                 B.Eng., Ph.D .. C .E n g, F.I.C.E.,
                           F.LStruct.E., M .I.W .E.S, M .C oiu.E.
                                                                                                                             and at:
A. G. Burdett             G .M „ B .Sc. (E nfl), C.Eng., M .h C .t;

R. C. A. Eastwood         B .Sc„ C.EngH M .I.£ .E * M .I.S to u C lt                                            36 High Holborn
                                                                                                                London WC1V 6AA
A u o c h tn :
Geoffrey Spir             c.Enf., m .i.c.e., M.i.M«ch.E.                                                        Tel.: (01) 242 7436
C.  8 . Q rM V M          B.Eng.. C.Enf., M.I.C.E., M.I.Straet.E.
                                                                                               Our R e f:   WE/JAS/PM/4699
A. J . Clough             tA * C.Enf ., M.C.I.B.S., M .I.tW i.E .
J , A. Strang*            CEn*.. M .I.Strua.E.                                                 Your R ef:
Conauttant:
A. L Percy                M.T«eh.(Hon.), B.Sc., C.En*., F.I.C.E.,
                          F.I.Struct.E., F.I.Mun.E., M.R.T.P.I.




                 Department of Administration,                                                              7 February 1983                    /
                 South Yorkshire County Council,
                 Barnsley,
                 South Yorkshire. S70 2TN


                  For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan




                  Dear Mr. Vaughan,
                                              Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                                                            Score and Message Board
                         The Club propose to have erected a new score and
                  message board in the south west corner of the ground.
                  Enclosed are four prints of our drawing 4699/1 showing
                  the general arrangement.
                         It is intended to have the score board working for
                 *a possible semi-final game on 16 April 1983.                                                The
                  supporting steel frame will therefore be' erected before
                  the end of March.
                         Copies of detail drawings and calculations will be
                  sent to Mr. Sherriff later this week.
                         The comments of the Officer Working Party will be
                  w e lc om ed .


                                                                            Yours sincerely,




                   c.c. Mr. E. England
                                                                                                                                       •
                                                                                                                                       . 7:
                                                                                                                                        ••••

                                                     Registered in England -          No. 1134531
                                                                                                                                       V-; v>
                                                                                                                                       ■■
                                                                     7


                 ;Ch Supt                     SOSGA 1975 - SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FC
                 i Brooahead

                  F Division



                                   Sir
                               .   ■ ■ -v:
                                   Please f
                                   cop




v':   ■ii;V ■■

                                   Chief Inspector
                                   OPS TWS/SM
    "‘ s o u t h YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
              , With th e Com plim ents of

    THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE                                                  m

    To.         Q p E ftim p A S                      ^ IV IS 1 0 -T 4


j                       FOR INFORMATION
      w /




                       FQR ACTION



                       FOR COMMENT




          \u—    *----------------- —   :------ 1 '




                                        -
    From.                                         Date _
    D e p a rtm e n t o f AdrhiViistration
    County Hall
    Barnsley    Tel. B arnsley86141 Ext.
    CR/ACE/001
Sheffield Wednesdoy^V Footboll Club pic
                                                                                                                  Registered Office
                                                                                                                  Hillsborough, Sheffield S 6 1 S W
Chairman:    H. E. McGEE                                                                                          T elephone:0 7 4 2 -3 4 3 1 2 3
Manager      J. CHARLTON, O.B.E.                                                                                  Telegrams: W ednesday Sheffield 6
Secretary:   E. ENGLAND                                                                                           Registered N o . 6 2 4 7 8 England



             The Chief Executive,
             South Yorkshire County Council,                                                                      EE/CB
             County Hall,
             Barnsley, S70 2TN                                                                                                                                             ••




                                                                                                                                                          .   i•


                                                                                                                                            :'r:V
                                                                                                                             .. ■■
                                                                                                         \
                                                                                                                                   .   ..             ’




             Dear Mr. Mallett,                                                                               \

             I have to inform you that we are in the final stages of
             negotiating with G.E.C. Claudgen Ltd . , for the erection
             of an electronic display board between the South Stand
             and the West Stand.

             Dr. Eastwood is dealing with the structural arrangements
             for us.

             Yours sincerely,




             Secretary.




                                                                                                                                                                   \   v   :. v - '


               D irectors: M. Sheppard. J.P .. F.C.A. (V ice-C hairm an). S. L Speight. O.B.E.. C. W oodw ard. K. T. Addy. E. Barron. G. K. Hulley.
            South Yorkshire County Council
m          F.A .M allett. LL.B., Chief Executive                     County Hall
                                                                      Barnsley
           J.C. Harris, I^ A .tLUB, (Cantab), County Secretary       South Yorkshire STO 2TN
           Department of Administration                              Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                      CSTD 0226) 86141
                                                                      Telex: 547675



           Sv^Hh/ 583/5                      EE/RCB                  i t ? February, 1983
            This matter is being dealt with by                       Ext. No.




    Dear Sir,
                                 ,
    Safety of Sports, Grounds Act, 1975

    I thank you for your letter of 2nd February.

    Dr. Eastwood has given informal intimation of the proposal,
    and has undertaken to submit details and drawings for
    consideration by the Officer Working Party (Sheffield
    District) when these have been prepared.

    I am also given to understand that the proposals for
    permanent television camera facilities are now unlikely
    to be implemented in the foreseeable future.

                                                      Yours faithfully,




                                                          r
                                                      Chief Executive

    Mr. E. England,                   r                          ^
    Secretary,
    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic,
    Hillsborough,
    SHEFFIELD,
    S6 1SW.
                                                 ••   •••
The Chief Executive
South Yorkshire County Council                .■V'.■
County Hall
BABNSLIY                             ■■■
South Yorkshire
S70 2131

                                 .    :‘
                                     --- '




Dear Sir

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB PLC

Thank you for your letter dated 22 December 1982.

I have no objection to the Chief Fire Officer being informed of the
minor amendment to the pre-determined Emergency Evacuation Procedure.

Yours faithfully




                                             /-"Z'O

Chief Constable
                                 8    ot
                                      ffl
                                      a
                                 H
                                      Cn
                                 &r



                                      £
                                      w
< -'r   ./X                           Q
                                      z
                                      o
                                  CC4        H
                                  W          <
                                  os £       a

                             ui
                             o
                             -I        G
                                       Q
                             o        •H          U
                             a.        05
                                      ;r-|
                                                 kH
                             ui                  a<d
                             QC
                                      P          Eh
                             X
                             w
                             *                   08
                                      &
              ..:•„ v •.
                       ■•.   cc                  m
                             o                   G
                             >        ■a         0.
                             X                   •P
                             H                   flj
                             3                   a)
                                       o
                                                 §
                                      &
                                      •P         •P                                   •P
                                       G                                               G
                                       a)         5                                    a)
                                      ■a                                              ■a
                                       c         ■8                                    c
                                       a)         a>                                   a)
                                      •P         •P                                   •P
                                       c          c                                    c
                                      •H         •r-                                  •H
                                                  n
                                                  a)                                   a)
                                                                                       a
                                       &          6            >1 -a                  3
                                       CO        CO                                   CO
                                       <w        <w
                                                               Aa)So                  <w
                                        a)        a)           j-i n)                  a)
                                       •H        ■H                •P
                                       Xi        Xt            e -p                   X
                                       u         u             H flj                  u


                                      o
                                      os     o
                                      CC4    Eh

                                                                                                     GEN/1




                                                                                            <**r
                                                                                               ''^




                                                                    0-
                                                                         m m m rn m
                                                       •' -■
                 South Yorkshire Police
To                 MINUTE SHEET                 date.2^. December ,.82.
 Ch.Supt.
  Broomhead
                   S u b J e c L . . . A ^ S ^ ^ ^         .........
i 'F' Division

                 Sir,
                        The attached letter dated 22 December, 82,
                 from S.Y.C.C. is forwarded for your information
                 and attention please.




                 Chief‘inspector (Operations)




                            24    D E C 1982




     GEN/51.
                 South Yorkshire Count y Council
                 F. A . M allett, LL.B., C hief Executive                           County Hall
                                                                                    Barnsley
                 J.C . Harris, M .A ..L L .B ,(C an tab ), County Secretary         South Yorkshire S70 2TN
                 Departm ent of Administration                                      Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                                    (S T D 0226) 86141
                                                                                    Telex: 547675


                 O u rR ef:   DV/ADA/583/5           YourRef:     OPS TWS/SM        D ate:   22nd December, 1982


                 This matter isbeing dealt with by       D. Vaughan                 Ext. No. 422




     Dear Sir,

     Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975
     Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC

     I thank you for your letter dated 17th December.

     As you are aware, the County Council issued a General Safety Certificate
     under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975, in respect of the Hillsborough
     Stadium on 21st December, 1979. The detailed pre-determined Emergency
     Evacuation Procedure was drawn up later by the South Yorkshire County Fire
     Service, in consultation with the then Divisional Commander of "F" Division
     (Chief Superintendent R. Herold). It was forwarded to the Club by the Chief
     Fire Officer by letter dated 9th April, 1980.

     This was done in accordance with the Schedule of Responsibilities of the various
     disciplines represented on the four Area Officer Working Parties and, of course,
     in no way affects your operational responsibility for "on the day" safety and
     security.

     I take it that on this occasion you will wish me to inform the Chief Fire
     Officer of the minor amendment which you mention in the pre-determined Emergency
     Evacuation Procedure.

                                                                Yours faithfully,




                                                                Chief Executive




r
           The Chief Constable,
           South Yorkshire Police,
           Police Headquarters,
           Snig Hill,
           SHEFFIELD.
1_         S3 8LY
The Chief Executive
South Yorkshire County Council             DV/ADA/583/5
County Hall
                                           P/TF3/DR
BARNSLEY
South Yorkshire
                                           24 December 1982
S70 2TN



j|ear Sir

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975
SK3FFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB LTD

I refer to your letter dated 13 December 1982 on the absjve
subject, and have no objections to the proposals contained
in that correspondence to construct a permanent camera platform
on the top of the Spion Kop at the Hillsborough Stadium.

Just one point I would make is that the intention is clearly
expressed that the platform is to be constructed for
Yorkshire Television. Will this facility be made available
should BBC Television be filming at Hillsborough?

Yours faithfully




     lief Superintendent




 -   2-
 Chief inspector Stuart (Operations) HQs

 fforward^d as requested.



 un/bupr..
 <24.12.82




                                                                  '•,y\       ■     '


                                                                  ■ ( ■2                -
                                                                  X:      '       ' f':-
               South Yorkshire Police
                                                                         V
>                MINUTE SHEET
h.Supt.
                 Subject   S ♦0♦ S ♦G»A» 197^L ” r^*^.
                                                     *,1**C*   ..■■■■—
Broomhead
'F' Division

               Sir*
                      The attached letter dated 22 December, 82,
               from S.Y.C.C* is forwarded for your information
               and attention please*




               lime I inspector (Operations)




                                                      .A

                                                  %




    GEN/M.
            South Yorkshire County Council
            F. A . M a lle tt, LL.B., C hief Executive                        County Hall
                                                                              Barnsley
            J.C . H arris, M .A ., LL .B ,(C an tab ), County Secretary       South Yorkshire S70 2TN
            D epartm ent of Administration                                    Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                              (STD 0226) 86141
                                                                              Telex: 547675             ^


            Our Ref:     DV/ADA/583/5           Your Ref: OPS TWS/SM          Date:   22nd December, 1982

            This matterisbeing dealtwith by          D. Vaughan               Ext.No. 422
                                                                                                  V

Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC

I thank you for your letter dated 17th December.

As you are aware, the County Council issued a General Safety Certificate
under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975, in respect of the Hillsborough
Stadium on 21st December, 1979. The detailed pre-determined Emergency
Evacuation Procedure was drawn up later by the South Yorkshire County Fire
Service, in consultation with the then Divisional Commander of "F" Division
(Chief Superintendent R. Herold). It was forwarded to the Club by the Chief
Fire Officer by letter dated 9th April, 1980.

This was done in accordance with the Schedule of Responsibilities of the various
disciplines represented on the four Area Officer Working Parties and, of course,
in no way affects your operational responsibility for "on the day" safety and -
security.

I take it that on this occasion you will wish me tc irform the Chief Fire
Officer of the minor amendment which you mention in the pre-determined Emergency
Evacuation Procedure.

                                                           Yours faithfully




                                                           Chief Executive




      The Chief Constable,
      South Yorkshire Police,
      Police Headquarters,
      Snig Hill,
      SHEFFIELD.
      S3 8LY                                                       _l
The Chief Executive
South Yorkshire County Council
County Hall
BARNSLEY
South Yorkshire                                               ■■■■
                                                                 • ,-              -v- -> --:::y               yy
S70 2TN                          ■ -
                                       ■ ' '


                                               :                               .    ■.   .    ■ ■ ■' ■ ■■■■; --■■■■< ■,■
                                       .                                           '■ ■                     -■      .
For the attention of Hr D
                                                                                         ..        .......


                                                          '
                                                                                                                           ;   -.vi-




                                                                                                                                       • ••
                                                                                                                                         .-
                                                                                                                                        ■
Dear Sir

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
                                                                                                                                          :.
SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB LTD                                                                                                      .   . .




I refer to your letter dated 7 December 1982 regarding the emergency
evacuation procedure at Hillsborough Stadium.

The present contingency plan which may require evacuation of all or part
of the ground has been altered slightly in that when a situation arises the
police control room staff at the ground will pass the following message
over the public address system, which will indicate to police officers and
stewards that emergency evasuation procedures are in force, that message
is ’Will Mr Derek Knights please go immediately to the secretary’s office*.

In the event of an emergency evacuation being necessary, a verbal message
will be passed by the police officer in charge ** aglin via the public
address system - giving specific instructions as to the action to be taken
by the public. When the situation has been resolved the ’all clear' is
notified by the following message passed over the public address systea,
•Mr Knights need not now attend the secretary’s office'.

As far as I am aware the Fire Brigade have no part in the formulation of
the contingency plans and, therefore, as a Butter of fact rather than as a
natter of courtesy, they were not informed of the change I have referred
to - if indeed that is the 'change' subject of their complaint*

Yours faithfully




Chief Constable
                                                   DOCUMENT No.         E l3
                                SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                            REF*             F/TFB/DR
    FROM:   Chief Superintendent Broomhead, 'F' Division
                                                            STATION/DEPT:    'F' DHQ
    TO:     Chief Superintendent (Operations & Traffic) HQs daTE-
                                                                             16 December 1982

             SUBJECT:     SAFETY IN SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
                          SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB LTD

            In your minute dated 8 December 1982 you referred to correspondence received
            from the Chief Executive, South Yorkshire County Council, which brought to
            attention the fact that the Chief Fire Officer had complained that the
            procedure for notifying stewards of an emergency situation within the
            football ground had been changed without the Chief Fire Officer's knowledge
            or any consultation with him.

            The present contingency plan which may require evacuation of all pr part of
            the ground has been altered slightly in that when a situation arises the
            Police Control Room staff at the ground will j?ass the following message over
            the public address system, which will indicate to police officers aivS
            stewards that emergency evacuation procedures are in force: that message
            is "Will Mr. Derek Knights please go immediately to the secretary's office".

            In the event of an emergency evacuation being necessary, a verbal message
            will be passed by the police officer in charge - again via the public
            address system - giving specific instructions as to the action to be taken
            by the public. When the situation has been resolved the 'all clear' is
            notified by the following message passed over the public address system,
            "Mr. Knights need not now attend the secretary's office".

            As far as I am aware the Fire Brigade have no part in the formulation of the
            contingency plans and therefore, as a matter of fact rather than as a
            matter of courtesy, they were not informed of the change I have referred
            to - if indeed that is the 'change' subject of their complaint - whiefe is—
            not made- clear- in the correspondence £r-©» ■

            Forwarded for your attention.




            Chief Superintendent




GEN/2
                                                                                                              gVH

                                                                                                     8 December 82

                                SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
                                SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB LTD




Oh S u p t       S ir
Broorahead
                 A tta c h e d f o r you r
F D iv is io n   d a te d 7 December 1982 from th e S o u th Y o rk a h ire C ounty
                 C o u n c il r e l a t i n g to th e em ergency e v a c u a tio n p ro c e d u re
                 a t S h e f f ie ld W ednesday F o o tb a ll C lu b .

                 fh e l e t t e r '"
                 a p p e a r to tee
                 t h a t may a s s i s t .                   *         •             ;     ■[        \         '•>




                 Chief Inspector
                 OPS TWS/SM


                 Enc
    South Yorkshire County Council
    F. A . M allett, L.L.B., C hief Executive                          County Hall
                                                                       Barnsley
    J.C. Harris, M .A .,L L .B ,(C an tab ), County Secretary          South Yorkshire S70 2TN
    Departm ent of Administration                                      Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                       (S T D 0 226) 86141
                                                                       Telex: 547675


    O urR ef:   DV/ADA/583/4           YourRef:       OPS/TS           D ate:     7th December, 1982


    This matter is being dealt with by          D. Vaughan             Ext. No.   422




   Dear Sir,

   Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975
   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.

   You will recall that the emergency evacuation procedure
   for the Hillsborough Stadium was drawn up by the South
   Yorkshire County Fire Service in consultation with the
   South Yorkshire Police.

   The Chief Fire Officer informs me that the procedure for
   notifying the stewards of an emergency situation has
   apparently been changed without his knowledge or his
   having been consulted.

   Perhaps you would kindly let me know the situation so
   far as the South Yorkshire Police are concerned.

                                                    Yours faithfully




                                                    Chief Executive




The Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police
Police Headquarters,
Snig Hill,
SHEFFIELD.
S3 8LY                                                    _I
Brooohead

F Division
          South Yorkshire County Council
          F.   A . M a lle tt, LL.B., C hief Executive                       County Hall
                                                                             Barnsley
          J.C . Harris, M .A ., LL.B.,(Cantab), County Secretary             South Yorkshire S70 2TN
          Departm ent of Administration                                      Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                             (S T D 0226) 86141
                                                                             Telex: 547675


          O urR ef:    DV/ADA/583/5           YourRef:     OPS/TS            D ate:   13th December, 1982


          This m atter is being dealt with by      D. Vaughan                Ext. No. 4 22




          Dear Sir,

          Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975
          Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.

          I attach (in duplicate) copy of the correspondence (but
          not the calculations) from Messrs. Eastwood & Partners
          relating to proposals to construct a permanent camera
          platform at the top of the Spion Kop at the Hillsborough
          Stadium.

          I am consulting the Building Authority on the structural
          aspects of the proposals, as well as the County Fire
          Service.

          Perhaps you will let me have any comments which you feel
          should be incorporated in my reply from a policing point
          of view.

                                                         Yours faithfully,




                                                         Chief Executive

          Enc.




r                                                              n
     The Chief Constable,
     South Yorkshire Police,
     Police Headquarters,
     Snig Hill,
     SHEFFIELD.
|_   S3 8LY                                                    _1
                                                                                                                ir'        ,
     EA S TW O O D & PARTNERS                                                                                    Bowmaker House
                  C o n s u ltin g    E n g in e e rs                                                            23 Kingfield Road
   W. Eastwood                  B.Eng., Ph.D., F.Eng., F.I.C.E.,
                                                                                                                 Sheffield S11 9AS
                                F.I.Struot.E„ F.G.S., M.Cons.E.                                                  Tel.: (0742) 583871
   A. A. Wood                   B.Eng, Ph.D., C.Eng., F.I.C.E.,                                                  Telex:       547266
                                F.I.Struct.E„ M.I.W.E.S., M.Cons.E.
  A. G. Burdett                 G.M., B.Sc.(Eng), C.Eng., M.I.C.E.                                                                   and at:

  R. C. A. Eastwood             B.Sc.. C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struot.E.
                                                                                                                     36 H ig h H o lb o rn
  Associates:                                                                                                        London WC1V 6AA
  Geoffrey Spir                c.En*., m .i.c .e„   Mj.Mech.E.
                                                                                                                     Tel.: (01) 242 7436
  C. S. Greaves                B.Eng,, C.Eng., M.I.C,E., M.I.Struct.E.
  A. J . Clough                B.A., C.En*., M.C.I.8.S., M.I.Mech.E.                                             WE/j a s / k :
  J . A. Strange               C .Enj., M.I.Struet.E*                            vOUMfy HALL, HARHStir
  Consultant:                                                                  m m
  A. L. Percy                  M.Tech.(Hon.), B.Se., C.Eng., F.I.C.E.,
                               F.I.Struct.E., F.I.Mun.E., M.R.T.P.I.




  C h ie f E x e c u t iv e ,
  D e p a rtm e n t o f A d m in is t r a t io n ,
  S o u th Y o r k s h ir e C o u n ty C o u n c il.
  C o u n ty H a l l ,
  B a r n s le y ,
  S o u th Y o r k s h ir e ,                                                                                                      ■ ...... .'V ;
  S70 2TN.                                                                                                                                         - •- . .... .




          th e a t t e n t i o n          o f M r. D. Vaughan


 D e a r M r. V aug han ,

                                                S h e f f i e l d W ednesday F o o t b a ll C lu b PLC
                                                             S p io n Kop - Camera P la t f o r m
                           We h a v e be e n p a s s e d a c o p y o f some c a l c u l a t i o n s b y
 CSL C o n t r a c t S e r v ic e s                     ( Y o r k s h ir e )    L t d . who h a ve a p p a r e n t ly b e e n
 a s k e d b y Y o r k s h ir e T e le v is io n t o c o n s t r u c t a p e rm a n e n t cam era
 p la t f o r m     a t th e to p o f S p io n K op.                             A fu r th e r s e t is      e n c lo s e d
a n d we h a v e a ls o                s e n t a n o th e r s e t d i r e c t l y            t o Don S h e r i f f f o r
h is     com m ents.                 A lth o u g h n o t show n, we u n d e r s ta n d t h a t th e y in t e n d
to      s ite     th e to w e r w h e re th e y e r e c t th e te m p o r a ry s t r u c t u r e .                             T h e ir
p r o p o s a l a p p e a rs t o be s t r u c t u r a l l y a c c e p ta b le a lth o u g h we h a ve
r e q u e s te d t h a t th e y c o n s t r u c t a c o n c r e te b lo c k a t th e to p o f
th e t e r r a c e        in s t e a d o f u s in g a                    'H ilt i'     a n c h o r as in d ic a t e d on
s h e e t 7.

                          You w i l l see on s h e e t 1 t h a t i t                          is   p rp p o s e d t o c la d
th e to w e r u s in g p ly w o o d s h e e ts ro u n d a l l f o u r s id e s .                                if    a c c e p ta b le
th is     w i l l need t o be good q u a l i t y                               e x te r n a l p ly fix e d   t o a tim b e r
s u b -fra m e an d th e p ly w o o d p a in te d b lu e t o m a tc h th e b a r r i e r s and
r a ilin g s .

                         We h a v e s u g g e s te d t h a t a c c e s s i s                   g a in e d t o    th e p la t f o r m
fro m a la d d e r in s id e                   th e to w e r ,             a    s im p le d o o r w h ic h can be lo c k e d


                                                     Registered in England - No. 1134531                                                   .• ..
                                                                                         SH E E T   2 V

                                                                                                            V
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




  when th e to w e r i s         n o t in    use c a n ■
  s id e w a l l s .     The com m ents o f th e




   c.c.                M r. D.    S h e r if f ,   D e p a rtm e n t o f P la n n in g




                                                                                                          ...
           EASTWOOD                      & PARTNERS
                       C o n s u ltin g " E n g in e e rs                                                                                                 Bowmaker House
                                                                                                                                                          23 Kingfield Road
          W. Eastwood                 BE n0-. Ph.D.. F.Eng., F.I.C.E
                                      F.I.Struct.E, F.G.S.. M.Cons.E™
                                                                                                                                                          Sheffield S 1 1 9AS
         A. A. Wood                   B Eng.. Ph.D., C.Eng.. F.l C E
                                                                                                                                                          Tel.: (0742) 583871
                                      F.I.Struct.E„ M.I.W.E.S.. M.Cons.E.                                                                                 Telex:       547266
         A. G. Burdett               G.M., B.Sc.(Eng), C.Eng.. M.I.c.E.
            C. A. Eastwood                                                                                                                                                                         and at:
                                     B.Sc., C.Eng.. M.I.C.E. M.I.Struct.E.
         Associates:                                                                                                                                       36 H ig h H o lb o rn
      Geoffrey Spir
                                    C.En*„ M.I.C.E., M.I.Mech.E.                                                                                           London WC1V 6AA
     C. S. Greaves
                                    B.En*., C.En*., M.I.C.E.. M .I.Strun.E.                                                                                T®l-: (01) 242 7436
     A. J . Clough
                                    B.A., C.En*., M.C.I.B.S., M.I.Mech.E.
     J . A. Strange                                                                                                   Our R e f ;
                                   C .E n M J .S tru c t.E .                                                             r '-VV- ■■
     Consultant:                                                                                                      Vour R ef:                            • •••■
     A. L. Percy
                                   M Teeh.(Hon.), B.Sc„ C.En*.. F.I.C.E
                                   F.l.Struct.E., F.I.Mun.E.. M.r !t .P.L
                                                                                                                                                                             • :           '


                                                                                                         ■                      V 1.."-                                              y:;;:V\v':r
                                                                                                             'J                     ;■                                        ■■I";'..

                                                                                                                  :                              v :V           :v-;                     :

    D e p a rtm e n t o f P la n n in g ,                                          ■       ■ .                                                 ■■■    '     .■■■■    ■   ■   ■ ■         ■■.■■■■


                                                                                                                                                     fin
    t S™    Haeu , M e trO P ° l l t a n                       B o r ° “ 9h Council,                                                                 8 ^oember
    S h e f fie ld l .
                                                                                                     ■   ■                '    ■■         ::                                             ^
   ^ - ^ g _ a t t e n t lp n o f Mr .                           p.

   D e a r M r.         S h e r if f ,

                                                      ^ ^ ^ S M j f e d n e s d a y F o o t b a ll                                   p i„ k

                             Pol.             .                 gEiSB-gSE^Cam era' P latfo rm

   y e s t e r d a y , we h a v e p le a s u r e                      i n T n c l I s t a g V e r S a t I ° n W lth J ° h n S tr a n 9e
  P re p a re d b y CSL C o n t r a c t S e r v ic e s                                 <I O r k L “               T           ° ' ° a lC U la t io n s
  p ro p o s e d ca m e ra p l a t f o r m ,                      a copy o f o u r l e t t                               ^          ^                ^
  e n c lo s in g th e same c a l c u l a t i o n s                           is       a ls o e n d o l                                                    VaU3han

 P la n n in g P e r l L ^ r ^ m                               ^ t 'b e T              “         iS n 0 t 3 b u i W in g ,                                 fo r m a l
 «= to be s u b le t to the n o r m a ^ ™        ^
 app ro val. Perhaps you would ho v •              B urldm g Regulations
 fo r us p lease.                  k“ d en° Ugh to           th is p o in t


                                                                               Y o u rs s i n c e r e l y ,




c .c .
                         M r. D . V a u g h a n , S . Y . C . C .                                ^




                                                   Registered in England - No. 1 1 34 531
   •   *a
                                               SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                                 REF:                F/CC/AG
       FROM:   -Inspector Calvert
                                                                                 STATION/DEPT:   - 'F' DHQ
       TO:     The Chief Superintendent             'F' Division
                                                                                 DATE:             ,22 November 1982’


                  SUBJECT:                    SWFC - CROWD SEGREGATION




                       Since the segregation of the terraces at the Leppings                     Lane end^
                      of the ground last season we have operated, on matches                     where
                      the number of away supporters did not merit allocation                     of the
                      whole of that end of the ground, a system of using one                     or two
                      of the pens for accommodating the away supporters, and                     the
                      remaining pens for home supporters.

                      This has prevented clashes on the terraces, but we still
                      experience a considerable amount of trouble, particularly at     ^
                      half time when both sets of supporters leave the terraces to
                      use the facilities', either toilets or the refreshment bar, when
                      we are faced with a confrontation situation. Over the past few
                      weeks there have been numerous clashes, both in the toilets and
                      the refreshment bar. At the-Derby County match, the refreshment
                      bar was closed down by the Pbl^ice for safety reasons.   :                                  ;

       i .
                       ,               '        •     *                  '         ' '       ' ' /'
                      These problems are caused quite simply by there being only one
                      set of facilities for*use by both groups of supporters, and we
                      are seeing a situation where w e h a v e w restrict the use by
                      'supporters to either one or the other which is obviously not
                      satisfactory from the supporters’ point of .view, knd is using a                       ;
                      grea!t deal of manpower ‘tio maintain the peace.'  1      1                                 ;
                       i ■'        ‘
                                           I                                 <i
                                                                         ; r ,
                                                                              -          .        s ,
                       This is the only fault, of the segregation facilities provided by
                       the club and I would suggest that an apprbach be made to them
                       setting out the problems and asking that in due course, an
                       additional male toilet be provided at the South end of the enclosure,
                       and an additional bar at the North End1, and that some form of
                       barrier, which would possibly only need be 2 or 3 feet high to be
                       provided in the ceritrp.




                       inspector

                      —       ‘X       —


                                                                                         <JLO ~_r       a




                                   Q 5L4A "                  Ov
                                                                                             Q_>^V
G E N /2


                     i.0— AA^v-1                                                   f-                        G?
                                Cv_




                                                                           ^ ^ H/?7_                     .




2 ,.       >L$ :          .                                >



                                                                                                                                                                <©_
                                                                                                                                                        12,0 - t E


   IW T X j o~c                                                                                                                      ,rl f Z—           tkaaj
                            U m l ,

       l/V \         - \ A > \ » $ 0 —i         ; 1<y\         K v .                    C W         <Lx_cJ|^

       V k a ~-                            cJ^y>v -iQ-'^v.                             q X a^Su    ^                       a _ _ A

                                           ‘" ’W                                                                                (jO-iSi— -^j A.


                                                                                               ■   ■ .       ■.'      *.   *     V                                     1
                                                                                                                   <2t-^              c ^ X r




                                                                         fi't^-            -                          ^•“O-                      c.
                                                                                                                                                  -«,    kVs/
                                                                                                                                                        *^

                                                                                                         ^7 X- '/                                          *x».yc f~

                                                                                                   *         4 c t4


 5.             C l . sIm^*                     ^                                                                                                         /t^ U



               <aN                        ' ^                             Vi

                         VOf|W|                10        V^ — ' 1                                                               . .-1 ---
                                                              T"         ,,
                                                                                 SOUTH YORKS. POLICE

                                                                       ,V
                         t * .        t 0 * .                     «*           ,.    . - 3 ;'•r-;n p -5
                                                                                                                                      i
           C- /                 »i          ■       •*-->■ '                  «,                                      /     ■
                                                                             t C H iEr                                     1>    0 ^ 2 .,
                                                                 (s\l*Q-J~£‘
                                                                              iU ? E R A U O N S                                            4>
                         '*-'            .y/
                South Yorkshire Police                                   8
T o:-            MINUTE SHEET                   date....   2Z.*.8.*.82
I CHIEF SOFT.    S u b ject..   SHE^IELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLDB
S HEBOLD.



                S ir ,

                Please fin d attached two copies o f the
                o f th e Working P a rty Meeting h e ld a t
                on 2*tth August, 1982.




                A/bUp-C.        ^
                ( O perations D iv is io n )




  GEN/SI,
                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
                       With the Compliments of
                 THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
                 To.            OPEft           V iv<sie>i

                                  FOR INFORMATION




                                  FOR ACTION
'i :
       Mufti
XS—
 f S»\
w m r n im
                                  FOR COMMENT
         mmmmm




                 From                       Date
                 Deparcmeni or Mammisiraiion
                 County Hall
                 Barnsley    Tel. Barnsley86141 Ext.
                 CR/A CE/O Ot
                    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

           Note of a Meeting held at the Hillsborough Stadium
                      Sheffield on .24 August 1982


PRESENT:    Representing the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

Dr W Eastwood (Messrs Eastwood & Partners)
E England (Club Secretary)
J A Strange (Messrs Eastwood & Partners)

             Repre sent ing the Officer Working Par try (Sheffield District)

N Atkinson (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
Ms J Barker (South Yorkshire Police)
D Billington (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
C Calvert (South Yorkshire Police)
R Carnal1 (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
R Herold (South Yorkshire Police)
J T H Ray (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
D Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
T Stuart (South Yorkshire Police)
D I Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)
A Wright (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)

1      Purpose of Meeting

The visit was the usual summer inspection carried out of all Football
League Clubs in South Yorkshire (originally referred to in the Chief
Executive's letter to the Club dated 10 January 1981).

2_____ Ground Inspection

A      West Stand

•It was noted that there was light surface corrosion at the foot of the
 steel supporting pillar nearest to the North-West Terrace. -As there was
no enclosing wing to the stand, the pillar was open to the elements.

The possibility of spectators climbing onto the roof of the store shed to
the rear of the stand and adjacent to the boundary wall was discussed.

IT WAS AGREED -

(i)    That the Club would arrange for the foot of the steel supporting
pillar to be cleaned and painted and possibly for the gusset plate to be
covered by a concrete haunch.

(ii)   That the Club would consider whether any useful purpose would be
served by retaining the store shed adjacent to the boundary wall.

(iii) That the Club would investigate and make good the crack in the
concrete adjacent to stand entrances "W" and "X".

B      North West Terrace

It was noted that the cracks in the concrete underneath the Terrace had
been repaired and appeared satisfactory. However, there was seepage of
water between the North West Terrace and the West Stand in heavy rain.

IT WAS AGREED - That the Club'would make good the bitumastic sealing
between the Terrace and the West Stand.

C       North Stand

A crack in the concrete at the expansion joint adjacent to Stand entrance
"R" was noted.

IT WAS AGREED - That the Club would investigate and make good the crack.

D       Spion Kop

The Building Authority suggested that at some future date the Club should
consider giving attention to the original steps at the rear of the Kop
(at the bottom of the new staircase) so as to remove the slight downward  J ®
tilt and ensure a common height of risers.

IT WAS AGREED - That, whilst there had been no reported incidents, the Club
would bear the suggestion in mind for attention at a future date.

E        South Stand

The Club reported that the gantry access to the Commentary Box on the top
of the Stand was not now used, except by jgroundmaintenance staff.

IT WAS AGREED - That the Club w o u l d replace the missing ringsin the chain
used as a handrail on the gantry.

F        Crush Barriers

The Club reported that the remaining third of the crush barriers on the
Spion Kop had now been tested. The only problem had been rusting of some
of the clips over the top tubes. These had been replaced or would be
replaced by the start of the Season on 28 August.

A visual inspection had also been carried out of the clips on the crush
barriers on the West and North-West Terraces, and similar action taken.

G        Police and First Aid Facilities

The new police and first aid facilities under the North Stand were well
on the way towards completion, and would be utilised at the opening match
on 28 August.

H        Penistone Road Side

It was noted that the steel girders adjoining the wall at the rearof the
Butcher's Shop had been satisfactorily attended to, and that the Folding
Exit Gates had had new tops and runners installed and the concrete made
good.

So far as the proposal to re-site an existing toilet block to the rear of
the Spion Kep to enable additional turnstiles and an exit gate to be
installed was concerned, the Club had reported to the Chief Executive
by letter that this had had to be deferred until the end of next season
due to the size of the problem and the possibility of creating hazards for
spectators.
I      Television Camera Facilities

It was noted that the scaffolding Tower erected on the Spion Kop for
Television camera purposes had now been removed.

There did not appear to have been any progress with the Television
Authorities to date on the subject of permanent or semi-permanent
facilities.
                                                                             •' ■
J     Fire-Fighting Equipment

Whilst the Club were confident that all of the fire extinguishers, etc?
were still sited as originally required by the Generai Safety Certificate,
the County Fire Service felt that a routine inspection of the equipment
would now be appropriate.
                                       '   ’- H .

K     Maintenance
            :   :--------------



Certain areas of spalled concrete in the Stadium required attention, and
the Club had the work in hand as items of routine maintenance.
                    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

           Note of a Meeting held at the Hillsborough Stadium
                      Sheffield on 24 August 1982


PRESENT:    Representing the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd

Dr W Eastwood (Messrs Eastwood & Partners)
E England (Club Secretary)
J A Strange (Messrs Eastwood & Partners)

            Representing the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)

N Atkinson (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
Ms J Barker (South Yorkshire Police)
D Billington (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
C Calvert (South Yorkshire Police)
R Carnall (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
R Herold (South Yorkshire Police)
J T H Ray (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
D Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
T Stuart (South Yorkshire Police)
D I Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)
A Wright (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)

_____
1     Purpose of Meeting

The visit was the usual summer inspection carried out of all Football
League Clubs in South Yorkshire (originally referred to in the Chief
Executive's letter to the Club dated 10 January 1981).

2      Ground Inspection

A     West Stand

It was noted that there was light surface corrosion at the foot of the
steel supporting pillar nearest to the North-West Terrace. As there was
no enclosing wing to the stand, the pillar was open to the elements.

The possibility of spectators climbing onto the roof of the-store shed to
the rear of the stand and adjacent to the boundary wall was discussed.

IT WAS AGREED -

(i)    That the Club would arrange for thefoot of the steel supporting
pillar to be cleaned and painted andpossibly for thegusset  plate to be
covered by a concrete haunch.

(ii)   That the Club would consider whether any useful purpose would be
served by retaining the store shed adjacent to the boundary wall.

(iii) That the Club would investigate and make good the crack in the
concrete adjacent to stand entrances "W" and "X".

B      North West Terrace

It was noted that the cracks in the concrete underneath the Terrace had
been repaired and appeared satisfactory. However, there was seepage of
water between the North West Terrace and the West Stand in heavy rain.

IT WAS AGREED - That the Club'would make good the bitumastic sealing
between the Terrace and the West Stand.

C      North Stand

A crack in the concrete at the expansion joint adjacent to Stand entrance
"R" was noted.

IT WAS AGREED - That the Club would investigate and make good the crack.

D       Spion Kop

The Building Authority suggested that at some future date the Club should
consider giving attention to the original steps at. the rear of the Kop
(at the bottom of the new staircase) so as to remove the slight downward
tilt and ensure a common height of risers.

IT WAS AGREED - That, whilst there had been no reported incidents, the Club
would bear the suggestion in mind for attention at a future date.

E       South Stand

The Club reported that the gantry access to the Commentary Box on the top
of the Stand was not nowused, except byground maintenancestaff.

IT WAS AGREED - That theClub would replace the missingrings   in the chain
used as a handrail on the gantry.

F       Crush Barriers

The Club reported that the remaining third of the crush barriers on the
Spion Kop had now been tested. The only problem had been rusting of some
of the clips over the top tubes. These had been replaced or would be
replaced by the start of the Season on 28 August.

A visual inspection had also been carried out of the clips on the crush
barriers on the West and North-West Terraces, and similar action taken.

G       Police and First Aid Facilities

The new police and first aid facilities under the North Stand were well
on the way towards completion, and would be utilised atthe opening match
on 28 August.

H       Penistone Road Side

It was noted;that the steel girders adjoining the wall at the rear of the
Butcher's Shop had been satisfactorily attended to, and that the Folding
Exit Gates had had new tops and runners installed and the concrete made
good.

So far as the proposal to re-site an existing toilet block to the rear of
the Spion Kep to enable additional turnstiles and an exit gate tobe
installed was concerned, the Club had reported to the Chief Executive
by letter that this had had to be deferred until the end of next season
due to the size of the problem and the possibility of creating ha.zards for
spectators.
I      Television Camera Facilities

It was noted that the scaffolding Tower erected on the Spion Kop for
Television camera purposes had now been removed.

There did not appear to have been any progress with the Television
Authorities to date on the subject of permanent or semi-permanent
facilities.

       Fire-Fighting Equipment

wnilst tne u i u d were connaenc cnat.au 0 1 cne l i r e
were still sited as originally required by the Gene
the County Fire Service felt that a routine inspect
would now be appropriate

K      Maintenance

Certain areas of spalled concrete in the Stadium re
the Club had the work in hand as items of routine m
* SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
       With the Compliments of
 TH E C H IEF E X E C U TIV E



                  FOR INFORMATION




                  IFOR ACTION



                  FOR COMMENT




 From                        )ate    IO *   ' 4X.

 Department of Administration
 County Hall
 Barnsley    Tel. Barnsley 86141 Ext
 CR /A C E/0 01
                                                                                                                        \

                                                                     I-      ^Oi               ~/orr ^Wc^^Xcl                         lXvv3ta-t^
                                                                               >H^Ct                -        'T u w , ^
                                                                               Av^iAVt,                          10 ^Vwv           etf— U ^
                                                                               ^ ♦ w   w   ^ u J - r     ;   :
                                            gfi#-i£r’.%?.<
                                                                                                                    ■.■>-% ..


                                                                 2    ,        ^bk-edi ' 4 * r SMlniUf V b u U u ^ C e
           iSiH®                                                               V*<5t. -                                               71+^
                                                                                           ’ v^-fc , t o Cwva.                   cCt        Tity_
      h       h


                                                                 V                                  ■y <m-l

W*]J?B»-4>»7{/r;W%•**•<WsirMM*                                                 k4^\uw()                                W \ «, tVvvA          U-Vn* * 0
WSlfltSliiiS
         ®M|                                                                    AJ>                                         Vfc-A^flUl   ,
                                   ?^¥§#




                                                                                                                                                     «*'4*°
                                                                                                                                                       (&$




                                                                                                                                              s
                                                                                                                            i     ^ ps '\* 'i'XT'-




                                                                          14               ;\;J              ; ' .’ VO''-*
                                                             ^                                 *,      % j. *.« -    «&•&«» - *•
                                                       - ,-
                                                    !§Il|Pslf®§!ili'i!''“<‘!i'S\i
                                                    ‘
                                                    ®<*aS^a#3<A.sffiifS^
                                 ;:;^.:
                                      ffgf^l^^pl
Sheffield Wednesdays:Y, Football Clubpic
                                                               Registered Office
                                                               Hillsborough, Sheffield S6 1SW
Chairman:     H. E. McGEE                                      Telephone: 0742-343123
Manager:      J. CHARLTON, O.B.E.                              Telegrams: Wednesday Sheffield 6
Secretary:    E. ENGLAND                                       Registered No. 62478 England


             South Yorkshire County Council
             County Hall,
             Barnsley, S70 2TN                                 5th August 1982
                                                     ?       COu
                                                    ..V




             Dear Mr. Mallett

             Having met and conversed with Mr. David Vaughan at the police
             meeting in Sheffield yesterday, I confirm that the alterations
             to turnstiles etc. on Penistone Road have had to be deferred
             until the end of next season, due entirely to the size of the
             project and the possibility of creating hazards for our
             spectators.

             The police and first aid facilities are progressing very well,
             and we are hopeful that they will be in operation for the
             start of the season.

             Yours sincerely,




             Secretary.
                                                                   11 August 1982


    Oh Supt
                                    SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB         r
    Herold

|F D iv is io n
|


I                       A v i s i t by th e O ffic e r Working P a rty to

                        proposed a t 10.00 ant on Tuesday* 2 k August
                        1982, fo r th e Animal In s p e c tie s *

                        A
I                       w i l l he in attendance* I
                        th e attached copy l e t t e r firom S h e ffie ld
                        Wednesday Footbdt.1 C l u b r e ^ i i i g *© i “ ‘
                        a tio n s a t the ground being d e fe rre d .




                        A /Superintendent
                        OPS JB/SM


                        Enc




                                         5
                                             life'*




                  'h.
        Sooth Yorkshire Police
                  MINUTE SHEET                                                 date.. l6 .,June   1982

                  Subject ••••MEETIKG...TQ...BE..HELD...AT..JDEGE..JIEADQUJiETEES..
                             J.1.30 AM WEDNESDAY 4 AUGUST 1982
o




            You are requested to attend a meeting to be held in the
                  ®nCe ?°°m at Police Headquarters at               11.30 am on
            Wednesday, b August 1982.

            The secretaries of the five football league clubs within
            the county have been invited to attend and, following a
            S o u t h          th^ or 8anisation of football matches within
            chan rm ^          ^ for the past and coming seasons, the clubs*
            chairmen have      been invited to join us for lunch, at
            Headquarters,      at about 12.30 pm.

    %       I attach copies of previous minutes and any items for the
            agenda for the meeting to be held on k August 1982 should
            be forwarded to Acting Superintendent Stuart. Operations
            Division, by 19 July 1982.                  * Uperatlons




            (Operations)



           Enc


           Distribution

           Ch Supts       A Division
                          B Division
                          C Division
                          D Division
                          E Division
                          F Division
                          Operations & Traffic Division
           Supt           Operations Division
X"


                                                    9 June 1982
     Ch Supt
     Herold                     SOSGA 1975 - SWFC

     iF Division


                   Sir

                   Pleas# find attached for your infor*ation
                   and attention two
                   1982
                   1982




                   OPS TWS/SM


                   Enc
                                                                                                        /
EASTWOOD                               & PARTNERS                                                                            BOWMAKER HOUSE
«      - **         C o n s u ltin g    E n g in e e rs                                                                      23 KINGFIELD ROAD
                                                                                                                             SHEFFIELD S11 9AS
W. Eastwood                        B.Eng., Ph.D ., F.Eng., F.I.C.E.,                                                         Tel.: (0742) 583871
                                   F.l.Struct.E., F.G.S., M .C ons.E.

A. A. Wood                         8 . Eng., Ph .D ., C.Eng., F.I.C.E.,                                                                             and at:
                                   F.l.Sttuct.E., M .I.W .E .S ., M .C ons.E

A. G. Burdett                      G .M ., B .S c .(E n g ), C.Eng., M .I.C .E .                                                   36   H ig h   H o lb o rn
R. C. A. Eastwood                  B.Sc., C.Eng., M .I.C .E ., M .I.S truc t.E .                                                   London WC1V 6AA
                                                                                                                                   Tel.: (01) 242 7436
Associates:
Geoffrey Spir                     C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Mech.E.

C. S. Greaves                      B.Eng., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Scruct.E.
A. J . Clough                     B.A., C.Eng., M.C.I.B.S., M.I.Mech.E.                                 Our Ref:       WE/CW/3971
J. A. Strange                     C.Eng., M.I.Struct.E.                                                 Your R e f :   DV/LW/50
Co n su lta n t:
A. L. Percy                       M.Tech.(Hon.), B.Sc., C .Enj., F.I.C.E.,
                                  FJ.Struct.E., F.I.Mun.E., M.R.T.P.I.




    Chief Executive,                                                                                                   25 M a y ,
    South Yorkshire County Council,
    C o u n t y Hall,
    Barnsley,
    S. Y o r k s .                                                                                                                                        - ■.
    S 7 0 2TN


    For            the    attention                 o f Mr.               D.       Vaughan


    Dear            Mr.     Vaughan,

                                        Sheffield Wednesday Football                                        Club
                         Canopy         over            Television                   P l a t f o r m in South          Stand
                                       *    *.                                            *
                   We     have         had        a meeting with                          representatives              of the Y T V
    and            they     together with                           the BBC           have decided            that      they       cannot
    afford               the    canopy               after             all.          In    addition,        the        lifting beam
    for h oi sti ng cameras                                   into position cannot be                          placed         at t h e
    back            of the        stand because                              of pos sib le        future       developments.
    We         shall        therefore                  now be designing                         a much      simpler syst e m
    with            a lifting be a m over the                                      open       seats.
                    I understand                    that representatives                           of    YTV have            had
    d i s c u s s i o n s w i t h Mr.                         D.       Sherriff with              r e g a r d to       the    structure
    on         top of S pion                  K op .            We        have not been            involved            so    I am
    not            able    to     tell you                   the          outcome.


                                                                                     Yours      sincerely,




    c.c.            Mr.    E.     England                  - Sheffield Wednesday                         FC


                                                                                                                                           ..■ ' - ..'1
                                                                                                                                                      .\ ■
                                                               Registered in England - No. 1134531
            South Yorkshire Count y Council
           F. A.Mallett, LL.B., Chief Executive                         County Hall
                                                                        Barnsley
           J.C. Harris, M.A., LL.B, (Cantab), County Secretary          South Yorkshire S70 2TN
           Department of Administration                                 Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                        (STD 0226) 86141
                                                                        Telex: 547675

           OurRef: DV/AA/583/5            Your Ref: WE/CW/3971          Date; .3 June 1982



     Dear Sir,

     Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
     Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.

     I thank you for your letter dated 25th May.

     It is noted that the Television Authorities do not intend to
     proceed with the canopy over the television platform in the South
     Stand, and no doubt you will let me have details of the lifting
     beam proposals when these have been finalised.

     As regards the temporary structure at the top of the Spion Kop,
     it is true that at their request, YTV had discussions on a
     preliminary basis with the Building Authority earlier in the year.
     It was because of the fact that it became clear in March that
     further progress could not be made until arrangement drawings
     were submitted for consideration by the whole officer Working
     Party in the usual way that I wrote formally to the Club on this
     matter orx 31st March (a copy of whi^ch I forwarded to you for
     information).

     To date, I have not received any arrangement drawings from either
     the Television Authorities or the Club.

                                                    Yours faithfully,




                                                    Chief Executive.




Dr. W. Eastwood, B.Eng.,Ph.D.,F.Eng.,F,I.C.E,,
F.I.Struct.E.,F.G.S.,M.Cons.E.,
Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,
Consulting Engineers,
Bonomaker House,
23 Kingfield Road,                                           i
Sheffield.     Sll 9AS
                                                                                                                         BOWMAKER HOUSE
EASTWOOD                      & PARTNERS                                                                                 23 KiNGFIELD ROAD
               Consulting        Engineers
                                                                                                                         SHEFFIELD S11 9AS                 q lf iS
W. Eastwood                 B.Eng., Ph.D .. F.Eng.. F.I.C.E.,                                                            Tei.: (0742) 583871               °
                            F.I.Struct.E„ F.G.S., M .C ons.E .

                            8 . Eng.. Ph.D .. C.Eng.. F.I.C.E..
                                                                                                                                                 and at:
A. A. W o o d
                            F.I.Struct.E„ M .I.W .E .S ., M .C ons.E
                                                                                                                               3 6 H i g h Ho t b o r n
A. G. Burdett               G .M ., B .S c .(E n g ), C.Eng., M .I.C .E .
                                                                                                                               London WC1V 6AA
R. C. A. Eastwood           B.Sc., C.Eng„ M .I.C .E ., M .I.S truc t.E .
                                                                                                                               Tel.: (01) 2 4 2 7436
Associates;
Geoffrey Spir               C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Mech.E.

C. S. Greaves               B.Eng., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Scruct.E.
                                                                                                    Our R e f:      WE/JAS/SR/3971
A. J . Clough               B.A., C.Eng., M.C.I.B.S., M.I.Mech.E.

J . A. Strange              C.Eng.. M.I.Struet.E.                                                   Your R e f:
Consultant:
A. L. Percy                 M.Tech.(Hon-), B.Sc., C.Eng., F.I.C.E..
                            F.I.Scruct.E.. FJ.Mun.E.. M.R.T.P.I.


                                                                                                                                                              .   .




                                                                                                                                                                      >■
                                                                                                                                   ,'■           \-v-i:    ■•■■:

    South Y o r k s h i r e C o u n t y C o u n c i l ,                                                              17 May,          198
    C o u n t y Hall ,
    Barnsley.
    S o u t h Yorks.
    S70 2TN


    For       th e     a t t e n t i o n o f Mr.                        D.     Vaughan

    Dear       Mr.    Vaughan,

                                         Sheffield                      Wedneday Football                  Club
                                                         Camera Facilities

                 Thank       you         for          your            letter           dated     11 M ay ,       1982 accepting
     our      proposals            for          improving                     the      access     to,    and       providing a
     canopy          over    the         television                          platform       i n t he     South       Sta nd .
                 Although we                    have           written              to    both    the    B.B.C           and    Y.T.V
     about       the     p l a t f o r m at                  the            top   of     Spion Kop we             have    not     yet
     received          their           proposals.                            W hen we      have    details          these will              be

     fowarded          to     you         for         comment.




                                                                                         Yours    sincerely,




                                                                                                                 1 8 MAY 198 2                     !
                                                                                                         C0lP<rv ■ •                     .- V ..'.I
                                                                                                         y;-         ■■■■■■- —                      \

                                                            Registered in England -        No. 1134531
                                                                                                                           12 May 1982


                                 iCh Supt                               SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1 9 7 5 -
                                 IHerold
                                                                        SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB
                                     F Division




                                                        Sir

           MKMBSHgSSfM                                  Please find attached two     .
                                                        of the meeting held at the Fire Station,
1^»*■4 *' ’V^
           *■« ?<
               >w*         .w    *
                                                        Division Street, Sheffield, on Monday, 10 May
                                                         1982   .
       i-i’,-.:.Ja‘s„   IAfkv* ‘J



                                                         A/Superint endent
                                                         OPS TWS/SM


                                                         Enc




                                                                                      * *e        *A‘          ’ y-y




                                                                              r-•■■■»-•"v»r,^jr         j~ \           f



                                                                                           -.... ..\"A




                        ffj|5e
                                              f
                                              c*“* yVv* ‘‘          * " ^ *-■***? * -,S
                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
                                          With the Compliments of
                                     THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
                                                   O   PER/VTlTN •> ^ I¥ 1* <oisi__________


                                                       FOR INFORMATION

        ■iy                  wamsm
V"            -




                                                       FOR ACTION




                                                       FOUCOMMENT
 ,:-r


              ~-S- -'.X.
                                                                  'liwiviiw     al&o                 t
                           - ' ;


                                     From                            Date
                                     D epartm ent ot Adm inistration
                                     County Hall
                                     Barnsley    Tel. Barnsley86141 Ext.
                                     C R /A C E /001



                                                       ' "•!* ■               M' /■■j/,
                                                                                   I ~,   :1V'%
                                                                                        Vw:..'?.'.
                          SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

             Note of a Meeting of the Officer Working Party (Sheffield
             P istrictFheld at the Fire Station, Division Street,
             Sheffield, on 10th May, 1982

PRESENT:     Ms. J. Barker (South Yorkshire Police)
             D. Billington (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
             R. Herold (South Yorkshire Police)      ^      \   _      _ ^
             A. Roberts (City o£ Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
             D*. Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
                 Stuart (South
             T. ______  _____ Yorkshire Police)             ^            f^
             D. I. Vaughan   (Snnth Yorkshire County
                             (South            Countv Council)^
                                                       Council)                                      v
             f ! Waterhouse
                 Waterhouse (South
                            (S      Yorkshire County Fire Service)

         Purpose of Meeting

The primary purpose of the meeting was t o c o n s i d e r the outline proposals
forwarded for comment by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of the
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd. for improving the access to, and
providing a canopy over, the television c a m e r a facilities m the South
Stand.

2*         South Stand Television Camera Facilities

The Officer Working Party considered the drawings of the two alternative
proposals put forward, together with copy letters dated 14th and 21st April
containing additional details.

IT WAS AGREED that, subject to the detailed requirements of the Building
Regulations and the Health and Safety at Work Act being met, either of the
two outline proposals submitted for improving the access to, and providing
a canopy over, the television camera facilities m the South Stand were
acceptable from a Safety of Sports Grounds Act point of view.

 3.        Additional Turnstiles and Exit Gate in Penis tone Road

 D. Vaughan recalled that, in accordance with the Note of the meeting held
 on 15th April, he had written formally to the -Club (copy of the letter
 dated 20th April previously circulated to the Working Party).
                                                           >

 He reported that shortly afterwards, the Club's Secretary, Mr. E. England
 had ’phoned to discuss the intent of the paragraph relating to the Penistone
 Road side of the Ground.  In view of the discussion at the meeting held on
 15th April and the 'phone conversation with Mr. England, a^letter (dated
 28th April) had been sent to the Club saying that, on public order and
 safety grounds, the Penistone Road improvements would now be regarded as
 a requirement of the General Safety Certificate   (Note - D. Vaughan undertook
 to circulate a copy of the letter dated 28th April).

 4._____ Temporary Structures                              t

 It was noted that the copy letter dated 21st April on the South Stand
 Television Camera Facilities also referred to* the temporary structures aspect
 covered in the Note of the meeting held on 15th April (and specifical y
 mentioned in the letter to the Club dated 20th April).

  IT WAS A.GREED that D. Vaughan should query the present position when
  informing Messrs. Eastwood and Partners of ttfe Officer Working^Party s
             ,    ,.                             r~>- ♦•*>» South Stand Television Camera....
  views on tue a. 1 c e r a d L i v e prupOoiiio . t y *.   :                               .. .   ...
      DV/AA/583/5        KE/CB            28th April, 1982.


Dear Sir,

Further to the concluding paragraph of my letter
ualeu 20La April, to remove any doubt which might
exist, the County Council (through the Officer
Working Party) feels that experience has shown
that the improvements at the Penistone Road side
of the Hillsborough Stadium must now be considered
to be essential on public order and safety grounds.

Accordingly, carrying out of the improvements will
now becoiae a requirement of the General Safety
Certificate granted to the Club on 2lst December,
1979


                     Yours faithfully,




                     Chief Executive




Mr. E. England,
Secretary,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd,,
Hillsborough,
Sheffield,
S6 1SW.
           South Yorkshire County Council
          F. A. Mallett, LLB., Chief Executive                     County Hall
                                                                    Barnsley
          J,C. Harris, M.A.,LL.B„(Cantab), County Secretary        South Yorkshire S70 2TN
          Department of Administration                             Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                    (S T D 0226) 86141
                                                                    Telex: 547675


          Our Ref: DV/LW/503/5           YourRef: WE/JAS/CW/3971   Date: 11th May, 1982




Dear S i rs ,

Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.

The Officer Working Party (Sheffield District) has now had the opportunity
of considering the outline proposals enclosed with your letter dated
27th April for improving the access to, and providing a canopy over, the
television camera- facilities in the South Stand at the Hillsborough Stadium.

Subject to the detailed requirements of the Building Regulations and the
Health and Safety at Work Act being met where appropriate, either of the two
outline proposals are regarded as acceptable from a Safety of Sports Ground
Act point of view.

The Officer Working Party also noted the reference to the temporary structures
aspect in the concluding paragraph of the copy letter dated 21st April, and
I was requested to query with you the present position on this matter.

                                            Yours faithfully,




                                            Chief Executive.




Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,
Consulting Engineers,
Bo.wmaker House,
23 Kingfield Road,
Sheffield,
                          SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

             Note of a Meeting of the Officer Working Party (Sheffield
             District) held at the Fire Station, Division Street,
             Sheffield, on 10th May, 1982

PRESENT:     Ms. J. Barker (South Yorkshire Police)
             D. Billington (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
             R. HeroId (South Yorkshire Police)
             A. Roberts (City o£ Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
             D. Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
             T. Stuart (South Yorkshire Police)
             D. I. Vaughan  (South Yorkshire County Council)^
             F. Waterhouse (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)

1._____ Purpose of Meeting

The primary purpose of the meeting was to consider the outline proposals
forwarded for comment by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of the
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd. for improving_the access to, and
providing a canopy over, the television camera facilities m the South
Stand.

2         South Stand Television Camera Facilities

The Officer Working Party considered the drawings of the two alternative ^
proposals put forward, together with copy letters dated 14th and 21st April
containing additional details.

IT WAS AGREED that, subject to the detailed requirements of the Building
Regulations and the Health and Safety at Work Act being met, either of the
two outline proposals submitted for improving the access to, and providing
a canopy over, the television camera facilities in the South Stand were
acceptable from a Safety of Sports Grounds Act point of view.

 3         Additional Turnstiles and Exit Gate in Penistone Road

 D. Vaughan recalled that, in accordance with the Note of the meeting held
 on 15th April, he had written formally to the Club (copy of the letter
 dated 20th April previously circulated to the Working Party).

 He reported that shortly afterwards, the Club's Secretary, Mr. E. England
 had 'phoned to discuss the intent of the paragraph relating to the Penistone
 Road side of the Ground.   In view of the discussion at the meeting held on
 15th April and "the 'phone conversation with Mr. England, a letter (dated
 28th April) had been sent to the Club saying that, on public order and
 safety grounds, the Penistone Road improvements would now be regarded as
 a requirement of the General Safety Certificate   (Note - D. Vaughan undertook
 to circulate a copy of the letter dated 28th April).

 4,_____ Temporary Structures

 It was noted that the copy letter dated 21st April on the South Stand
 Television Camera Facilities also referred to the temporary structures aspect
 covered in the Note of the meeting held on 15th April (and specifically
 mentioned in the letter to the Club dated 20th April).

    IT WAS AGREED that D. Vaughan s h o u l d query the present po si tionwhen ■ .
    informing Messrs. Eastwood and Partners of the Officer Working Party s
                               •. , _ „ i -  C n r !-*<» <5outh ^tand Television Camera : . ;
    views ou the alternative proposaia         i Uw                            *. .
      DV/AA/583/5        EE/CB           28th April, 1982


Dear Sir,

Further to the concluding paragraph of my letter
udleu 20Lh April, to remove any doubt which mi git
exist, the County Council (through the Officer
Working Party) feels that experience has shown,
that the improvements at the Penistone Road side
of tho Hillsborough Stadium must now be considered
to £>e essential on public order and safety grounds.

Accordingly, carrying out of the improvements will
now becoiae a requirement of the General Safety
Certificate granted to the Club on 21st Decstcber,
1979


                     Yours faithfully,




                     Chief Executive




Mr. E. England,
Secretary,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd,,
Hillsborough,
Sheffield,
S6 1SW.
                                                             c e ?■ ^
                     South Yorkshire County Council
                     F. A. Mallett. LL.B., Chief Executive                     County Hall
                                                                               Barnsley
                     J.C. Harris, M.A., LL.B, (Cantab), County Secretary       South Yorkshire S70 2TN
                     Department of Administration                              Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                               (S T D 0226) 86141
                                                                               Telex: 547675


                     Our Ref: DV/LW/50 3/5           YourRef: WE/JAS/CW/3971   Date: 11th May, 1982                  '
                                                                                                                                 V.
                                                                                                                 -   • • .       -     •. •'


                                                                                                                                •.’•1 1
                                                                                                   • •:



         Dear Sirs,

         Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975
.J
         Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.
                                                                                              ..   .   ■ .   .   .           . . . -


         The Officer Working Party (Sheffield District) has now had the opportunity
         of considering the outline proposals enclosed with your letter dated
         27th April for improving the access to,  and providing a canopy over,                                                ■■ '
         television camera facilities in the South Stand at the Hillsborough Stadium.

         Subject to the detailed requirements of the Building Regulations and the
         Health and Safety at Work Act being met where appropriate, either of the two
         outline proposals are regarded as acceptable from a Safety of Sports Ground
         Act point of view.

         The Officer Working Party also noted the reference to the temporary structures
         aspect, in the concluding paragraph of the copy letter dated 21st April, and
         I was requested to query with you the present position on this matter.

                                                        Yours faithfully,




                                                        Chief Executive,




     r   Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,                                n
         Consulting Engineers,
         B o w m a k e r House,
         23 Kingfield Road,
         Sheffield,
          11 O 7 Q
     u
                                                                                                                                        \
                                                     29 April 1982
      Ch Supt Herold
                             SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975
' ;
      F Division
                             SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB LTD.


                       Sir
                          Please find attached copy correspondence
                       and plans received from SYCC regarding a
                       meeting to be held at Division Street Fire
                       Station at 2.30 pm on Monday 10 May 198a.

                       I will represent Headquarter* at the meeting.




                       A/Superintendent
                       OPS TS/DU      ;




                                                   ORK3HU&
                 South Yorkshire County Council
                 F. A. Mallett. LL.B., Chief Executive                                          County Hall
                                                                                                Barnsley
                 J.C. Harris, M.A., LL.B, (Cantab), County Secretary                            South Yorkshire S70 2TN
                 Department of Administration                                                   Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                                                (STD 0226) 86141
                                                                                                Telex: 547675


                 Our Ref:                              Your Ref;                                Date'

                 DV/KA/5 8 3 /5                       OPS/TS                                   2 8 th Ap




                 D ear S i r ,

                 S a f e t y o f S p o r t s G rounds A c t , 1975
                 S h e f f i e l d Wednesday F o o t b a l l Club L td

                 C o n firm in g t h e 'p h o n e c o n v e r s a t i o n b e tw e e n o u r r e s p e c t i v e
                 o f f i c e s t o d a y , a m e e ti n g o f t h e S h e f f i e l d D i s t r i c t O f f i c e r
                 Working P a r t y w i l l b e h e l d a t 2 .3 0 p.m . on Monday, 1 0 th May,
                 1982, i n t h e C o n fe re n c e Room a t t h e F i r e S t a t i o n , D i v i s i o n
                 S tr e e t, S h e ffie ld .

                 The p u rp o s e o f t h e m e e ti n g w i l l b e t o c o n s i d e r t h e C l u b 's
                 o u t l i n e p r o p o s a l s ( i l l u s t r a t e d i n t h e a t t a c h e d p la n s) f o r
                 im p ro v in g t h e a c c e s s t o and p r o v i d i n g a canopy o v e r t h e
                 t e l e v i s i o n cam era f a c i l i t i e s i n t h e S outh S ta n d . The copy
                 l e t t e r s d a t e d 1 4 th and 2 1 s t A p r i l ( a l s o a t t a c h e d ) c o n t a i n
                 a d d i t i o n a l d e t a i l a n d , you w i l l n o t e , a l s o r e f e r t o t h e
                 te m p o r a r y s t r u c t u r e s p o i n t a l r e a d y r a i s e d w i t h t h e C lu b.

                 P e r h a p s you w i l l a r r a n g e t o be r e p r e s e n t e d a t b o t h H e a d q u a r te r s
                 and D i v i s i o n a l l e v e l s a s u s u a l .


                                                           Y ours f a i t h f u l l y




                                                           C h ie f E x e c u t i v e ,
                                                          .w




The C h ie f C o n s t a b l e ,                                            “I
South Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e
P o lic e H ead q u arters,
S nig H i l l ,
                                                                                                                              BOWMAKER HOUSE
      EASTWOOD                    & PARTNERS
                                                                                                                              23 KINGFIELD ROAD
                     Consulting     Engineers                                                                                                     &                                   ■
                                                                                                                              SHEFFIELD S11 9AS
      W . Eastw ood             B.Eng., Ph.D., F.Eng., F.i.C.E.,                                                              Tel.: (0742) 583871
                                F.1.Struct.E„ F.G.S., M.Cons.E.
      A . A. W ood              B.Eng.. Ph.D.. C.Eng.. F.I.C.E..                                                                                               and at:
                                F.I.Struct.E., M.I.W.E.S., M.Cons.E
                                                                                                                                  36    H ig h        H o lb o rn
      A. G. B urdett            G.M., B.Sc.(Eng), C.Eng.. M.I.C.E.
                                                                                                                                  London W C1V 6AA
      R. C. A. Eastw ood B.Sc., C.Eng. M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                                                  T el.: (0 1 ) 242 7436
      Associates;
      Geoffrey Spir            C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M,I.M«ch.E.
      C. S. Greaves             B.Eng,, C.Enf., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                             Our B e l:                 W E /J A S /C W /3 9 7 1
      A. J . Clough            B.A.. C.Eng.. M.C.I.B.S,. M.I.M»ch.E.                                                                   ' . '-V: "' "
      J . A. Strange           CEng., M,I.Struct.E.                                          Y o u r .R a ii       ..             -,                            ■        ...■; ....       .


      C onsultant:
                               M.Tech.(Ho#.), B.Sc., C.Eng.. F.I.C.E.,                                                                            •    ■        ,        ■            .       :
      A. L. Percy
                               FJ.Struct.E.. F.I.Mun.E., M.R.TJU.                                                             >        ..' , ■                 • ■.
                                                                                                                                              .   V        .        ..




      BBC./ B r o a d c a s t i n g House,                      London W L A 1AA                    ■

      (Mr. J. Aitken)
      Yo r k s h i r e Teleuvisicm Ltd,. , T V Centre,                              Lee d s ^ m         3.         IJS .. J.
                                                                                         -                     —          :
      (Mr. R. Wilde)




      Dear Sirs,

                                       Sheffield W e d n e s d a y Foo tba ll Club
                               Access to C ame ra P l a t f o r m - South Stand.

                     W e have p lea s u r e in e n clos ing two copies of- our d r a w i n g
      3971/1 showing proposals: far ex t e n d i n g the access w a l k w a y to
       the camera p l a t f o r m over-the^ Southr-stand:.^                                         i.c
                     To cause as little d i s t u r b a n c e as po ssi ble to the
      present seating arr ange men t we propo se that the~e xist ing
v*/




      hoisted st airflight is m a i n t a i n e d and a cat ladder installed.
       This woul d be .used to, evaluate, the-camera. p l a t f o r m if an-.
       emergency occu red duri ng a match.                                      A timber h a t c h over the
       top of the ladder,                      released from above, wil l prevent
       spectators climbin g onto the walkway.                                         By adopting this
       arrang eme nt only one seat will-be. l o s t ..
                     The w a l k way is shown ex ten ded to the rea-r of the                                                           t' ’
       stand-, raised .by a flight of -steps to,■give^-sufficient ; ■-*?...
       headroom-above, t h e back: rows of* seats" and- t o ^cleaar^ the*--: -
       ex isti ng gutter;.                  A runways bean*, ab:©ve*;the walteray ^xteaasicffin.
       projects:over-the.yarrd'?outsides.:
                     We have- des i.gneti. the', beam- to.; safely- support- “a load ~ -
       of 250 k g (550 lb. f) .,                          The.iwalkWsay- hasc been, <iesa/gn®&.. to a
        carry a uniformly                                                 loa d -of 5. kN/ral- '(10Q. .'11>.

                                                         Registered in England - No. 1134531
EASTWOOD f t PARTNERS




          A timber clad         "dormer" type h o u s i n g on a steel frame
 w i l l be constructed to fit into the e x i s t i n g roof.              This
 h o u s i n g w i l l h a v e doixbAe      ta. a i l Q w ^eqaipineirt to~ be b r o u g h t
 o n t o the walkway.
          It is ho p e d that the w o r k shown w i l l be carried out
 be f o r e the start of the n e x t season.          You r comments on our
 p r o p o s a l s w o u l d be w e l c o m e d so that w e can complete t he


 soon as possible.


                                             Yours    faithfully,




 c .c . E r i c England. SWEC?'
                                                                                                                 BOWMAKER HOUSE
EASTWOOD                       &      PARTNERS
                                                                                                                 23 KINGFIELD ROAD
              Consulting         Engineers
                                                                                                                 SHEFFIELD S11 9AS
W . Eastw ood                B.Eng.. Ph.D., F.Eng., F.I.C.E,                                                     Tel.: (0742) 583871
                             F.I.Struct.E„ F.G.S., M.Cons.E.

                             B.Eng.. Ph.D., C.Eng.. F.I.C.E™                                                                              an d at:
A . A . W ood
                             F.I.StructE„ M.I.W.E.S.. M.Cons.E
                                                                                                                        36   H ig h   H o lb o rn
A . G . B urdett             G.M.. B.Sc.(Eng). C.Eng., M.I.C.E.
                                                                                                                        London W C1V 6AA
R„ C. A. Eastw ood           B.Sc„ C.Eng., M.I.C.E„ M.I.StructE.
                                                                                                                        Tel.: (01) 242 7436
Associates:
Geoffrey Spir                C.En*.. M.I.C.E., M.I.Mech.E.
C. S. Greaves                B.En*., C.En*., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struet.E.
                                                                                             Our Ref :
A. J . Clough                B.A., C.En*., M.C.I.B.S., M.I.M.ch.E.                                           W E /JA S /S E /3 9 7 1
J . A. Strange              C.En*., M.i.Struct.E.                                            Your R e f:
Consultant:
A. L. Percy:                 M.TecMHon.), B.Sc., C.En*.. F.I.C.E.,
                             F.I.Struct.E., F.I.Mun.E., M.R.T.P.I.




   British Broadcasting Corporation,                                                                         21 A p r i l p 1 982
   Broadcasting House,
   London.
   W1A 1AA


   F o r t h e a t t e a t i o n o f M r ; jy : A l t k e n

   D ear S ir s ,

                                        S h e ffie ld             W ednesday F o o t b a l l C lu b L td
                                   C anopy o v e r cam era P la tf o r m                         -   S o u th S ta n d        *

                S in c e w r i t i n g              to     y o u o n 1 7 M a r c h we h a v e              lo o k e d    in to
    t h e v a r i o u s ways o f . c o n s t r u c t l n g _ a c a n o p y o v e r . t h e . e x t e r i i a . 1 ;
    cam era p la tf o r m               above; th e               S o u th . S t a n d .    Two s c h e m e s h a v e ' b e e n
    d e v ise d .        T hese         are         show n on o u r d ra w in g s 2 9 7 1 /2 and 3 ,                          tw o c o p i e s
    o f w h ic h a r e          e n c lo se d .
                D ra w in g 2 sh o w s a c a n t i l e v e r s y s te m w h ic h h a s                              th e          a d v a n ta g e s
    of an u n in te rru p te d                      v ie w .a lo n g t th e        f r o n t o f th e       p l a t f o r m . J The                  ; «
    c a n tile v e r       beam s w i l l                 be ta k e n       th ro u g h and c o n n e c te d            In to      th e
    m a in r o o f s t r u c t u r e .                   The beam s w i l l            be p ro p p e d o f f        th e e x is tin g
    c a s te lla te d        beam s u p p o r t i n g , t h e c a m e ra p l a t f o r m                    a n d by u s in g t h i s -
    sy ste m         no a d d i t i o n * ! l o a d t r i l l b e t a n s f e r r e d                 to    th e p la tfo rm              Ite e X f'
                H o w ev er,         because of                      th e e re c tio n     <L±tl i c u l t l e i ", a c c e s s f o r                *.
    c r a n e s , w o rk in g a t h e ig h t; o v e r th e s e a t i n g e t c ,                            th e c o st o f th is
    schem e i s           likely, t o               b e -,v e * y h ijg h .        W© B B l t e t s »t h e c o s t i f c o u l d          b e .a®
    much as.'. £ 1 1 ,.5 0 0 *
          D ra w in g 3 sh o w s «                           le ^        im p re ssiv e s t r u c t u r e ^ h ic h            is a s e rie s
    o f s im p le , fra m e s r b o l t e d                     t o ’t h e e x i s t i n g c a n o p y s t e e l w o r k s             The
    c a n o p y s . w i H ”n o t        p r o j e c t . t o :the&. b a c k 5. o f t h e : p l a t f o r m - b u t w ill:^ C O v e r--'
    say       th e    f r o n t . 3 .Gm,. ;} u s i e n o u g h ; to ^ ^ p ro tc w s t;. th e * ..e»& e£a#£«B 6M
                                                         Registared in England -   No. 1134531
            T h e o b v i o u s d is a d v a n t a g e - o ft h iB S C h e H ie i s              th a t    th e   fro n t
p o s t s may o b s tr u c t s ig h t l i n e s t o w a r d s t h e n e a r c o r n e r f l a g s *
H o w e v e r , s u i t a b l e p o s i t i o n i n g o f th e c a m e r a s m ay o v e r c o m e
th is .
            A lth o u g h som e o f           th e e r e c ti o n       difficultlea-are com m on
to     b o tft-s e h e ffle fc ^
le ss     c o stly .          We e s t i m a t e     t h e c o s t m ay bo o n l y h a l f o f              th a t.
of     th e schem e o n d ra w in g 2 .
             A fte r     you have had c h an c e                to     s tu d y th e      p r o p o s a l s we w i l l
be p le a se d         to ra c e iv e       a n y c o m m e n t s y o u m ay w i s h t o m a k e .



             At th e        b e g in n in g o f      th is    m o n t h we r e c e i v e d        a copy o f
a le tte r         d a te d     31 M arch fro m            S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e C o u n t y C o u rre A l:,.
to     M r. E n g l a n d ,        th e C lu b S e c r e t a r y .        Thej l e t t e r      m e n tio n s?
te m p o ra ry s t r u c t u r e s and s c a f f o l d i n g              u sed in c o n n e c tio n w ith
te le v isio n         tra n sm isslo H S B ,         W&' b e l i e v e
te m p o ra ry p la tfo r m            e re c te d    at     th e    t o p o f S p i o n Kop.             Do t h e
BBC i n t e n d        to     p u t fo rw a rd p ro p o s a ls ,          p ro b a b ly     in c o n ju n c tio n
w ith Y o rk sh ire T e le v is io n L td .,                    fo r     th e e r e c tio n       o f a p erm an en t
s tru c tu re ?          I f so*       c o u ld d e t a i l s       be fo rw a rd e d to          us p le a se       fo r   *.-■ <
su b m issio n         to     th e    S o u th Y o r k s h i r e O f f i c e r W o rk in g P a r t y .            I t may
be b e n e f i c i a l        if     t h i s w o rk w as c o m b in e d w i t h           th e w o rk p r o p o s e d
fo r      th e   S o u th S ta n d b u t t h i s           c a n be d e c id e d        la te r.




                                                                     Y o u r s ;f a i t h f u l l y   i
                               SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

N ote o f a M e e tin g o f t h e O f f i c e r Working P a r t y ( . S h e f f i e l d D i s t r i c t ) h e l d a t
t h e F i r e S t a t i o n , D i v i s i o n S t r e e t , S h e f f i e l d , on 1 5 th A p r i l , 1 9 8 2 .

PRESENT:        A. A tk in s o n ( C i t y o f S h e f f i e l d M e t r o p o l i t a n D i s t r i c t C o u n c i l)
                D r. H. B a i l e y ( S h e f f i e l d A rea H e a l t h A u t h o r i t y - T e a c h in g )
                Ms. J . B a r k e r (S o u th Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e )                                  ^
                R. H e r o ld (S o u th Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e )                                      / f
                J . T . H. Ray (S o u th Y o r k s h i r e County F i r e S e r v i c e )
                D. S h e r i f f ( C i t y Of S h e f f i e l d M e t r o p o l i t a n D i s t r i c t C o u n c i l)
                T. S t u a r t (S o u th Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e )
                D. I . Vaughan (S o u th Y o r k s h i r e County C o u n c il)
                F . W aterh o u se (S o u th Y o r k s h i r e County F i r e S e r v i c e ) .

1•          P u r p o s e o f M e e tin g

The p r im a r y p u r p o s e o f t h e m e e ti n g was t o c o n s i d e r t h e o u t l i n e d ra w in g o f th e
new p o l i c e and f i r s t a i d f a c i l i t i e s s u b m i t t e d f o r p r e l i m i n a r y comment by t h e
S h e f f i e l d Wednesday F o o t b a l l Club L t d . The Club had u n d e r t a k e n to su b m it
d e t a i l e d d ra w in g s once t h e Working P a r t y ' s p r e l i m i n a r y o b s e r v a t i o n s w ere
know n.
                                                                                                           \
2.             P o l i c e and F i r s t Aid F a c i l i t i e s

The P o l i c e and t h e A rea H e a l t h A u t h o r i t y r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s c o n f irm e d t h a t t h e
o u t l i n e d ra w in g i l l u s t r a t e d t h e b a s i c f e a t u r e s w h ich t h e y had a s k e d s h o u ld
b e i n c o r p o r a t e d a t e a r l i e r m e e t i n g s w i t h t h e C lu b .

 IT WAS AGREED t h a t t h e C l u b ’ s p r o p o s a l s w ere a c c e p t a b l e i n p r i n c i p l e , s u b j e c t
 to t h e f o l l o w i n g p o i n t s b e i n g draw n t o t h e Club s a t t e n t i o n (by Mr. Vaughan
 on b e h a l f o f t h e Working P a r t y )

 (x)            The w a l l s o f t h e f i r s t a i d room t o be l i n e d w i t h s u i t a b l e , n o n­
                c o m b u s t i b l e , m a t e r i a l t o e n a b l e th e room t o b e e a s i l y c l e a n e d and
                a l s o a v o i d th e n eed f o r r e - d e c o r a t i o n ;

 (ii)           l o c k a b l e s t o r a g e f a c i l i t i e s f o r b l a n k e t s , s t r e t c h e s , e t c . t o be
                p r o v id e d i n th e f i r s t a i d room;

 (iii)          i n v ie w o f t h e l o c a t i o n o f t h e G .P .O . j a c k p o i n t i n t h e p o l i c e room,
                th e t e l e p h o n e f a c i l i t y to be e x te n d e d i n t o t h e f i r s t a i d room a l s o ;

  (iv )         th e f l o o r s of b o t h t h e f i r s t a i d and p o l i c e rooms t o be o f e a s i l y
                 c l e a n a b l e m a t e r i a l ( s u c h as q u a r r y t i l e s , e t c . ) ;

  (v)           th e d o o r o f th e d e t e n t i o n room i n t h e p o l i c e room t o be a t l e a s t
                 2” t h i c k and f i t t e d w i t h a 5" l e v e r m o r t i s e l o c k , and t o open o u tw ard s
                 i n t h e d i r e c t i o n o f t h e to p of t h e p l a n s u p p l i e d ;

  (v i)         t h e r o o f o v e r t h e two rooms t o b e o f s u i t a b l e              n o n - c o m b u s t ib le
                 m a te ria l;

  (v ii)        th e need f o r t h e b u i l d i n g to be r o b u s t l y c o n s t r u c t e d , ( e s p e c i a l l y
                 th e d e t e n t i o n room) w i t h o u t r e d u c i n g t h e i n t e r n a l d im e n s io n s t o be
                 b o rn e i n mind;

  (v iii)        t h e b u i l d i n g g e n e r a l l y .(and th e t o i l e t accom m odation p a r t i c u l a r l y )


                                                                    MOMENT No. S Z - ]
to     be   ad eq u ately    v e n tila te d ,    and   su ita b le     d rain ag e     f a c i l it i e s   to   be   provided;


(ix )       a d e q u a te n a t u r a l o r a r t i f i c i a l l i g h t i n g to be p r o v i d e d ,

(x)         s im p le f i r e f i g h t i n g e q u ip m en t (su c h as a f i r e e x t i n g u i s h e r )           to be
             p r o v i d e d i n b o t h th e f i r s t s i d and p o l i c e rooms,

(x i)       th e Club to be rem in d ed o f t h e n e c e s s i t y o f s e e k i n g f o r m a l B u i l d i n g
             R e g u l a t i o n a p p r o v a l from t h e B u i l d i n g A u t h o r i t y .

3._____ Temporary S t r u c t u r e s

At t h e m e e tin g h e l d a t t h e H i l l s b o r o u g h S tadiu m on 4 t h F e b r u a r y , 1982, c o n c e r n
was e x p r e s s e d as to th e p o s s i b i l i t y o f i n a d e q u a t e s t r u c t u r a l s t a b i l i t y of_
te m p o ra ry s t r u c t u r e s , su c h as s c a f f o l d i n g u s e d i n c o n n e c t i o n w i t h t e l e v i s i o n
tra n sm is sio n s.       The Club h ad b e e n rem in ded o f t h e i r o b l i g a t i o n s .

S in c e t h a t ti m e , t h e Club h ad b e e n i n to u c h w i t h t h e T e l e v i s i o n A u t h o r i t i e s
who, i n t u r n , had b e e n i n t o u c h w i t h Mr. Vaughan by 'p h o n e . As a t t h a t s t a g e
o n ly i d e a s (m a in ly o f a s t r u c t u r a l n a t u r e ) w ere b e i n g f l o a t e d , i t was a g r e e d
t h a t t h e b e s t m ethod o f m aking p r o g r e s s was f o r t h e T e l e v i s i o n A u t h o r i t i e s to
c o n t a c t th e B u i l d i n g A u t h o r i t y d i r e c t .

The d i s c u s s i o n s w hich th e n took p l a c e i n d i c a t e d t h a t t h e p r o v i s i o n o f se m i­
p e rm a n e n t o r p erm an en t f a c i l i t i e s was b e i n g c o n s i d e r e d . ^ As th e p o s i t i o n
c u r r e n t l y was t h a t th e p r o p o s a l s a l m o s t h ad s u b s t a n c e , i t had b e e n s u g g e s t e d
to t h e Club (by l e t t e r . d a t e d 3 1 s t March) . t h a t t h e n e x t s t a g e was f o r the^
Club and i t s C o n s u l t a n t s to a g r e e a p p r o p r i a t e p r o p o s a l s w i t h t h e T e l e v i s i o n
A u t h o r i t i e s and th e n to s u b m it a r r a n g e m e n t d ra w in g s f o r c o n s i d e r a t i o n by
th e w hole O f f i c e r Working P a r t y i n th e u s u a l way.

 4^______ A d d i t i o n a l T u r n s t i l e s and E x i t G ate i n P e n is to n e Road

 Tne Club a t t h e m e e tin g on 4 th F e b r u a r y h ad e x p r e s s e d t h e i r _i n t e n t i o n o f
 p r o c e e d i n g i n th e f o r th c o m in g c l o s e s e a s o n w i t h th e d e m o l i t i o n o f some o f th e
 e x i s t i n g t o i l e t s on th e P e n is to n e Road s i d e o f t h e S tad ium i n o r d e r to
 p r o v i d e a d d i t i o n a l t u r n s t i l e s and an e x i t g a t e a t t h a t s i d e o f t h e S tad iu m .

 I t was s u g g e s t e d t h a t i t may w e l l b e t h a t th e Club would c a r r y - o u t th e work
 a t t h e same tim e as th e p r o v i s i o n o f t h e new f i r s t a i d and p o l i c e f a c i l i t i e s
 i f p r e s s u r e d to do s o .         C e r t a i n l y , a d d i t i o n a l t u r n s t i l e s w ere d e s p e . r a t e l y
 n e e d e d ( e s p e c i a l l y a t e v e n in g m a tc h e s ) a t th e P e n i s tone Road s i d e o f th e
 S tad iu m i n vie w o f th e l i m i t e d a r e a a v a i l a b l e f o r q u e u i n g _and th e c o n s e q u e n t
 i n h e r e n t d a n g e r to b o t h s p e c t a t o r s and r o a d t r a f f i c .             A d d itio n a lly , th e e x i t
 w i d t h s from t h a t s i d e o f t h e S tad iu m w ere j u s t a d e q u a t e , and an e x t r a e x i t
 w ould r e l i e v e t h e s i t u a t i o n .

     IT WAS AGREED t h a t C h ie f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t H e ro ld w ould l e t b o th Mr. Vaughan
     an d D i v i s i o n a l O f f i c e r Ray have d e t a i l s o f th e p o l i c e re c o m m e n d a tio n s .
     F o llo w in g t h i s , D i v i s i o n a l O f f i c e r Ray w ould c o n f i r m to Mr. Vaughan th e
     County F i r e S e r v i c e s u p p o r t o f th e p r o p o s a l s , and Mr. Vaughan would i n c l u d e
     an a p p r o p r i a t e p a r a g r a p h i n h i s l e t t e r to th e C lu b.
                    South Yorkshire County Council
©
                 F. A. Mallett, LL.B., Chief Executive                                             County Hall
                                                                                                   Barnsley
                 J.C. Harris, M.A.,LLB.,(Cantab), County Secretary                                 South Yorkshire S70 2TN
                 Department of Administration                                                      Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                                                   (STD 0226) 86141
                                                                                                   Telex: 547675

                    Our Ref; DV/KA/583/5                 YourRef: EE/CB                            Date: 20th April, 1982.
                                                                                                                          'r

    D ear S i r ,

    S a f e t y o f S p o r t s Grounds A c t , 1975

    I r e f e r t o y o u r l e t t e r d a t e d 5 t h A p r i l and t o t h e r e c e n t 'p h o n e c o n v e r s a t i o n
    w h ich you had w i t h Mr. D. Vaughan o f my s t a f f .
                                                                                                                               >-
    I c o n f i r m t h a t t h e O f f i c e r Working P a r t y h a s now c o n s i d e r e d t h e C lu b ’ s o u t l i n e
    d ra w in g o f t h e new p o l i c e and f i r s t a i d . f a c i l i t i e s a n d , s u b j e c t t o t h e f o ll o w i n g
    p o i n t s and c o n s i d e r a t i o n o f d e t a i l e d d r a w in g s , r e g a r d s t h e p r o p o s a l s as
    acc ep ta b le in p r in c ip le

    (i)          t h e w a l l s o f t h e f i r s t a i d room t o b e l i n e d w i t h s u i t a b l e n o n -
                 c o m b u s t i b l e m a t e r i a l t o e n a b l e t h e room t o b e e a s i l y c l e a n e d and
                 a l s o a v o id t h e n eed f o r r e - d e c o r a t i o n ;

    (ii)         lo c k a b le s to ra g e f a c i l i t i e s f o r b la n k e ts , s t r e t c h e r s , e t c .   t o be
                 p r o v id e d i n t h e f i r s t a i d room;

     (iii)       i n v ie w o f t h e l o c a t i o n o f t h e G .P .O . j a c k p o i n t i n t h e p o l i c e room,
                  th e te l e p h o n e f a c i l i t y t o b e e x te n d e d i n t o t h e f i r s t a i d room a l s o ;

     (iv )       t h e f l o o r s o f b o t h t h e f i r s t a i d and p o l i c e rooms t o be o f e a s i l y
                  c l e a n a b l e m a t e r i a l (s u c h as q u a r r y t i l e s , e t c . ) ;

     (v)         t h e d o o r o f t h e d e t e n t i o n room i n t h e p o l i c e room t o be a t l e a s t
                  2" t h i c k and f i t t e d w i t h a 5 l e v e r m o r t i s e l o c k , and t o open o u tw a rd s
                  in th e d i r e c t i o n o f th e to p o f th e p la n s u p p lie d ;

     (v i)       t h e r o o f o v e r t h e two rooms t o be o f s u i t a b l e n o n - c o m b u s t ib le
                 m a te ria l;

     (v ii)      t h e need f o r t h e b u i l d i n g t o b e r o b u s t l y c o n s t r u c t e d , ( e s p e c i a l l y
                  t h e d e t e n t i o n room) w i t h o u t r e d u c i n g t h e i n t e r n a l d im e n s io n s t o be
                  b o rn e i n m ind ;

     (v iii)     t h e b u i l d i n g g e n e r a l l y (and t h e t o i l e t a c c o m o d a tio n p a r t i c u l a r l y )
                  t o be a d e q u a t e l y v e n t i l a t e d , and s u i t a b l e d r a i n a g e f a c i l i t i e s t o be
                  p ro v id e d .

                                                                                          . . . / C o n t.



Mr. E. E n g lan d ,
                                                                             n
S ecretary ,
S h e f f i e l d Wednesday F o o t b a l l Club L t d . ,                                    DOCUMENT No. S Z &
H illsb o ro u g h ,
S h e ffie ld ,                                                                                                       .......   .

So 1SW.                                                                         I
                                                                                                                                      • «- * •

                                                                                         20th April, 1982.                  ;-


 (x x )      a d e q u a te n a t u r a l o r a r t i f i c i a l   l i g h t i n g to be p ro v id e d ;

 (x)         s im p le f i r e     f i g h t i n g e q u ip m e n t ( s u c h a s a f i r e e x t i n g u i s h e r ) t o   be
              p r o v id e d i n   b o t h t h e f i r s t a i d and p o l i c e room s;

 (x i)       t h e Club t o b e re m in d e d o f t h e n e c e s s i t y o f s e e k i n g f o r m a l B u i l d i n g
              R e g u l a t i o n a p p r o v a l from t h e B u i l d i n g A u t h o r i t y .

A d d i t i o n a l l y , two o t h e r m a t t e r s w e re r a i s e d a t t h e Working P a r t y            m e e t i n g . The
f i r s t r e l a t e s t o t h e s u b j e c t o f te m p o r a r y s t r u c t u r e s . T h i s w as,        o f c o u rs e *
r e f e r r e d t o i n my l e t t e r d a t e d 3 1 s t M arch, and no d o u b t you w i l l                   l e t me know,
i n du e c o u r s e , w h at p r o g r e s s i s b e i n g made o n t h e p r e p a r a t i o n o f            th e p ro p o sa ls
f o r s e m i-p e rm a n e n t o r p e rm a n e n t f a c i l i t i e s .

The second m a t t e r r e l a t e s t o t h e c o n c e r n f e l t fro m a p u b l i c o r d e r and s a f e t y
p o i n t o f view by s p e c t a t o r s ( p a r t i c u l a r l y d u r i n g e v e n in g f i x t u r e s ) s p i l l i n g o u t
on t o P e n i s t o n e Road w h i l s t t r y i n g t o g a i n a d m is s i o n t o t h e G round. As you a r e
a w a r e , t h e P e n i s t o n e Road a t t h a t p o i n t i s b o t h t h e m ain A61 S h e f f i e l d / B a r n s l e y
r o a d and a f e e d e r r o u t e fro m t h e c i t y c e n t r e t o t h e Ml Motorway a t T a n k e r s l e y
a n d , a s s u c h , c a r r i e s c o n s i d e r a b l e volum es o f t r a f f i c a t a l l t i m e s . T h e re i s
a v e r y r e a l f e a r t h a t a s e r i o u s a c c i d e n t w i l l r e s u l t u n l e s s so m eth in g can be
d o n e t o e n a b l e s p e c t a t o r s q u euin g t o g a i n a c c e s s t o t h e Ground a t t h a t p o i n t to
e n t e r more r a p i d l y t h a n i s p o s s i b l e p r e s e n t l y .

T h is w as, o f c o u r s e , a m a t t e r d i s c u s s e d a t t h e Ground I n s p e c t i o n on 4 t h F e b r u a r y ,
1982. I t was u n d e r s t o o d a t t h a t ti m e t h a t t h e Club i n t e n d e d t o c a r r y o u t work
i n t h e c l o s e s e a s o n t o r e c t i f y t h e p ro b le m . I n t h i s c o n n e c t i o n , i t i s s u g g e s te d
t h a t t h e m o st v i a b l e m ethod o f im p ro v in g t h e s i t u a t i o n i s t o r e - s i t e an e x i s t i n g
t o i l e t b lo c k t o t h e r e a r o f t h e S p io n Kop t o e n a b l e an a d d i t i o n a l minimum o f
s i x ( b u t p r e f e r a b l y t w e l v e ) t u r n s t i l e s t o be i n s t a l l e d , t o g e t h e r w i t h an
a d d i t i o n a l e x i t g a t e . The e x i t w i d t h s on t h e P e n i s t o n e Road s i d e o f t h e Ground
a r e , o f c o u r s e , j u s t a c c e p t a b l e and an e x t r a e x i t would r e l i e v e t h e s i t u a t i o n .

The County C o u n c il f e e l s j u s t i f i e d i n r e q u e s t i n g m o st f i r m l y t h a t t h e Club
s h o u ld t a k e a c t i o n i n t h e f o r th c o m in g c l o s e s e a s o n t o r e l i e v e t h e a d m is s io n
(and t o a l e s s e r e x t e n t , t h e e g r e s s ) p ro b le m s a t t h e P e n i s t o n e Road s i d e o f t h e
G ro un d, s h o u ld a d e c i s i o n t o do so n o t have a l r e a d y b e e n t a k e n by t h e C lub.

                                                               Yours f a i t h f u l l y ,




                                                               C h ie f E x e c u t i v e .
                                                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
                                                               W ith the Compliments of

                                                 T H E C H IE F E X E C U TIV E
                                                                             ATltTK^N, ^WlS'frKi
                                                 To.


                                                                     FOR INFORMATION




l»i 4l-*",£ V- ' ' '' ♦**>>'-r-.*'                                    FOR ACTION
  -V V ■ '' • ”>                ■'   '‘
f              Pt* * * +>» 'Mr
                                            if
                                          mm$M               "        FOR COMMENT C 1* * & r T*>
•
it
 iiaiMTSOsfe&cS&ufjeF?,
tSfSIISlSte


                                                                     (jd^^ yftyc      w\   .^ $ 9 . .


                                                 Fron                       Date           (o . *4» ’<*2.
                                                 Department of Administration
                                                 County Hall
                                                 Barnsley    Tel. Barnsley86141 Ext,            \^ -zrz.
                                                 C R /A C E /0 0 1
                                                                                 #   \
                                                       7 April 1982

a Supt Herold             WORKING PARTY MEETING - SWFC
Division



                                                                         -
                Sir

                A Working Party Meeting will be held at
                Division Street fire Station on Thursday,
                15 April 1982, at 2.30 p« with regard to
                the new medical and police roe* at Sheffield
                Wednesday Football Club* Chief Inspector
                Ruddy and I shall attend from Operations
                Division.                      -
                Please find
                        . . . attached copy
                                        . : . of
                                               . plans.
                                                  . ......   . ,   ' ■       .


                                         "


                PS


                Enc
                                                                            '•';   •' • ■'
                                                                                    "
                                                           Is               :

                                                                -.. - ;   /:/
                                                                 ;-’ ■
                                                                     '



                     o
                     o
                                                                          ;;

                                 o


                     O
                     o           >
                                 “
                     LJ-i   vO   -«c

                                 eO




                     o
                     o
                                            E te

                     O
                                                       q
                                       O
                                       <
                                       />
                     o      uJ
                            £> l_L->
                            2  =x
                                 <0
                     <Q
                     t-U
                     kD
                     o
                     o
f   ■■■ ^   • -.■1   Ci?
                     £X



                                             ,0 /9 /
                South Yorkshire County Council
                F. A. Mallett, LL.B., Chief Executive                                     County Hal l
                                                                                          Barnsley
                J.C. Harris, M.A., LL.B, (Cantab), County Secretary                       South Yorkshire S70 2TN
                Department of Administration                                              Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                                          (STD 0226) 86141
                                                                                          Telex: 547675


                Our Ref:                           Your Ref                               Date:

                DV/KA/583/5                        OPS/TS                                 7 t h A p r i l , 1982.



D ear S i r ,

S a f e t y o f S p o r t s G rounds A c t, 1975
S h e f f i e l d Wednesday F o o t b a l l Club L t d .

C o n firm in g t h e phone c o n v e r s a t i o n b etw ee n o u r r e s p e c t i v e o f f i c e s t o d a y , a
m e e tin g of t h e S h e f f i e l d D i s t r i c t O f f i c e r Working P a r t y w i l l b e h e l d a t
2 .3 0 p.m . on T h u r s d a y , 1 5 th A p r i l , 1982, i n t h e C o n fe re n c e Room a t t h e
F ir e S ta tio n , D iv isio n S tr e e t, S h e ffie ld .

The p u rp o s e o f t h e m e e ti n g w i l l b e t o c o n s i d e r t h e o u t l i n e d ra w in g s s u b m itte d
b y t h e S h e f f i e l d Wednesday F o o t b a l l Club ( a l r e a d y fo rw a rd e d t o you u n d e r
s e p a r a t e c o v e r ) r e l a t i n g t o t h e p ro p o s e d P o l i c e Room and M e d ic a l Room a t
t h e H i l l s b o r o u g h S tad iu m . The Club was u n d e r t a k e n t o su b m it d e t a i l e d
d ra w in g s once t h e Working P a r t y ’ s o b s e r v a t i o n s on t h e o u t l i n e d r a w in g s a r e
known.

P e rh a p s you w i l l a r r a n g e t o b e r e p r e s e n t e d a t t h e m e e tin g a t b o t h H e a d q u a r te r
and D i v i s i o n a l l e v e l a s u s u a l .


                                                      Yours f a i t h f u l l y ,




The C h ie f C o n s t a b l e ,
S ou th Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e ,
P o lic e H ead q u arters,
S nig H i l l ,
S h e ffie ld      S3 8LY
&MVMt m r

SAITOHf CP s&Qgtya GBOUNDS ACT $3WU
8WK3HRBBES WEEHESJMJf pOQMWtiUE# CMjIP
                        ~A-^tL- oar
x j>cKjftuwig<i<ffi recaxpc     dhJflr yowf jMiwiapr
                                             "SijtefciAuMMfcqrskni
                                                             ^KfljgiAk«b^4fiep
                                                                             l^Mk          ipfwI «ra»
                                                                                                 iMyjl w
                                                                                                       aM
                                                                                                        fi|ia|ifc
Oili ^ ilJBwi iSllftw * ^JJ* 0 B | Sk89^mMQp^» jr iWffpy wMMgawpsT vpSKI fll WKKBBm^m mm*mm wBPWHHF^WI
Road P o llo e s ta t io n , * d il a tta n d th a              mmMm * k WlLttibmmtfk a t
t*3 0 pNk an 4 FaJwcuacy 1 ^ 2 *

Y oura f ^ t h f u l l y




                                                     *» Ittl'iM lM r                .: . 3405
               South Yorkshire County Council
              F. A. Mallett, LL.B., Chief Executive                                           County Hall
                                                                                              Barnsley
              J.C. Harris, M.A., LL.B„ (Cantab), County Secretary                             South Yorkshire S70 2TN
              Department of Administration                                                    Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                                              (STD 0226) 86141
                                                                                              Telex: 547675


               Our Ref: DV/MB/583/5                  Your Ref: OPS/TS                         Date:




    Dear S i r ,

    S a f e t y o f S p o r t s Grounds A c t , 1975
    S h e f f i e l d Wednesday F o o t b a l l Club
                                                                                                         ■   ■■ ■


    I h av e a l r e a d y f o r w a r d e d t o you u n d e r s e p a r a t e c o v e rT (a n d a l s o d i r e c t t o
    D i v i s i o n a l H e a d q u a r t e r s ) copy o f a l e t t e r d a t e d 2 0 th J a n u a r y w h ich I add
    t o Dr. W. E astw oo d, t h e C l u b ' s C o n s u l t a n t .
                       .
    I a l s o c o n f i r m t h e r e c e n t ’phone c o n v e r s a t i o n b e tw e e n o u r r e s p e c t i v e
    o f f i c e s t o t h e e f f e c t t h a t a r r a n g e m e n ts h av e b e e n made f o r t h e O f f i c e r
    Working P a r t y t o v i s i t t h e H i l l s b o r o u g h S tad iu m a t 2 .3 0 p .m . on T h u rsday
    n e x t , 4 t h F e b r u a r y , 1982.

    P e r h a p s you w i l l a r r a n g e , a s u s u a l , t o b e r e p r e s e n t e d a t b o t h H e a d q u a r t e r s
    and D i v i s i o n a l l e v e l s .

                                                                      Y ours f a i t h f u l l y ,




                                                                       C h ie f E x e c u ti v e




|   The C h ie f C o n s t a b l e ,                                         1
    S o u th Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e ,
    P o lic e H ead q u arters,
    S n ig H i l l ,
    SHEFFIELD.
    S3 8LY
                              SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                         REF:                      F/RH/DR          f)V^*
C h ie f S u p e rin te n d e n t H ero ld , 'F ' D iv is io n                                     •F ' DHQ
                                                                         STATION/DEPT:
S u p e r i n t e n d e n t Mole ( O p e r a ti o n s ) HQs              DATE:                     13 O c to b e r 1981


SUBJECT:        SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB

You w i l l a l r e a d y h a v e r e c e i v e d a copy o f t h e m i n u te s o f t h e O f f i c e r Working
P a r t y ( S h e f f i e l d D i s t r i c t ) r e l a t i n g t o t h e S a f e t y o f S p o r t s G rounds A ct
1975 a s i t a p p e r t a i n s t o H i l l s b o r o u g h S ta d iu m , an d I now a t t a c h f o r y o u r
i n f o r m a t i o n an d y o u r f i l e a copy o f a n o t e X h a v e d i c t a t e d f o r my
d i v i s i o n a l f i l e r e l a t i n g t o t h e p r o v i s i o n o f t h e p o l i c e room f a c i l i t i e s
a t t h e C lu b .

My p o s i t i o n a s D i v i s i o n a l Commander i s somewhat d e l i c a t e i n t h a t f o l l o w i n g
p r o b le m s w i t h t h e e v e n in g m atch when Wednesday w ere a t home t o R o th e rh am ,
I p r e s s e d t h e C lub management i n t o c o n s i d e r i n g p u t t i n g i n more t u r n s t i l e s
a s t h e r e was a v e r y r e a l r i s k t o p e d e s t r i a n s q u e u e in g o u t s i d e t h e
P e n i s t o n e Road t u r n s t i l e s and s p i l l i n g i n t o t h e d u a l c a r r i a g e w a y . T h a t
i n i t i a t i v e was l a r g e l y r e s p o n s i b l e f o r t h e C l u b ' s p r e s e n t p o s i t i o n .

I know t h a t we h a v e t o a b i d e by t h e S a f e t y o f S p o r t s G rounds A ct 1975 -
a s w r i t t e n - an d c a n n e v e r k n o w in g ly c o n s e n t t o b r e a c h e s o f t h e r u l e s ,
b u t i n a l l t h e ti m e I h a v e b e e n r e s p o n s i b l e f o r t h e p o l i c i n g o f
H i l l s b o r o u g h t h e r e h a v e b e e n a number o f o c c a s i o n s when I h a v e had
c o n s i d e r a b l e p ro b le m s (and r e s u l t a n t r i s k t o l i f e an d lim b) g e t t i n g
p e o p l e i n t o t h e g ro u n d b u t n e v e r o ne o c c a s i o n when we h av e had
d i f f i c u l t y g e t t i n g them o u t . D e s p i t e t h a t , h o w ev er, w h at h a s come o u t
o f t h i s c u r r e n t move i s t h a t t h e C lub now knows t h a t t h e County C o u n c il
r e a l l y h av e them by t h e ' s h o r t and c u r l y ' s ' a n d u n l e s s an d u n t i l t h e y
ta k e a c t io n t o p ro v id e th e f a c i l i t i e s r e q u ir e d by th e A ct, th e n th e y a r e
n o t l i k e l y t o b e g r a n t e d any o t h e r form o f c o n c e s s i o n - te m p o r a r y th o u g h
i t may b e .           __




 C h ie f S u p e rin te n d e n t




                             DOCUMENT No .      *8 3 2 .
Note for Sheffield Wednesday Football file


On 7 . 1 0 . 8 1 a t t e n d e d a m e e ti n g a t F i r e B r i g a d e H e a d q u a r t e r s , D i v i s i o n S t r e e t ,
w h ic h was a t t e n d e d b y o t h e r members o f t h e SYCC and S e r g e a n t _______ HQ (Ops)
D i v i s i o n , an d c h a i r e d b y D i v i s i o n a l O f f i c e r J o n e s o f t h e f i r e S e r v i c e .

C o n s i d e r a t i o n was g i v e n t o t h e p r o p o s a l s b e i n g p u t f o r w a r d by t h e C lu b t o
r e p l a c e o n e o f t h e e x i s t i n g E x i t g a t e s on P e n i s t o n e R oad w i t h s i x more
t u r n s t i l e s . W h ilst th o s e p r e s e n t ag reed in p r in c ip le w ith th e ad v a n ta g e s,
t h e F i r e B r i g a d e s a i d t h a t t h e y c o u l d n o t i n an y way C oncede t o t h e r e q u e s t
w i t h o u t some a l t e r n a t i v e a r r a n g e m e n t s b e i n g made t o b r i n g u p t h e number o f
E x i t u n i t s s t i l l e x i s t i n g t o t h e minimum o f 69 u n i t s w i d t h r e q u i r e d b y t h e
S afety C e r tif ic a te .

The S e c r e t a r y , D avid V aughan, o f SYCC, i s t o conv ey t h e M e e tin g s f e e l i n g s by
l e t t e r t o t h e C lu b , p u t t i n g f o r w a r d p o s s i b l e a l t e r n a t i v e s i n t h a t some t u r n -
s t i l e s g i v i n g a c c e s s t o t h e Kop c o u l d b e s i t e d i n t h e e x i s t i n g 13' w a l l i n
t h e c a r p a r k a d j a c e n t t o t h e em ergen cy e x i t g a t e n e a r t o t h e H i l l s b o r o u g h
S u i t e . A l t e r n a t i v e l y , some form o f re m o v a b le t u r n s t i l e s c o u l d b e c o n s i d e r e d
x f s u c h i t e m s a r e a v a i l a b l e . The o n l y t h i r d a l t e r n a t i v e b e i n g t h a t i f t h e
6 t u r n s t i l e s t o b e i n s t a l l e d a t t h e P e n i s t o n e Road s i d e mean t h e c l o s u r e o f
t h e 21 f t . e x i s t i n g E x i t g a t e , t h e n t h e a r i t h m e t i c o f t h e m a t t e r means t h a t
t h e C lu b w ould h a v e t o a g r e e t o a c a p a c i t y r e d u c t i o n o f 3 ,8 4 0 p e r s o n s on t h e
Kop. T h i s , o f c o u r s e , r e d u c e s t h e t o t a l g ro u n d c a p a c i t y b elo w 5 0 ,0 0 0 .

 D avid Vaughan o f SYCC i s t o f o r w a r d me a co p y o f h i s l e t t e r t o t h e C lu b .



 1 3 . 1 0 .8 1   -    N o te f o r S h e f f i e l d Wednesday F o o t b a l l f i l e

 A t t a c h e d m i n u te s o f t h e O f f i c e r W orking P a r t y ( S h e f f i e l d D i s t r i c t ) r e c i e v e d
 r e l a t i v e t o t h e a p p l i c a t i o n r e f e r r e d t o a b o v e , a s a r e s u l t o f w hich I v i s i t e d
 H i l l s b o r o u g h S ta d iu m and h a d a m e e ti n g w i t h Mr. E n g la n d , t h e s e c r e t a r y .

 I h a n d e d him a cop y o f t h e a t t a c h e d a r i t h m e t i c by t h e F i r e S e r v i c e p e r s o n n e l ,
 r e l a t i n g t o t h e number o f u n i t w i d t h s r e q u i r e d f o r em ergency e x i t s , and h i s
 vie w i s t h a t t h e v a r i o u s a l t e r n a t i v e s p u t f o r w a r d i n t h e l e t t e r h e h a s r e c e i v e d
 fro m D av id Vaughan a r e / n o n - s t a r t e r s . The C lu b w i l l n o t a g r e e t o a r e d u c t i o n i n
 t h e c a p a c i t y o f t h e S p io n Kop, nor-Jto o p t i o n (c) t h e c o n s t r u c t i o n o f new t u r n ­
 s t i l e s g i v i n g a c c e s s t o t h e Kop fro m t h e c a r p a r k a d j a c e n t t o t h e H i l l s b o r o u g h
 S u i t e , and a d d i t i o n a l l y he d o e s n o t s e e some form o f p r e - f a b r i c a t e d and rem­
 o v ab le t u r n s t i l e s a s b ein g a p r a c t i c a l a l t e r n a t i v e .
                                      •' - I

 Mr. E n g la n d i s o n l y t o o w e l l aw are t h a t f o r a s lo n g a s t h e C lub f a i l t o comply
 w i t h t h e c o n d i t i o n s u n d e r w h ich t h e C e r t i f i c a t e was g r a n t e d i n r e l a t i o n t o t h e
 p r o v i s i o n o f a p u r p o s e - b u i l t p o l i c e / a m b u l a n c e room, t h e n an y o t h e r a p p l i c a t i o n s
 w h ich s e e k t o b r e a c h t h e o f f i c i a l te r m s o f t h e C e r t i f i c a t e a r e n o t l i k e l y t o be
 approved.

  I h a v e a p p r a i s e d Mr. E n g la n d w i t h t h e c o n t e n t o f Ite m 3 on t h e a t t a c h e d m i n u te s
  an d h e h a s u n d e r t a k e n t o a c q u a i n t h i s c h a i r m a n , Mr. McGee, o f t h i s f a c t .
  I made Mr. E n g lan d f u l l y aw are t h a t s h o u ld t h e Working P a r t y c h o o s e t o b e p a r t i c u l a r l y
   ‘b lo o d y m in d e d ' t h e y c o u l d d r a m a t i c a l l y r e d u c e t h e c a p a c i t y o f ( o r in d e e d c l o s e ) t h e
  N o r th S ta n d a l l t h e t i m e o u r p r e - f a b r i c a t e d wooden and c o m b u s t i b l e p o l i c e room
  r e m a in e d i n i t s p r e s e n t fo rm . He knows t h i s o n l y t o o w e l l and s i n c e t h e N o rth
  S t a n d i s t h e p r i n c i p a l money s p i n n e r f o r g ro u n d r e c e i p t s h e i n t e n d s t o t r y and
  p r e s s u r e h i s B oard i n t o t a k i n g some p o s i t i v e s t e p s t o g e t t h e p o l i c e room p r o j e c t
  o f f t h e g ro u n d .
                                                                                                                                                          south     Y o r k s h ir e c o u n t y c o u n c il .

                                                                                                                                                                  W ith the C om plim ents of

                                                                                                                                                            THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
                                                                                                                                                            Trt       ffpfcft flTtCrMS          ^WtSUSTNt

                                                                                                                                  ^41
                                                                                                                                                                                  FO RI
                                                                                                             lSS|S6li%*|ip|^^^Bpifc
                                                                            '" ^       lir
                                                                                                                              ikfMtsg^!;■


,!*?lSIS#fepli#te
    ;J /.v.'V'.                                                                                                                      |i§|
         V~
          _   . / ’ * * .............................            *                              W
                                                                     ............... * . • * - . • « # .    - '"' V-
                                                                                                           - ..............                  _   .....i

                                           .,y 1;       -y   •

                                                                                                                  Iw IM                                                           FOR COMRAgffJT
                                                                                                                                            mM1

                                                                                                                                                                                          K•: f . *
                                                                                                                                                                                          WlAtfr*

                                                                                                                                                            From                                      __ D a t e * b ' >0 *‘

                                                                                                                                                            D ep artm en t of A dm inistration
                                                                                                                                                            County H all
                                                                                                                                                            Barnsley                T e l. Barnsley86141 Ext M-1* '
                                   SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

                        N ote o f a M e e tin g o f t h e O f f i c e r Working P a r t y
                     ( S h e f f ie ld D i s t r i c t ) h e ld a t th e D iv is io n S t r e e t
                          F i r e S t a t i o n , S h e f f i e l d , on 7 t h O c to b e r , 1981

PRESENT:                         Ms. J . B a r k e r (S o u th Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e )
                                 P . G a rn e r (S o u th Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e )
                                 R. H e ro ld (S ou th Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e )
                                 D. H o rn er (S o u th Y o r k s h i r e County F i r e S e r v i c e )
                                 K. J o n e s (S o u th Y o r k s h i r e C ounty F i r e S e r v i c e )
                                 J . Ray (S o u th Y o r k s h i r e C ounty F i r e S e r v i c e )
                                 D. S h e r i f f ( C i t y o f S h e f f i e l d M e t r o p o l i t a n D i s t r i c t C o u n c il)
                                 D. I . Vaughan (S o u th Y o r k s h i r e C ounty C o u n c il)

1 ._____ P u rp o s e o f M eetin g

The p u r p o s e of t h e m e e tin g was t o c o n s i d e r th e r e q u e s t o f t h e S h e f f i e l d
Wednesday F o o t b a l l Club L t d . ( c o n t a i n e d i n c o r r e s p o n d e n c e c i r c u l a t e d t o e a c h
o f t h e d i s c i p l i n e s r e p r e s e n t e d on t h e Working P a r t y ) t o t e m p o r a r i l y i n c r e a s e
t h e number o f t u r n s t i l e s on t h e P e n i s t o n e Road s i d e o f t h e g ro u n d by t a k i n g
o u t t h e 21 f t . e x i t g a t e and i n s t a l l i n g s i x a d d i t i o n a l t u r n s t i l e s , p en d in g
t h e c a r r y i n g o u t o f a p e rm a n e n t scheme i n t h e 1982 c l o s e s e a s o n .

2 ._____ A d d i t i o n a l T u r n s t i l e s

The P o l i c e r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s p o i n t e d o u t t h a t p u b l i c o r d e r and p u b l i c s a f e t y
p ro b le m s w ere c a u s e d on o c c a s i o n s o u t s i d e t h e g roun d ( m a in ly a t e v e n in g m a tc h e s )
by s p e c t a t o r s s p i l l i n g o u t o n to P e n i s t o n e Road w h i l s t t r y i n g to g a i n a d m is s io n
to t h e g ro u n d . T hese p ro b le m s had b e e n d i s c u s s e d w i t h t h e C lu b , and had
p r o b a b l y r e s u l t e d i n t h e r e q u e s t now b e f o r e t h e Working P a r t y . However, w h i l s t
p u tt in g th e case fo r a d d i t i o n a l t u r n s t i l e s , th e p o li c e r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s s tr e s s e d
t h a t i n no way d i d th e y c o n s i d e r t h i s s h o u ld be done a t t h e ex p e n se o f means
o f e s c a p e , s h o u ld t h e Working P a r t y c o n s i d e r t h a t t h i s would be t h e r e s u l t of
t h e C l u b ' s te m p o r a ry p r o p o s a l s now u n d e r c o n s i d e r a t i o n .

The F i r e S e r v i c e r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s r e p o r t e d t h a t th e y had c a r r i e d o u t a s i t e
i n s p e c t i o n , and p o i n t e d o u t t h a t t h e e x i s t i n g f i v e e x i t s i n q u e s t i o n were o n ly
j u s t a d e q u a te i n t h e e v e n t o f a maximum c a p a c i t y crowd ( u s i n g t h e G reen Guide
c a lc u la tio n s).

The Working P a r t y d i s c u s s e d a number o f o p t i o n s w hich m ig h t be open t o t h e C lub ,
p e n d in g t h e c a r r y i n g o u t o f th e p e rm a n e n t p r o p o s a l s i n t h e 1982 c l o s e s e a s o n .

IT WAS AGREED t h a t , w h i l s t t h e C l u b 's p e rm a n e n t p r o p o s a l s w ere welcome i n
p r i n c i p l e , t h e te m p o r a r y p r o p o s a l s f o r s i x a d d i t i o n a l t u r n s t i l e s on t h e "*
P e n i s t o n e Road s i d e o f t h e g ro und (by rem ov in g th e e x i s t i n g 21 f t . e x i t g a t e )
c o u ld n o t be s u p p o r t e d .

IT WAS ALSO AGREED t h a t , i n o r d e r t o be c o n s t r u c t i v e , t h e f o l l o w i n g o p t i o n s
s h o u ld be b r o u g h t t o t h e C l u b ' s n o t i c e

 (a )       a r e d u c t i o n o f 3 ,8 4 0 i n t h e S p io n Kop c a p a c i t y s h o u ld t h e Club w ish
             to p r o c e e d w i t h t h e te m p o ra ry p r o p o s a l s ;




                                                                                                          siKi>>o*£
(b)       t h e c o n s t r u c t i o n o f some form o f e a s i l y r e m o v e a b le t u r n s t i l e s        to en ab le
           t h e e x i s t i n g 21 f t . e x i t g a t e t o c o n t i n u e t o b e a v a i l a b l e ;

(c)       t h e c o n s t r u c t i o n o f new t u r n s t i l e s i n t h e a r e a o f t h e Stadium b etw ee n
           t h e end o f t h e S o u th S tan d and t h e P e n i s t o n e Road, p o s s i b l y f o r u s e s o l e l y
           a t e v e n in g m a tc h e s w here l a r g e a t t e n d a n c e s a r e e n v is a g e d s h o u ld t h e
           Club w is h t o n o r m a lly r e t a i n t h e e x c l u s iv is m of t h e      S o u th S tan d a r e a .

3.        P o l i c e and F i r s t Aid F a c i l i t i e s

W h i ls t n e i t h e r t h e Club n o r i t s C o n s u l t a n t s had r e p l i e d t o d a t e t o t h e
r e p r e s e n t a t i o n s made r e g a r d i n g t h e new p o l i c e and f i r s t f a c i l i t i e s , t h e P o l i c e
r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s r e p o r t e d t h a t i t a p p e a r e d t h a t some p r o g r e s s was b e in g 'm a d e and
t h a t t h e s u b j e c t had b e e n d i s c u s s e d a t a r e c e n t Board m e e t i n g .

IT WAS AGREED t h a t , i n t h e a b s e n c e o f a f i r m i n d i c a t i o n from t h e Club a s t o when
t h e new p o l i c e and f i r s t a i d f a c i l i t i e s a r e t o be p r o v i d e d , Mr. Vaughan s h o u ld
draw t o t h e C l u b 's a t t e n t i o n t h a t t h e N o r th S tan d c a p a c i t y i s d e t e r m i n e d by
t h e e v a c u a t i o n tim e o f 8 m i n u t e s o r i g i n a l l y a g r e e d u s i n g t h e n o n - c o m b u s t i b i l i t y
s t a n d a r d s o f t h e G re e n G u id e .        I f t h e e x i s t i n g p o l i c e and f i r s t a i d f a c i l i t i e s
a r e t o r e m a in , t h e n t h e e v a c u a t i o n tim e w i l l h a v e t o b e r e d u c e d t o t h e
c o m b u s t ib le s t a n d a r d e v a c u a t i o n tim e o f 2£ m i n u t e s . N a t u r a l l y , t h i s would
e n t a i l e i t h e r a r e d u c t i o n i n t h e number o f s p e c t a t o r s a d m itt e d t o t h e N o rth
S tand o r an i n c r e a s e i n t h e number o f e x i t s from t h e S ta n d .
                        jS o u T H    Y o r k s h ir e c o u n t y c o u n c il
                        i
                                W ith the C om plim ents of
                        i



                            THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
                            T o __________ O P E R A T E IT N ^




               * !r                                FOR INFO RM ATIO N




           ■j’r ?'%*’«|                           frn      ACTION
           „           I
                 *t''y ‘I

 it§#i
                                                   FOR C O M M E N T A t YtEKriNt
                                                   ftr VWBWJ ST , ViRS Sr^rnrtrKJ
                                                   O H T^- OCT*£BR ^     io«.^

                                                     v*>

                                                                        D a t e A ’ >0 -
                            D ep artm e n t of A dm inistration
                            County H all
                            Barnsley                T e l. Barns3evS6l4l Ext
                                                              mppjjwi




                                                                                  ssn

                       OOCllMlNTHo;




sfgilgjp
                      mmmm
                                                                                       *
                                     OCT 1981
                                                            COUNT; iv.LL,                      f c 'W
                                                                                        J
                                                             limited
                                                              Registered Office
                                                              Hillsborough, Sheffield S6 1SW
                                                              Telephone: 0742-343123/4
Chairman:    H. E. McGEE                                      Telegrams: Wednesday Sheffield 6
Manager:     J. L CHARLTON, O.B.E.                            Registered No. 62478 England
Secretary.   E. ENGLAND


             South Yorkshire County Council,                  EE/CB
             County Hall/
             Barnsley, S70 2TN                                30th September 1981




             Dear Mr. Mallett,

             Further to my telephone conversation with Mr. David
             Vaughan this morning/ I have pleasure in enclosing plan
             and details of our proposed alteration at Penistone Road.

             TO further explain our predicament/ the reason we cannot
             replace the exit gate immediately is, the area where it
             will go along with six more turnstiles is at the present
             tine a toilet area which will have to be moved. The
             spectators/ who would normally use the present gate/ could
             in fact lose Door 'O' as an exit.

             May we have your approval to make these alterations/ and
             we will then submit the necessary plans etc.

             Yours sincerely/




              Secretary.




              Enc.




                                                                                           .        T
                                                                                           '     .V —
  Sheffield Wednesday E C ,
    Hittsborouqh Ground
                                                                                                              \



                                                                                                                               - Taka- c t i
                                                                                                           <3iu* !K.;t>u Towtiki
                                                   N O R T H STAND                                 ^                               u     t,
                                                                                                       ^          £ C*.-^               C-i^.ClU
                                                                                                                         *K.              |

                        (iiiiiKlSlSii
                                                                                                                     .   e l e c t r o n ic
                                                                                                                         SCORE BOARD




                        wrsr
                                                                                                                                        £r.2ii
                       STAND




                                                           SOUTH STAND                                                          . \ . MO
                                                                                                                                y .V" s/?/c
                                                                     J. BUS
                                                                         *i
                                        OFF/CfAL
Turnstiles                                                               'o U t t ' " RESTAURANT

Gates- -                                           DIRECTORS ENTRANCE
              DV/MH/583/5                   EE/CB                         28th September, 1




   D ear S i r ,

   S a f e t y o f S p o r t s G rounds A c t, 1975

   I th a n k you f o r y o u r l e t t e r o f 2 5 th S e p te m b e r.

  I f you w i l l l e t me h av e a d ra w in g o r p l a n showing you r
  im m ed iate p r o p o s a l s , I w i l l a r r a n g e f o r t h e O f f i e e r
C f o r k i n g P a r t y t o g i v e i t c o n s i d e r a t i o n on an u r g e n t b a s i s .

                                                    Yours f a i t h f u l l y ,




                                                    C h ie f E x e c u ti v e



   E. E n g la n d , E s q . ,           ^
   S ecretary ,
   S h e f f i e l d H ednesday F o o t b a l l C lub L t d . ,
   H illsb o ro u g h ,
   SHEFFIELD,
   S6 1SW.
Sheffield W e d n e s d a y '^ . football
                                 Limited
                                          Club
                                                              Registered Office
                                                              Hillsborough, Sheffield S6 1SW
Chairman:    H. E. McGEE
Manager:     J. L CHARLTON, O.B.E,
                                                              Registered No. 62478 England
Secretary:   E. ENGLAND


             South Yorkshire County Council
             County Hall
             Barnsley, S




             Dear Mr. Mallett,

             We are experiencing delays and very heavy congestion on the
             Penistone Road side of our ground, particularly for evening
             matches. This, we feel sure, is due to a shortage of turn­
             stiles. We have looked into improving this particular
             area and, hopefully the alterations could be made at the
             end of the season but to get over the iitmediate problem,
             we could in fact erect six turnstiles with no other
             complication than taking out- an exit gate, and this gate
             would be replaced with ^another when the main alteration
             was done next summer.

             I have already spoken to Chief Superintendent Herold, and
             this proposal meets with his unqualified agreement.

             Will you look into this matter with the utmost urgency,
             and I shall be pleased to have your deliberations, in
             order that whatever work needs to be done can be started
             immediately.

             Yours sincerely,




             Secretary.
                                      SOUTH V O R K S H IR E COUNTY COUNCIL
                                        »
                                              W ith the C om plim ents of

                                 j
                                 ■j
                                        THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
                                              r u -\ C F        ^ o-k i v t



           t   )mia   ■*•                                          IFOR INFORMATION
                      Sr^as?-



                                                                   FOR ACTIO N



           %&&s                                             ,      FO R COMMENT                      r^ ;
tiagi§ii                                               ,,       fc**f                      , P i& M Z .
                       ^ is**v
                                                                             p . V. o .                  A


                                            From                                              D a t e l± _Ll :
                                            D ep artm e n t of A dm inistration
                                         County H a ll
                                            Barnsley                    T e l. Barnsley 86141 Ext

                                                                                                         ' '’
                                                                                                            ■
                                                                                                            *




                                                                        *>    *    ■ i .       >^    v ^ a.^
                                                                                             , * r - *,?
                                                                                              *v'H-;/.^
                                                                             '**                    1'«




                                                                                                    &m
        £Ws


                    As                          w vrtZE^       <*-*-*»*

<Xjbvi-<yv^v         "XtvSL             ©ttl-UL*-     \ a J &^”k - ' ~ j

P o ^ t ^       I           I '^lEwv^'jt                *T            vo«^

'W -   . &4>
 ft    "tK          'f                   W**XCll/\| .
                                                 *■          £ ■*.*          -■>


                C o^ k                                            I
            'Ct             CAva^M
   <v*jur      —                                ci\^UA«iL^
               *1   -4 * . ’***   > .«. .1^..    .


                                                                      JTV,
>i -s.

              #

                                            SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL

          JOINT REPORT OF THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE,                                        .           FIRE SERVICE COMMITTEE
          THE CHIEF FIRE OFFICER AND THE CHIEF                                                    3RD SEPTEMBER, 1981
          CONSTABLE

                                       SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

  l.      Background

  l.l     The County C o u n c i l ' s powers and d u t i e s u n d e r t h i s A ct a r e d e l e g a t e d t o t h e
          F i r e S e r v i c e C om m ittee. On 8 t h J a n u a r y , 1976, t h e Comm ittee d e c i d e d t h a t t h e
          n e c e s s a r y d e t a i l e d i n v e s t i g a t i o n s h o u ld b e u n d e r t a k e n by Of f i c e r ’Workiijg
          P a r t i e s f o r e a c h o f t h e f o u r Borough C o u n c il a r e a s . T h ese O f f i c e r Working
          P a r t i e s c o n s is t o f r e p r e s e n ta tiv e s o f th e F ir e S e rv ic e , th e P o lic e , th e
          B u i l d i n g I n s p e c t o r s o f t h e Borough C o u n c i l , c o - o r d i n a t i o n b e i n g u n d e r t a k e n by
          t h e D ep a rtm e n t o f A d m i n i s t r a t i o n .

  1.2     W h i l s t i t i s P a r l i a m e n t ' s i n t e n t i o n t h a t a l l s p o r t s g ro u n d s Which h av e
          accom m odation f o r more th a n 1 0 ,0 0 0 s p e c t a t o r s s h o u ld b e s u b j e c t t o t h e p r o v i s i o n s
          o f t h e A ct e v e n t u a l l y , t h e o n l y g ro u n d s d e s i g n a t e d by t h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e t o
          d a t e as r e q u i r i n g G e n e r a l S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e s from t h e a p p r o p r i a t e County C o u n c il
          h a v e b e e n c e r t a i n " I n t e r n a t i o n a l " g ro u n d s and t h o s e o f c l u b s i n t h e F i r s t and
          Second D i v i s i o n s o f t h e F o o t b a l l L e ag u e.

  2   .   P o s i t i o n i n S ou th Y o r k s h i r e

  2.1     The H i l l s b o r o u g h S tad iu m o f t h e S h e f f i e l d Wednesday F o o t b a l l Club L t d . was
          d e s i g n a t e d by t h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e a s r e q u i r i n g t o a p p ly t o t h e County
          C o u n c il f o r a G e n e r a l S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e by 1 s t J a n u a r y , 1979. F o llo w in g
          d e t a i l e d i n v e s t i g a t i o n s by t h e O f f i c e r Working P a r t y f o r t h e S h e f f i e l d D i s t r i c t ,
          t h e C e r t i f i c a t e was g r a n t e d on 2 1 s t Decem ber, 1979, a f t e r a p p r o v a l by th e
          C o m m ittee.

  2.2     The O f f i c e r Working P a r t i e s f o r t h e f o u r D i s t r i c t s h a v e a l s o b e e n g i v i n g
          i n f o r m a l a d v i c e , on r e q u e s t , t o t h e r e m a in d e r o f t h e League F o o t b a l l Clubs i n
          S o u th Y o r k s h i r e .

          F o ll o w i n g t h e i r p r o m o tio n t o t h e Second D i v i s i o n o f t h e F o o t b a l l L e ag u e, t h e
          B a r n s l e y F o o t b a l l Club L t d . and t h e R otherham U n ite d F o o t b a l l Club L t d . have
          b e e n d e s i g n a t e d by t h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e as r e q u i r i n g t o a p p ly t o t h e County
          C o u n c il f o r a G e n e r a l S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e by 1 s t J a n u a r y , 1982.

  3.      G eneral S a fe ty C e r t i f i c a t e

  3 .1    On 3 0 th November, 1978, t h e Comm ittee a p p ro v e d a d r a f t G e n e ra l S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e
          (copy a t t a c h e d ) a s t h e b a s i s f o r t h e s t a n d a r d c e r t i f i c a t e t o be u s e d th r o u g h o u t
          t h e C o unty .

  3 .2    The G e n e r a l S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e g r a n t e d t o t h e S h e f f i e l d Wednesday F o o t b a l l Club
          L t d . on 2 1 s t Decem ber, 1979, was b a s e d on t h e s t a n d a r d c e r t i f i c a t e w ith a d d i t i o n s
          t o m eet t h e p a r t i c u l a r c o n d i t i o n s a t t h e H i l l s b o r o u g h S tadium .

  3 .3    E x p e r i e n c e g a i n e d s i n c e t h e g r a n t i n g o f t h e S h e f f i e l d Wednesday G e n e ra l S a f e t y
          C e r t i f i c a t e h a s shown t h e d e s i r a b i l i t y o f i n c o r p o r a t i n g two m inor amendments
          to th e s ta n d a rd c e r t i f i c a t e f o r th e fo llo w in g r e a s o n s :-



                                                                                                               B35
(a)         t h e C h ie f C o n s t a b l e f e e l s i t e s s e n t i a l t h a t , i n o r d e r t o m a i n t a i n
             p u b l i c s a f e t y , t h e p o l i c e commander a t a f o o t b a l l groun d s h o u ld
             h av e t h e d i s c r e t i o n a r y power t o d ecid e- t h e a c t u a l moment when t h e
             e x i t g a t e s s h o u ld b e o p e n e d . To s a f e g u a r d t h e P o l i c e and t h e Club
             c o n c e r n e d , i t i s s u g g e s t e d t h a t p a r a g r a p h 10 s h o u ld b e amended
             a c c o r d i n g l y , and

(b)         as i t i s s t a n d a r d p r a c t i c e f o r I n s t i t u t i o n o f E l e c t r i c a l E n g i n e e r s '
            C e r t i f i c a t e s t o b e i s s u e d f o r f i v e y e a r s f o r c o m p le t e ly new
            i n s t a l l a t i o n s and l e s s e r p e r i o d s f o r o t h e r i n s t a l l a t i o n s (b a s e d on
             t h e r e s u l t s o f t e s t s and t h e known age o f t h e i n s t a l l a t i o n ) i t i s
             f e l t t h a t t h e 12 months r e q u i r e m e n t m e n tio n e d i n l i n e 2 o f p a r a g r a p h
            26 s h o u ld b e amended a c c o r d i n g l y .

Recommendation

(i)         T h a t t h e s t a n d a r d S o u th Y o r k s h i r e G e n e r a l S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e b e amended
             t o r e a d as f o l l o w s

              (a)     P a r a g r a p h 10

             "The H o ld e r s h a l l e n s u r e t h a t , e x c e p t w here o t h e r w i s e marked on
             t h e p l a n s , a l l d o o r s and g a t e s w h ich form an e g r e s s r o u t e betw ee n
             any s p e c t a t o r accom m odation and t h e p u b l i c h ig h w ay , o r o t h e r open
             s p a c e o u t s i d e t h e s ta d i u m , s h a l l b e so s e c u r e d a s t o open im m e d ia te ly
             and e a s i l y from t h e i n s i d e and s h a l l be .manned a t a l l tim e s t h e s ta d i u m
             i s b e i n g u s e d f o r a S p e c i f i e d A c t i v i t y by a t l e a s t t h e number o f s te w a r d s
             r e q u i r e d by P a r t 2 o f S c h e d u le 3 . A l l su ch d o o r s o r g a t e s s h a l l be
             opened by t h e s te w a r d s r e s p o n s i b l e and s e c u r e d i n t h e f u l l y open
             p o s i t i o n a t a tim e a g r e e d b e tw e e n t h e H o ld e r and t h e C h ie f C o n s ta b le
             and a t any o t h e r tim e on e v a c u a t i o n o f t h e s ta d i u m o r a p a r t t h e r e o f on
             b e i n g o r d e r e d so t o do by a p o l i c e o f f i c e r i n u n if o r m o r by t h e s o u n d in g
             o f th e alarm ".

              (b)      P a r a g r a p h 26

              "The H o ld e r s h a l l w i t h i n            months o f t h e d a t e o f t h i s c e r t i f i c a t e and
              t h e r e a f t e r n o t l e s s th a n o n ce i n e a c h p e r i o d o f f i v e y e a r s i n r e s p e c t
              o f new i n s t a l l a t i o n s (a n d su ch l e s s e r p e r i o d as t h e C h ie f F i r e O f f i c e r
              may r e q u i r e i n r e s p e c t o f o t h e r i n s t a l l a t i o n s ) s u p p ly t o t h e C h ie f
              F i r e O f f i c e r t h e c e r t i f i c a t e o f an in d e p e n d e n t E l e c t r i c a l E n g in e e r as
              t o t h e c u r r e n t c o m p lia n c e o r n o n - c o m p lia n c e o f t h e e l e c t r i c a l
              i n s t a l l a t i o n w i t h i n t h e s ta d i u m w i t h S e c t i o n E o f t h e I . E . E . R e g u l a t i o n s
              o r o t h e r s e c t i o n s o r R e g u l a t i o n s f o r t h e tim e b e i n g i n f o r c e r e l a t i n g
              t o t h e E l e c t r i c a l Equipm ent o f B u i l d i n g s " .

 (ii)         T h a t t h e G e n e r a l S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e g r a n t e d t o t h e S h e f f i e l d Wednesday
              F o o t b a l l Club L t d . on 2 1 s t D ecem ber, 1979, b e s i m i l a r l y amended.


 F . A. MALLETT                                   J - H. BR0WNL0W                                  H. A. JONES
 C h ie f E x e c u t i v e                       C h ie f C o n s t a b l e                       C h ie f F i r e O f f i c e r

 County H a l l ,
 B a r n s le y .

 2 6 th A u g u st, 1981.
MINUTES OF A MEETING TO DISCUSS THE ORGANISATION OF FOOTBALL MATCHES
                 YORKS
WITHIN THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AREA FOR THE 1 9 8 1 /0 2 SEASON. ilELD',                                                   ^
AT POLICE HEADQUARTERS
           EADQUARTERS ON FRIDAY 7 AUGUST 1981


p re s e n t:      A s s i s t a n t C h i e f C o n s t a b l e ( O p e r a t i o n s ) - C hairm an        \ '    *

                   C h i e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t s ' B ' , ' D ' , an d *F' D i v i s i o n s
                   S u p e r i n t e n d e n t s 'A 1, ' C ' , ' E ' , and O p e r a t i o n s D i v i s i o n s * * ^
                   C h ie f I n s p e c to r (O p eratio n s)
                   Mr D V aughan (SYCC)                                                                             P ,
                   Mr W r ig h t          - C h a irm a n , R otherham U n i t e d F o o t b a l l C lu b
                   Mr B e n n is o n - S e c r e t a r y ,            "              ’*          "         "
                   Mr S p in k s          - S e c r e t a r y , B a r n s l e y F o o t b a l l C lub
                   Mr E n g la n d - S e c r e t a r y , S h e f f i e l d W ednesday F o o t b a l l C lu b /
                   Mr C h e s t e r - S e c r e t a r y , S h e f f i e l d U n i t e d F o o t b a l l C lu b
                   A /In s p e c to r Johnson - S e c re ta ry

                   A p o l o g i e s w e re r e c e i v e d from t h s C h airm an a n d S e c r e t a r y o f
                   D o n c a s t e r F o o t b a l l C lub


 A s s i s t a n t C h ie f C o n s ta b le (O p e ra tio n s) opened t h e m e e tin g by r e i t e r a t i n g
 i t s o b je c ti v e s o f advance i d e n t i f i c a t i o n o f d i f f i c u l t i e s d u rin g th e f o r th ­
 com ing f o o t b a l l s e a s o n w i t h a view t o d e c i d i n g upon a c o u r s e o f a c t i o n t o
 o b v i a t e t h o s e d i f f i c u l t i e s b e f o r e t h e y becam e a p p a r e n t t o o u t s i d e r s .


      1.      MINUTES OF THE              PREVIOUS MEETING

      1 .1    The m i n u t e s o f       t h e m e e ti n g h e l d a t N i a g a r a S p o r t s C lu b o n 16 O c to b e r
      1980,   w h ich h a d b e e n       c i r c u l a t e d , w ere r e c e i v e d a n d a c c e p t e d .


      2.      MATTERS ARISING FROM THE MINUTES

      2 .1    I te m 3 - T e l e v i s i o n a n d P r e s s

  2 . 1 . 1 The C h airm an s a i d t h a t a m e e ti n g h a d f i n a l l y b e e n a r r a n g e d w i t h
. r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s o f b o t h t h e n a t i o n a l an d l o c a l m e d ia , a n d t h i s would t a k e
 p l a c e i n O c to b e r 1981 a t t h e N i a g a r a S p o r t s C lu b . T h i s was t h e f i r s t
 o c c a s i o n upon w h ic h s u c h a m e e t i n g h a d b e e n p o s s i b l e , due t o o t h e r
  com m itm ents o f a l l c o n c e r n e d . The s u g g e s t i o n s made a t t h e m e e ti n g on
  16 O c to b e r 1980 w i l l t h e n b e p u t f o r w a r d . The P r e s s C o u n c i l h a d b een
  approached ab o u t th e d i f f i c u l t i e s en co u n tered b u t h ad been u n a b le t o
  a s s i s t an d s u g g e s t e d t h a t i n d i v i d u a l a p p r o a c h e s w e re n e c e s s a r y .
...a
  2 . 1 . 2 The r e c e n t p u b l i c d i s o r d e r s i t u a t i o n t h r o u g h o u t t h e c o u n t r y , and
  t h e p o s s i b l e i m p l i c a t i o n s f o r t h e f o r th c o m in g f o o t b a l l s e a s o n , w ere t h e n
 d i s c u s s e d . M e n tio n was a l s o made o f t h e s i t u a t i o n s w h e re crow d
  d i s t u r b a n c e s a r e m a g n i f i e d b y e x c e s s i v e m e d ia c o v e r a g e , r e s u l t i n g i n
   •co p y cat' in c id e n t s .           S u p e r i n t e n d e n t L a m b ert s u g g e s t e d t h a t i t s h o u l d b e
 w r i t t e n i n t o c o n t r a c t s w i t h t h e t e l e v i s i o n c o m p a n ie s t h a t t h e y s h o u ld o n l y
  p h o to g r a p h t h e a c t u a l s p o r t i n g e v e n t t a k i n g p l a c e .          H ow ever, Mr B en n iso n
  p o i n t e d o u t t h a t t h e c o n t r a c t s a r e a g r e e d b e tw e e n t h e F o o t b a l l League and
  t h e t e l e v i s i o n c o m p a n ie s . He s u g g e s t e d t h a t l e g i s l a t i o n c o n c e r n i n g t h e
  p o i n t r a i s e d by S u p t L a m b ert may be t h e a n s w e r . Mr E n g la n d r e i t e r a t e d t h e
  p o i n t made a t a p r e v i o u s m e e ti n g t h a t few d i f f i c u l t i e s w e re e n c o u n t e r e d
  w i t h t h e p h o t o g r a p h e r s d e t a i l e d t o c o v e r t h e a c t u a l m a tc h - t h e o n e s
  t a k i n g e x c e s s i v e a c c o u n t o f h o o l i g a n o r i e n t a t e d i n c i d e n t s w e re t h e news
  re p o rte rs.           He m a i n t a i n e d t h a t a c l o s e l i a i s o n w i t h t h e t e l e v i s i o n
  p r o d u c e r who a t t e n d e d t h e ma<:ch w ould b e e x t r e m e l y b e n e f i c i a l a n d h a d
  w o rked i n t h e c a s e o f S h e f f i e l d Wednesday F o o t b a l l C lu b .

                                                                                           08GUMENT No.
2 . 1 . 3 The C h airm an m e n tio n e d t h e p o s s i b i l i t y o f u s i n g v i d e o r e c o r d e r s
w h ic h c o u l d t h e n b y a n a l y s e d a n d , w h e re n e c e s s a r y , r e t r o s p e c t i v e a r r e s t s
m ade. S t i l l p h o t o g r a p h s w o u ld b e o b t a i n e d from t h e v i d e o r e c o r d i n g s f o r
u s e i n c o u r t w h e re n e c e s s a r y . A p a r t from e n a b l i n g t h e p o l i c e t o c a t c h
h o o l i g a n s , i t c o u l d h a v e a d e t e r r e n t e f f e c t upon w o u ld -b e h o o l i g a n s who
may t h i n k t w i c e b e f o r e ' c a u s i n g t r o u b l e i f t h e y t h o u g h t t h e i r a c t i o n s w ere
b e in g m o n ito re d .       C h i e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t H e r o ld m e n tio n e d b r i e f l y t h e f a c t
t h a t d e f e n d a n t s a t L e e d s Crown C o u r t h a d r e c e n t l y b e e n fo u n d ' n o t g u i l t y '
o f o f f e n c e s a r i s i n g o u t o f d i s t u r b a n c e s d u r i n g t h e m a tc h b e tw e e n S h e f f i e l d
W ednesday a n d N e w c a s t l e a t H i l l s b o r o u g h a t t h e b e g i n n i n g o f t h e 1 9 8 0 /8 1
season.           They h ad p r o d u c e d t e l e v i s i o n r e c o r d i n g s a s p a r t o f t h e i r
su c c e s s fu l defen ce.

2*2       I te m 8 . 3 - B an n in g o f S u p p o r t e r s

2 . 2 . 1 A s s i s t a n t C h i e f C o n s t a b l e ( O p e r a t i o n s ) h i g h l i g h t e d a p ro b le m w hich
o c c u rre d l a s t seaso n o v er th e r e l e a s e o f a 'c o n v i c t i o n ' o f a S h e f f ie l d
Wednesday s u p p o r t e r i n v o l v e d i n d i s t u r b a n c e s a t O ldham . D e s p i t e t h e f a c t
t h a t t h e i n f o r m a t i o n was p a s s e d b y u s i n g o o d f a i t h , i t t r a n s p i r e d t h a t
t h e p e r s o n h a d n o t a t t h a t ti m e b e e n c o n v i c t e d o f t h e o f f e n c e an d was
a w a i t i n g t r i a l on a ' n o t g u i l t y ' p l e a . Mr E n g la n d m e n tio n e d t h a t o f t h e
names p u b l i s h e d a f t e r t h e d i s t u r b a n c e s a t O ldham , o n l y two h a d r e a c t e d
a d v e r s e l y , a n d one o f t h o s e was t h e p e r s o n who w as n o t t h e n c o n v i c t e d .

2 . 2 . 2 I n vie w o f t h e d i f f i c u l t i e s c a u s e d b y _ .th is i n c i d e n t , t h e C lu b s m u st
now o b t a i n d e t a i l s o f any o f t h e i r c o n v i c t e d s u p p o r t e r s from t h e p r e s s
i f t h e y w is h e d t o p u b l i s h t h o s e d e t a i l s i n t h e i r m a tc h p ro gram m es.


 3.        SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS (DESIGNATION) ORDER 1981

 3 .1    S u p e r i n t e n d e n t Mole t o l d t h e m e e ti n g t h a t R o th e rh am a n d B a r n s le y
 now came w i t h i n t h e p r o v i s i o n s o f t h i s O rd e r and D o n c a s t e r c o u l d w e l l
 fo llo w in th e n e a r f u t u r e .       Mr Vaughan and members o f t h e w o rk in g p a r t y
 had v i s i t e d th e gro u n d s co n cern ed .

.3 .2        Mr Vaughan s a i d t h a t i n f o r m a l l i a i s o n h a d b e e n m a i n t a i n e d w i t h a l l
 t h e S o u th Y o r k s h i r e f o o t b a l l c l u b s f o r t h e p a s t 12 m o n th s . S h e f f i e l d
 Wednesday p r e s e n t e d no p r o b le m s ; B a r n s l e y and R o th e rh am w e re b e i n g
 p r o c e s s e d ; an d D o n c a s t e r an d S h e f f i e l d U n i t e d w e re b e i n g i n v e s t i g a t e d on
 an i n f o r m a l b a s i s .      He w is h e d t o th a n k a l l t h e c l u b s f o r t h e i r e x c e l l e n t
 c o - o p e r a t i o n w i t h t h e w o rk in g p a r t y members an d h e h o ped t h e e n q u i r i e s
 w ou ld r e a c h a s u c c e s s f u l c o n c l u s i o n .
..a


 4.        DEVELOPMENTS SINCE THE LAST MEETING

 4 .1        Mr C h e s t e r s a i d t h a t t h e c o m p an ies form ed t h r o u g h t h e S h e f f i e l d
 U n i t e d F o o t b a l l C lu b h a d b e e n b r o u g h t a b o u t i n a n e f f o r t t o r e c o g n i s e t h e
 v a l u e o f s u p p o r t e r s an d s u p p o r t e r s ' c l u b s i n t h e i r a s s i s t a n c e t o t h e
 p a r e n t c l u b . S h e f f i e l d U n i t e d w ere t r y i n g t o e n s u r e t h a t t h e s u p p o r t e r s
 a s s o c i a t i o n s f e l t p a r t o f t h e c l u b . The new o r g a n i s a t i o n s h a v e
 c o n s t i t u t i o n s a n d f o r m a l c o m m itte e s a n d h e was aw are t h a t t h e y h a d
 r e c e i v e d a tre m e n d o u s r e s p o n s e t o d a t e .     S t r e n u o u s e f f o r t s w o uld b e
 made t o e n s u r e t h a t t h e s e o r g a n i s a t i o n s w ere s u c c e s s f u l . Mr C h e s t e r s a i d
 t h a t two o r t h r e e y e a r s ago t h e h o o l i g a n i s m p ro b le m was a c u t e . However,
 t h i s h a d d e c r e a s e d and s u p p o r t e r s h a d b e e n th a n k e d i n t h e m a tc h programm e.
 T h e re h a d b e e n a good r e s p o n s e t o t h i s i n i t i a t i v e .          The C hairm an p o i n t e d
 o u t t h a t t h e r e h a d b e e n a g e n e r a l d e c r e a s e i n a r r e s t s an d e j e c t i o n s from
 grounds o v e r th e l a s t seaso n .
4.2         Mr B e n n is o n g a v e d e t a i l s o f t h e i d e n t i f i c a t i o n s y s te m o p e r a t i n g f o r
j u v e n i l e s who w ere members o f t h e R otherham U n i t e d J u n i o r S u p p o r t e r s C lu b .
To e n t e r t h e j u n i o r t u r n s t i l e s t h e y w e re r e q u i r e d t o p r o d u c e a b i r t h
c e r t i f i c a t e and t h e C lu b was t r y i n g t o e n c o u r a g e f a m i l i e s b a c k i n t o
f o o tb a ll grounds.

4.3      C h i e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t W atson s u g g e s t e d t h a t n o t enough u s e was made
o f t h e p u b l i c r e l a t i o n s man on m a tch d a y s . T h e re c o u l d b e a d e v e lo p m e n t
of the functions of the man who plays the records in the pre-match period
so that his role encouraged the fostering of the spirit of good behaviour.
This man could possibly identify and welcome the visiting supporters,
although Chief Superintendent Herold felt that this could be counter­
productive and induce a disorder situation.

4.4   Mr Wright suggested that drinks consumed before the match could
create problems and Mr Chester asked whether the police met local JPs to
discuss problems at football grounds. The Chairman assured him that such
meetings did take place, albeit not specifically in relation to football
matches. However, at the various informal meetings which did take place,
the problems were aired.                                            •

4.5   Mr England commented that the ground regulations at Hillsborough had
recently been altered and asked whether the police would, with that backing,
refuse entry to known miscreants. The Chairman assured him that they would
refuse access to the ground to known trouble causers but said that the
re-written regulation was short of the phrase "deny access to,". On the
face of it, it merely allowed policemen to eject persons causing trouble
inside the ground and, while the police would interpret this regulation
in the spirit in which it was meant, it could well be re-written, with the
addition of the missing phrase, to good effect.

4.6   Mr Bennison suggested that the police should draft an appropriate
ground regulation which could then be included by the clubs, and the
Chairman said that this could and would be done as a matter of urgency.


 5.       FUTURE OPERATIONAL DIFFICULTIES

5.1        The C h airm an s t a t e d t h a t t h e F o o t b a l l A s s o c i a t i o n , i n t h e i r wisdom,
h a d e n s u r e d t h a t on a l t e r n a t e S a t u r d a y s f o u r o f o u r c l u b s w e re a t Home,
w i t h o n l y S h e f f i e l d W ednesday b e i n g Away. O b v io u s ly t h e r e v e r s e a p p l i e d
on t h e a l t e r n a t e S a t u r d a y s . T h i s c r e a t e d c e r t a i n o p e r a t i o n a l d i f f i c u l t i e s
w h ich w o u ld b e ov erco m e b u t t h e s e w ere e x a c e r b a t e d i n some c i r c u m s t a n c e s
s u c h a s when t h e S h e f f i e l d Show o c c u r r e d ,                f o u r f o o t b a l l m a tc h e s
t a k i n g p l a c e w i t h i n t h e c o u n t y on t h e same d a y , a n d s i m i l a r l y t h e S t L e g e r
Race Week a t . 'D o n c a s t e r c o i n c i d e d w i t h t h e same f o u r c l u b s b e i n g a t Home.
T h i s w o u ld r e p r e s e n t a c o n s i d e r a b l e d r a i n on manpower r e s o u r c e s .

 5.2          S u p e r i n t e n d e n t Mole p r o p o s e d t h a t s t e w a r d s s h o u l d l i a i s e w i t h t h e
 F i r e S e r v i c e c o n c e r n i n g f i r e p r e c a u t i o n s i n v ie w o f t h e r e c e n t n a t i o n w ide
 d i s t u r b a n c e s when f i r e bombs h a d b e e n th r o w n , b u t Mr B e n n i s o n , s u p p o r t e d
 by Mr S p i n k s , i d e n t i f i e d t h e c u r r e n t d i f f i c u l t y i n o b t a i n i n g s t e w a r d s .
 Mr W r ig h t asked* w h e t h e r p o l i c e c a d e t s , o r a s i m i l a r b o d y w i t h i n t h e F i r e
 S e rv ic e , co u ld u n d e rta k e s u p e rv is io n o f f i r e p o in t s , b u t th e d i f f i c u l t i e s
 i n h e r e n t i n s u c h a s y s t e m w e re p o i n t e d o u t t o him .

 5.3  C h i e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t I l e r o l d Scfid t h a t h e a n d h i s S u b - D i v i s i o n a l
 Commander, S u p e r i n t e n d e n t Chapman, h a d s p o k e n t o s t e w a r d s on t h i s s u b j e c t
and s a f e t y i n g e n e r a l d u r i n g a f r i e n d l y m atch a t H i l l s b o r o u g h , and t h e y
p r o p o s e d t o h o l d an e x e r c i s e t o t e s t s a f e t y p r e c a u t i o n s i n t h e n e a r
fu tu re .      He s u g g e s t e d t h a t o t h e r c l u b s m i g h t c o n s i d e r d o in g s o m e th in g
sim ila r.


6.       ANY OTHER BUSINESS

6 .1        C h i e f I n s p e c t o r S t u a r t in f o r m e d t h e m e e ti n g t h a t d u r i n g t h e fo rfch-
com ing s e a s o n , an o f f i c e r from t h e F o o t b a l l L i a i s o n D e p a rtm e n t woul*
on d u t y a t H e a d q u a r t e r s on a l l m a tc h d a y s . A dvance i n f o r m a t i o n aboi
s p e c t a t o r movements e t c . s h o u l d b e a s f u l l a s p o s s i b l e s o t h a t t h e
F o o t b a l l L i a i s o n D e p a r tm e n t c a n i n f o r m t h e F o r c e t o b e v i s i t e d b y ©1
s p e c t a t o r s i n t h e hope t h a t t h e q u a l i t y o f o u r i n f o r m a t i o n w o u ld be
r e c i p r o c a t e d when we r e c e i v e f o u r s e t s o f s u p p o r t e r s on a l t e r n a t e
S a tu rd a y s.'


T h e re b e i n g no o t h e r b u s i n e s s t h e m e e t i n g c l o s e d a t 1 2 .3 5 pm,
LETTER ALSO TO             -    R   C h e s t e r E sq, S e c r e t a r y , S h e f f i e l d U n ite d F/C Ltd
                                M   J S p in k s E sq , S e c r e t a r y , B a r n s l e y F/C L td
                                J   E B e n n iso n E sq, S e c r e t a r y , Rotherham U n ite d F/C L td
                                R   W Reade E sq, S e c r e t a r y , D o n c a s te r R o v ers F/C L td




E E n g lan d Esq                            r.. :        - . v. —
The S e c r e t a r y                       v . , , , .                                               ACC(0)/JEL
S h e f f i e l d Wednesday F o o t b a l l tC lu b L td           , ^                         ,4 -
H illsb o ro u g h                           ...... ,:t ,                                             12 A u g u st
                                                                                                                      1
S h e f f i e l d S6 1SW                     , *t . ■




D ear
                                                                                                                          -.I
I r e f e r t o o u r m e e tin g h e l d l a s t F r i d a y a t F o r c e
t o you a s p ro m is e d t h e w o rd in g o f a g ro u n d r e g u l a t i o n w h ic h , we would asjc y o u r
Board o f D i r e c t o r s t o c o n s i d e r f o r i n c l u s i o n a t . y o u r f o o t b i a i

              'T h e C lub r e s e r v e s t h e r i g h t f o y i t s s e r v a n t s and a g e n t s and
               f o r members o f t h e p o l i c e f o r c e s t o d e n y , a c c e s s , t o . o r , t o ,
               remove from t h i s Ground an y p e r s o n who d o e s n o t com ply w i t h
               g ro u n d r e g u l a t i o n s and w i t h tl je r u l e s and r e g u l a t i o n s o f t h e
               F o o t b a l l A s s o c i a t i o n and t h e f o o t b a l l League o r whose
               p r e s e n c e on t h e g ro u n d i s o r q p u ld r e a s o n a b l y b e c o n s t r u e d
               a s c o n s t i t u t i n g a s o u r c e o f d a n g e r , n u i s a n c e o r an noyance t o
               o th e r sp e c ta to rs* .

I hope t h a t t h i s w i l l p r o v e t o b e s a t i s f a c t o r y an d t h a t we can iooJ^ fo r w a r d t o
i t s im p le m e n ta tio n i n due c o u r s e .

Y ours




A s s i s t a n t C h ie f C o n s ta b l e
(O p e r a tio n s )
                                                                                   DOCUMENT No.         S 3 " )
-%




                                                                             • •• .


     Mr-S England
     Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd
     Hillsborough                                                        m
     SHEFFIELD                                                   "■
                                                                 "/ ^;V= '                     .~   ■


     8 6 ISM                                               ■■■
                                                                  V---V "
                                              .        ;             V--.-X--*


     Dear Brio

     X acknowledge receipt o f thi —     -Qyfwini* Rtoulstions and thank you for
     them.                                                                            .
                                                                                      .
                                                                                      .   ■.    ;       .   ■
                                                                                                            .''
                                                                                                              .



     Further to our discussion on Wednesday
     early in the season to bring all your stewards on an hour or so earlier.
     than usual I would like the opportunity - with you * to see them all to­
     gether so that I can explain the police role and ensure sensible co­
     operation between all of us during the coning season.

      —               POLIi


                 JUL198I


            F lJlV iS iW




                    f c.          U
                                                                                                      F /R H /D R
C h ie f S u p e r in te n d e n t H e r o ld ,   'F *   D iv is io n
                                                                                                       • F ' DHQ

A s s is t a n t C h ie f C o n s ta b le   (O p e r a tio n s )   HQs                                2 4 J u ly    1981



                       S H E FF IE L D WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB -                 GROUND RULES

   F u r t h e r t o o u r t a l k o v e r lu n c h o n W e d n e s d a y , 2 2 J u ly 1 9 8 1 # w it h o f f i c i a l s
   o f t h e S h e f f ie ld W ed n esd ay F o o t b a ll C lu b , I now a t t a c h f o r y e w *
   in f o r m a t io n a p h o to c o p y o f t h e am ended G ro u n d R e g u la tio n s .

   R e g u la tio n N o . 1 5 i s , o f c o u r s e , n ew a n d i s v e r y w id e i n i t s s c o p e .         It
   s e e m t h a t t h e s u g g e s tio n (w h ic h i s now recom m ended b y b o th t h e
   F o o t b a ll A s s o c ia t io n a n d t h e F o o t b a ll L e a g u e ) cam e a b o u t la r g e l y a s a
   r e s t i l t o f t h e i n i t i a t i v e w e to o k i n t h i s F o rc e a r e a l a s t y e a r .   A l­
   th o u g h i t i s v e r y w id e i n ' i t s ' -w o p *, i t 'h a s .-e J ts lu d e d '                                 '
    'd e n y in g a d m is s io n t o th e g ro u n d b y ' ' . p o l i o * ' ' ' w h i c h / a t
   t o h a v e in c lu d e d , a n d X c a n o n ly s u p p o s e t h a t e c o n o m ic f a c t o r s h a v e
   d ic t a t e d i t s o m is s io n .       O ne p re s u m e *' 'th e C lu b s w a n t
   a n d a r e h a p p y t o e j e c t t r o u b le m a k e rs o n c e t h e y h a v e g o t i t r a t h e r th a n
   d e n y in g t^ e a ^ a c c e s s in t h e f i r s t p la c e .




   C h ie f S u p e r in te n d e n t
           SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB LTE . SOUTH YORKS. POLICE


                        OFFICIAL NOTICE
                                                        2 3 JUL 1981
                       GROUND REGULATIONS
                                                           F D.h.Q.
                                                  L.
All matches are played in accordance with the Rules and Regulations
of The Football Association and The Football League.

Play cannot be guaranteed to take place cm any particular day or at
any particular time and the Club reserves the right to change its
advertised fixtures without n o t i c e a n d without liability.

No refund of any cash admission charge paid at the turnstile will be
made.

Refunds will be made in respect of seats booked in advance and paid
for where a match is postponed, subject to a time limitation, details
of which can be Obtained from the Box Office.

Unauthorised persons are not permitted to enter upon tl»e field of plfty.

With the exception of authorised Press representatives holding official
passes, the taking of photographs or cine photography inside the Ground
is prohibited.  In addition, no recording whether for Radio or Television
and whether for transmission or otherwise is permitted save with a
special authorisation in writing by the Club.

Only persons specifically authorised in writing by the Club are permitted
to offer Newspapers, Periodicals or any other Articles for sale in the
Ground.

Unnecessary noise such as that from the use of Radio sets and behaviour
likely to cause confusion or nuisance of any kind including foul and
abusive language is not permitted in any part of the Ground.

The climbing of floodlight pylons, stands or other buildings in the
Ground is forbidden.

The consumption of intoxicating liquors is permitted only in the bars
or other authorised places.

Bottles, glasses, flags, banners and other similar articles including
anything which could or might be used as a weapon are not permitted
within the Ground.

Under no circumstances, is it permitted to throw any object on to the pit

 In general the right of admission is reserved to the Club management.

 All persons entering this Ground are admitted only subject to the above
 Ground Regulations and to the Rules and Regulations of The Football
 Association and of The Football League.  Entry to the Ground shall be
 deemed to constitute unqualified acceptance of.all these Rules and
 Regulations.

 THE CLUB RESERVES THE RIGHT FOR ITS SERVANTS AND^ ftGENTS AND FCffl MEMBERS
 OF THE POLICE FORCES TO REMOVE FROM THIS GROUND*AN^HftRs8tfTOoboES NOT
 COMPLY WITH GROUND REGULATIONS AND WITH THE RUI&S AND REGULATIONS OF
 THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION AND THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE OR WHOSE PRESENCE ON
 THE GROUND IS OR COULD REASONABLY BE CONSTRUED AS CONSTITUTING A SOURCE
 OF DANGER, NUISANCE OR ANNOYANCE TO OTHER SPECTATORS.

                                BY ORDER
Sheffield Wednesday                                            limited
                                                                Registered Office
                                                                Hillsborough, Sheffield S 6 1SW
                                                                Telephone:0742-343123/4
Chairman:    H. E. McGEE
                                                                Telegrams: Wednesday Sheffield 6
Manager:     J. L CHARLTON, O.B.E.
                                                                Registered No.
Secretary;   E. ENGLAND



             South Yorkshire Police,                           EE/CB         ;
                                                                           ' 1 ;;v
             Police Headquarters,                            ■ ■■■■

             Snig Hill,                                        3rd July IS t
             Sheffield, S3 8LY



                                                                      ....            .7.            - V v;.




                                                                                 ■■
                                                                                            ... v-
             Dear Sir,

             Thank you for your letter of the 30th June re a meeting at
             Police Headquarters on Friday, 7th August at 11.30 a.m.
             which I shall be pleased to attend.

             I am unable to say whether my Chairman will be available,
             as he goes on holiday about that time; but might I suggest
             you contact him or his Secretary at Sheffield 349361 and
             I am sure that if he is unable to attend, another Director
             will accompany me.

             Yours faithfully,




             Secretary.
                                                                                                                                    o




                                                                                                                                            :
                                                                                                                                        ,   .


E E n g la n d E s q
T h e S e c r e ta ry
S h e f f i e l d W ed n esd ay F o o t b a ll C lu b L t d                                    o p s / b im   /   tt
H ills b o r o u g h
                                                                                                30 June 1981
S H E F F IE L D
S 6 1SW




D e a r S ir                                              .                                                            ......   ^

FOOTBALL CLUB R EPRESEN TA TIVES M EETING -                      7 AUGUST 1 9 8 1

I am w r i t i n g t o c o n f ir m te le p h o n e a rra n g e m e n ts f o r y o u t o a t t e n d a
m e e tin g o f F o o t b a ll C lu b R e p r e s e n ta tiv e s t o b e h e ld i n t h e C o n fe re n c e
Room a t t h e S o u th Y o r k s h ir e P o lic e H e a d q u a r te r s , S n ig H i l l , a t 1 1 .3 0 am
o n F r id a y 7 A u g u s t 1 9 8 1 .

I a n t ic ip a t e t h a t we m ay d e a l w it h t h e f o r m a l p a r t o f t h e m e e tin g u n t i l
a p p r o x im a te ly 1 2 . 3 0 pm a n d c o n tin u e w it h a w o rk in g lu n c h , a t w h ic h I
w o u ld l i k e t o t a k e t h i s o p p o r t u n it y o f i n v i t i n g y o u r C h a irm a n t o a t t e n d ,
s u b je c t t o    a v a ila b ilit y .

I w o u ld a p p r e c ia t e y o u r c o n f ir m a t io n o f in t e n d e d a tte n d a n c e a t t h e m e e tin g
a n d a n in d ic a t io n a s t o w h e th e r o r n o t t h e C h a irm a n w i l l b e a v a i l a b l e t o
 a tte n d .

S h o u ld y o u h a v e a n y q u e r ie s c o n c e r n in g t h e m e e tin g , th e n S p p e r in te n d e n t M o le
o f t h e O p e r a tio n s D iv is io n w i l l b e a b le t o a s s i s t .

 Y o u rs f a i t h f u l l y




 A s s is t a n t C h ie f C o n s ta b le
 (O p e r a tio n s )



                                                                                                         ]

                                                 Supt B L Mole                      3600
                                    SOUTH*YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL.
                                     *


                                               W ith th e C o m p lim en ts of

                                         THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
                                         T«%                                          ■■' i   • 9o      CE.   H »€
                                                     S kj »<Se         \


                                                                  FOR INFORMATION
                                                                  /^r  vs/iS l’»HN <a.U»0



                                                                  FOR ACTION
                                                                                 -v * -* * -    .

                                                                 'YOilli.V.-.iAl v.U*-| £.
         ' *7 **, ’ ‘V    „r '

                         W §m $M
i   ;\        ^             f’W
                              JrX


                                                                                                    ^         AM
                                                                                                         {      -




                                          F ro m «
                                          D e p a r tm e n t of A dm inistration
                                          County Hall
                                          B arn sley                 Tnl Ba«i»h»y86141 Ext                    M~2t
E A S T W O O D & PARTNERS                                                                          BOWMAKER HOUSE
                Consulting    Engineers                                                             23 KINGFIELD ROAD
                                                                                                    SHEFFIELD S11 9AS
W . E a stw o o d         8 .E n g , Ph.D.. F.Eng.. F.I.C.E..                                       Tel.: (0742) 583871
                          F.I.Struct.E., F.G .S- M.Cons.E.

A. A. W ood                8 .Eng., Ph.D., C.Eng.. F.I.C.E.
                          F.I.Struct.E, M.I.W.E.S., M.Cons.E.

A. G. B u rd e tt         G .M , B.Sc.(Eng), C.Eng.. M.I.C.E.

R. C. A. E a stw o o d    B.Sc., C .E ng. M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct. E.                                                                       '•. ;
Associates:
Geoffrey Spir             C.En*„ M.I.C.E., M.I.M«h.E.
C. S. Greaves             B.Eng., C.Enj., M.I.C. E., M.LStruct.E.                          ■   .


                                                                                    Our Ref:       Wl/AJC/SR/3113                 -
A. J . Clough             B.A., C.En( „ M.C.I.B.S., M.I.Mech.E.
J . A. Strange            C.En(., M,t.Scruct.E.                                     Your Ref:
Consultant:                                                                                                         ;•
                                                                                                                    :   :    .;


A. L. Percy               M.T«eh.(Hon.), B.Sc., C.En*„ F.I.C.E.,
                          F.I.Scruct.E., F.I.Mun.E., M.R.T.P.I.




                                                                                          ..


              The Chief Executive,                                                .......          23 April. 1981
              South Yorkshire County Council,
              County Hall,
              BarnsJLey,                    ■
              South Yorkshire.
              S70 2TN

              For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan

              Dear Sir,
                               Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd
                                         Public Address Standby System
                     In connection with the recent Working Party visit to
              the Hillsborough Grounds on 7 April 1981 we confirm that
              the following steps have been taken:

                     i)      the batteries                           are installed in a fire resistant
                             metal case.

                   ii)       the batteries are now kept fully charged by maintaining
                             a continuous d.c. supply.

                  iii)       all amplifier changeover circuits have been checked
                             and full sound level is available on standby.

                   iv)       instructions to ’operate* ’test* and ’leave* have been
                             posted alongside the equipment and copies left with
                             Mr. England.




                                                                                                                        '■   y- - ~' y



                                                    Registered in England — No. 1134531
                                                                     SHEET   2.



EASTWOOD £r PARTNERS




                                                                ;:.




                                               ■      :: r

          The above arrangements were in force prior to the
    semi-final match on 11 April 1981. We enclose a copy of
    the above instruction sheet or your records.




                                            Yours faithfully,




    c.c.   Mr. England - Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.
                        PUBLIC ADDRESS SYSTEM

 A.        T O OPERATE
 1.        Check that
               i)     Power plug in socket and switch on
              ii)     'Mains'    s wit ch on
            iii)      All amplifier switches         (5) on
              iv)     Sound source (roving mic, box mic,
                      gram, tape) s elec t e d as required.
               v)     Volume controls at       correct settings.

2.         Note that comm entary box           mic can be
            dir ected to
               i)     'Crowd control' (South Stand entrance
                      a r e v i a Amplif ier 1.
      or     ii)      'Stadium'    via Amplifiers 2 , 3 , 4     and
                      5.
      or iii)        Sele cted stands using isolating
                     switches.

B.         TO TE S T S TAND -BY BATTERIE S       *
t.         Set s y s t e m to operate as       A above.

2.          Tu r n   'Mains'    switch off.

3.          Check that
               i)    All   'Mains on'    neon lamps go out.
             ii)     Red 'Amplifier in use'          lamps fade and
                     relight.
            iii)     S y s t e m operates normally.

4.         Res tore 'Mains'        switch to on and reset
           volume control.

C.         TO LEAVE AFTER USE
1.         Leave
               i)    Power plug in socket and switch on
             ii)     'Mains'    switch on
           iii)      At least one amplifier switched on
             iv)     All so u n d source selector switches,
                     including monitor selector off
2.         Ch e c k that
              i)     Selected amplifier(s)        'Mains On'
                     neon(s) lit.
             ii)     All R ed   'Amplifier in use'        lamps are
                     out
3.         Note that
              i)     To maintain the batteries on charge,
                     power supply to at least one amplifier
                     must be left on
             ii)     The green 'Aux D.C. Supply' lamps may
                     be r e m oved to prevent them discharging
                     the batteries.
S hef f i e l d Wednes day                            Eastwood & Part
E A S T W O O D & P ART NERS                                                                                          BOWMAKER HOUSE
                Consulting     Engineers                                                                              23 KINGFIELD ROAD
                                                                                                                      SHEFFIELD S11 9AS
W . E a stw o o d         B.Eng, Ph.D.. F.Eng.. F.I.C.E..                                                             Tel.: (0742) 583871
                          F.I.Struct.E., F.G.S.. M.Cons.E.
A. A. W ood               B.Eng„ Ph.D.. C.Eng., F.I.C.E..
                          F.I.Struct.E., M.I.W.E.S.. M.Cons.E.
A. G. B u rd e tt         G.M.. B.Sc.(Eng). C.Eng., M.I.C.E.
R. C. A. E a stw o o d    B.Sc., C.Eng, M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.
Associates:
Geoffrey Spir             C E nj., M.I.C.E., M.I.M.ch.E.                                                                          ; ■ ■■••..■
                                                                                                                                    ’.v.'' ■
                                                                                                                                           ■■
                                                                                                                                           -  ■
                                                                                                                                              ' V ■■■■,■
C. S. Greaves             B.Enj., C.Enj.. M.I.C.E., M.I.Struet.E.
A. J . Clough             B.A., C.Enj.. M.C.I.B.S., M.I.Mech.E.                             Our R e f:
                                                                                                              .•
                                                                                                                   WE/AJC/SR/3113
                                                                                                                     .■  ■ ■ ■ • ■
J . A. Strange            C.Enf., M.I.Scruct.E.                                             Your Ref :
Consultant:
A. L. Percy               M.TtcMHon.), B.Sc., C.En*., F.I.C.E.,
                                                                                                                      ' ■a-—.-
                          F.I.Struct.E„ F.I.Mun.E., M.R.T.P.I.
                                                                                                                    ■:■. ■■■■■■    ■ ■■
                                                                                 ................................
                                                                              '<■ ‘ ‘                                   '                           :
                                                                              ;k: . - C v
                                                                                ....         -       •   4
              The Chief Executive,                                                                                 23   A p r il , 1 9 8 1
              South Yorkshire County Council,
              County Hall,                                                             ..        *
              Barnsley,                     ■
              South Yorkshire.
              S70 2TN

              For the attention of Mr. D. Taughan

              Dear Sir,
                               Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd
                                         Public Address Standby System
                     In connection with the recent Working Party visit to
              the Hillsborough Grounds on 7 April 1981 we confirm that
              the following steps have been taken:
                     i)      the batteries                          are installed in a fire resistant
                             metal case.
                   ii)       the batteries are now kept fully charged by maintaining
                             a continuous d.c. supply.

                  iii)       all amplifier changeover
                                                  *
                                                      circuits have been checked
                             and full sound level is available on standby.

                   iv)       instructions to ’operate* ’test* and ’leave* have been
                             posted alongside the equipment and copies left with
                             Mr. England.




                                                    Registered in England — No. 1134531
                                                                    SHEET   2.


EASTWOOD fir PARTNERS




          The above arrangements were in force prior to the
    semi-final match on 11 April 1981. We enclose a copy of
    the above instruction sheet for your records.
                                                                                 ■ft"
                                                         :v'.J;:-




                                             Yours faithfully,




                                                                                   *




     c.c.   Mr. England - Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.
                         PUBLIC ADDRESS SYSTEM

 A.        TO O P E RATE
 1.        Check that
              i)     Power plug in socket and switch cm
            ii)      ' M a i n s ’ switch on
           iii)      All amplifier switches           (5) on
            iv)      So und source (roving mic, box m i c ,
                     gram, tape) se lecte d as required.
             v)      Volume controls at correct settings.                              .■ ■
                                                                                                  -
                                                                            •     7.   ■                ■ - •'
                                                                                   ~ ':Y -            ■ ■ ■ / ■ •-
           Note that c o m me ntar y box mic can be                         v > •.V
           dir ecte d to                                                    "-
                                                                            ■     :                     .V^.vv
             i)      'Crowd control' (South Stand entrance
                     area) via Amplifi er 1.
      or    ii)      'Stadium'      via Amplifiers 2, 3, 4 and
                     5.                                                                -     ..   . .            .



      or iii)        Sel e c t e d stands using isolating
                     switches.

B.         TO T E S T STA ND-B Y B ATTERIES       *
t.         Set s y s t e m to operate as A above,

2.         Turn     ' M a i n s ’ s wit ch off.

3.         Check that
             i)      All    ’Mains o n ’ neon lamps go out.
            ii)      R e d ’A mplifier in u s e ’ lamps fade and
                     relight.
           iii)      S y s t e m operates normally.

4.         Restore ’M a i n s ’ swit ch to on and reset
           volume control.

C.         TO LEAV E AFTER USE
1.         Le ave
             i)     Power plug in socket and switch on
            ii)      ’M a i n s ’ switc h on
           iii)     At     least one amplifier switched on
            iv)     All s o u n d source selector switches,
                    incl udin g monitor selector off
2.         Check that
             i)     Se lect ed amplifier(s)       ’Mains O n ’
                    neon(s) lit.
            ii)     All R ed    ’Amplifier in u s e ’ lamps are
                    out
3.         Note that
             i)     To maintain the batteries on charge,
                    power supply to at least one amplifier
                    must be left on
            ii)     The green 'Aux D.C. S u p p l y ’ lamps may
                    be remove d to prevent them discharging
                    the batteries.
Sh ef fiel d Wed n e s d a y                          Eastwood & Partners
    +              T+/4                               p A n r u l f i no* P n rri nr»or* C
                         SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

       N o te   of   a   V is it    to     th e    H ills b o r o u g h    S ta d iu m ,    S h e ffie ld ,
                                          on 8 t h J u n e , 1981

PRESENT:        R e p r e s e n t i n g th e ' S h e f f i e l d Wednesday F o o t b a l l Club L td .

                E.   E n g la n d   (S e c re ta ry )


                R e p r e s e n tin g     th e    O ffic e r   W o rk in g    P a rty      (S h e ffie ld     D is tr ic t)


                C.   C a l v e r t (S o u th Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e )
                F.   D av is (S o u th Y o r k s h i r e County F i r e S e r v i c e )
                R.   Grimshaw (S o u th Y o r k s h i r e County F i r e S e r v i c e )
                R.   H e ro ld (S o u th Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e )
                A.   R o b e rts        (C ity    of   S h e ffie ld      M e tr o p o lita n    D is tr ic t    C o u n c il)
                J . P . Ruddy (S o u th Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e )
                D.   S h e riff     (C ity        of   S h e ffie ld      M e tr o p o lita n    d is tr ic t    C o u n c il)
                D . I . Vaughan (S o u th Y o r k s h i r e County C o u n c il)

1._____ P u rp o s e o f M e e tin g

The v i s i t was t h e s eco n d i n t h e tw i c e - y e a r l y programme o f v i s i t s by O f f i c e r
Working P a r t i e s t o a l l f i v e League F o o t b a l l Clubs i n S ou th Y o r k s h i r e , as
m e n tio n e d a t t h e m e e tin g on 1 0 th F e b r u a r y , 1981, and o r i g i n a j - l y r e f e r r e d t o
i n t h e C h ie f E x e c u t i v e ' s l e t t e r t o t h e Club d a t e d 1 0 th J a n u a r y , 1981. The
v i s i t on 7 th A p r i l h ad b e e n a s p e c i a l one i n view o f t h e S tad iu m b e i n g th e
venue on 1 1 th A p r i l f o r a F .A . Cup Semi- F i n a l m a tch .

2 ._____ I n s p e c t i o n o f        S tad ium

The r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s made a j o i n t i n s p e c t i o n o f t h e S tadium .

(a)       S o u th S ta n d

The p r o g r e s s o f t h e m o n i t o r i n g o f t h e a p p a r e n t d e f l e c t i o n i n t h e s t e e l
t r u s s e s r e f e r r e d to a t t h e m e e tin g on 1 0 th F e b r u a r y was q u e r i e d b u t , i n
th e a b s e n c e o f D r. W. E astw ood , no s p e c i f i c answ er c o u ld be g i v e n .

I t was n o te d t h a t t h e m o n i t o r i n g d e v i c e t o be s i t e d a d j a c e n t to t h e new
m e ta l c a s e f o r t h e b a t t e r i e s s u p p l y i n g t h e em ergency power s u p p ly f o r th e
p u b l i c a d d r e s s s y s te m ( r e f e r r e d to a t t h e m e e tin g on 7 th A p r i l ) had y e t to
be p r o v i d e d .

 (b)      West S ta n d

The c r a c k e d b r ic k w o r k a t t h e r e a r o f th e s t a n d , as w e l l as t h e a p p a r e n t
d i s t r e s s on t h e c o n c r e t e p i l l a r s ' s u p p o r t i n g th e s t e p s a t t h e r e a r o f th e
s t a n d and th e c r a c k s i n t h e c o n c r e t e a t t h e to p o f b o th s e t s o f s t a i r s ,
had b e e n made good.

 As p r e v i o u s l y a g r e e d , as soon as a g r i n d e r was n e x t p r e s e n t a t th e S tadium
 th e Club would ro u n d o f f t h e s t e e l s u p p o r t s to t h e new em ergency e x i t
 ( n e a r e s t to t h e S o u th S t a n d ) .

 F o llo w in g e x p e r i e n c e s a t t h e F.A . Cup S e m i- F in a l m a tc h , t h e Club were
 c o n s i d e r i n g r e v i s e d a r ra n g e m e n ts on th e t e r r a c i n g i n f r o n t o f t h e S ta n d .
 An a s s u r a n c e was g iv e n t h a t t h e O f f i c e r W orking P a r t y would be c o n s u l t e d
 when t h e s e had s u b s t a n c e .




                                                                                   I
(c)        North-West Terrace

The two s m a ll a r e a s w here w a t e r se e p a g e had c o n t i n u e d t o ta k e p l a c e a f t e r
t r e a t m e n t had now b e e n s a t i s f a c t o r i l y t r e a t e d .

I t was a l s o n o t e d ' t h a t t h e t i e b a r s th r o u g h t h e u p p e r l e v e l c o n c r e t e
a r e a to t h e r e a r had b e e n p r o t e c t i v e l y w rap p ed .

(d)       N o rth S ta n d

The e x p a n s io n c ro c k s i n t h e w a l l o f t h e N o rth S ta n d ( n e a r e s t to t h e S pion
Kop) had b e e n made good.

(e)       S pion Kop

The i n f i l l i n g o f t h e s t e p a d j a c e n t t o t h e h a n d r a i l on t h e l e f t o f th e
o r i g i n a l e x i t a t t h e to p o f t h e Kop had n o t b e e n done t o d a t e b u t would
be a t t e n d e d to s h o r t l y .

The te m p o ra ry b a r r i e r o f s c a f f o l d i n g tu b e s e r e c t e d b etw ee n t h e end o f th e
new Kop e x i t o u t e r b a r r i e r s and th e c o n c r e t e p i l l a r o f th e lo w e s t o f th e
Kop o r i g i n a l e x i t s t e p s ( a d j a c e n t t o t h e new b r i c k b u i l t c h ip shop) p r i o r
to t h e F.A . Cup S e m i- F in a l m atch re m a in e d . However, t h e Club in t e n d e d to
e x te n d t h e e x i s t i n g b a r r i e r s t o f i l l t h e gap on a p erm an en t b a s i s and to
l e v e l o f f t h e a r e a betw ee n t h e b o tto m o f t h e new Kop e x i t s t a i r c a s e and th e
o r i g i n a l Kop e x i t s t e p s p r i o r t o t h e commencement o f t h e f o r th c o m in g s e a s o n .

(f)       G e n e ra l

I t was n o t e d : -

(i)           t h a t t h e s t e e l g i r d e r s w i t h mesh on to p a d j o i n i n g t h e w a l l a t th e
r e a r o f t h e B u t c h e r ' s Shop on P e n i s t o n e Road r e q u i r e d a t t e n t i o n b e c a u s e o f
c o r r o s i o n , and ( i i ) t h a t t h e to p o f th e b r i c k b u i l t w a l l b etw ee n th e Spion
Kop and t h e S o u th S tan d r e q u i r e d p o i n t i n g .
S O tfH    YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL

         W ith th e C om p lim en ts of

  TH E CHIEF EXECUTIVE
   Trt    fccTUMOfc ^nv~fcQ t



                             FOR INFORMATION
                            ' *We ■■ 4 t& ^ X r cLm-«-<x .’%?>.
                 c ju   M



                              FOR ACTION

                                        /^G      Q r a r * ^      ■.>




    From                                              P » t» T ' V
    D e p a r tm e n t of A dm inistration
    County Hall
    B arn sley                  T el. B am eley 86141 Ext
                                    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

                   N ote o f a V i s i t t o t h e H i l l s b o r o u g h S ta d iu m , S h e f f i e l d
                                            on 7 th A p r i l , 1981


PRESENT:         R e p r e s e n t i n g t h e S h e f f i e l d Wednesday F o o t b a l l Club L t d .

                 A. J . Clough (M e s s r s . Eastw ood and P a r t n e r s )
                 E. E n g lan d ( S e c r e t a r y )
                 J . A. S t r a n g e ( M e s s rs . Eastw ood and P a r t n e r s )

                 R e p r e s e n t i n g t h e O f f i c e r Working P a r t y ( S h e f f i e l d D i s t r i c t )

                 K. Danks ( S o u th Y o r k s h i r e County F i r e S e r v i c e )
                 F . D av is (S o u th Y >rkshire County F i r e S e r v i c e )
                 R. H e ro ld (S o u th Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e )
                 A. R o b e r t s ( C i t y o f S h e f f i e l d M e t r o p o l i t a n D i s t r i c t C o u n c il)
                 P . Ruddy ( S o u th Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e )
                 D. S h e r i f f ( C i t y o f S h e f f i e l d M e t r o p o l i t a n D i s t r i c t C o u n c il)
                 D . I . Vaughan ( S o u th Y o r k s h i r e County C o u n c i l)

1.           P u rp o s e o f M e e tin g

B e a r i n g i n mind t h e F .A . Cup S e m i - F i n a l w hich was t o t a k e p l a c e on S a tu r d a y ,
1 1 th A p r i l , 1981, i t was f e l t i t w ould b e d e s i r a b l e f o r t h e Working P a r t y to
v i s i t t h e g ro u n d , e s p e c i a l l y a s a s m a l l number o f m a t t e r s had a r i s e n s i n c e th e
l a s t v i s i t on 10t h F e b r u a r y , 1981.

2.           I n s p e c t i o n o f Ground

(a )         S o u th S ta n d

The p r e v i o u s comments r e l a t i n g t o t h e r o o f s t r u c t u r e and t h e e x t e r i o r windows i n
t h e L a d i e s ’ T o i l e t s b elo w t h e s t a n d w ere s t i l l a p p l i c a b l e .

The L .P .G . c y l i n d e r s had b e e n removed fro m b e n e a t h t h e S ta n d , and t h e b a t t e r i e s
s u p p l y i n g t h e em ergency power s u p p ly f o r t h e p o l i c e a d d r e s s h ad b e e n e n c lo s e d i n
a s a t i s f a c t o r y f i r e r e s i s t i n g m e ta l c a s e . W h i ls t t h e p r o v i s i o n o f an a u to m a tic
b a t t e r y c h a r g e r w ould b e a l o n g e r te rm s o l u t i o n , i n t h e s h o r t te rm a r ra n g e m e n ts
had b e e n made f o r t h e b a t t e r i e s t o b e c h a rg e d b e f o r e e a c h game and f o r th e p u b l i c
a d d r e s s s y s te m t o be ch ec k ed r e l y i n g o n l y on t h e em ergency b a t t e r y s u p p ly . The
i n d i c a t o r f o r t h e b a t t e r i e s c o n d i t i o n was p r e s e n t l y i n th e P u b l i c A d d ress Box.
I t was s u g g e s t e d t h a t i t w ould be l e s s l i k e l y t o b e o v e r lo o k e d i f t h e i n d i c a t o r
was s i t e d a d j a c e n t t o t h e new m e ta l c a s e f o r t h e b a t t e r i e s .

(b)          West S tand

As p r e v i o u s l y a g r e e d , t h e Club would ro u n d o f f t h e s t e e l s u p p o r t s t o t h e new
em ergency e x i t ( n e a r e s t to t h e S o uth S ta n d ) a s s o o n a s a g r i n d e r was n e x t p r e s e n t
a t t h e g ro u n d .

The c r a c k e d b r ic k w o r k a t t h e r e a r o f t h e s t a n d w hich r e q u i r e d p o i n t i n g , th e
a p p a r e n t d i s t r e s s on t h e c o n c r e t e p i l l a r s u p p o r t i n g t h e s t e p s a t the. r e a r o f t h e
s t a n d , t h e c r a c k s i n t h e c o n c r e t e a t t h e to p bo b o t h s e t s ' o f - s t a i r s , a s w e l l as
t h e c u r r e n t l y s l i g h t c o r r o s i o n i n t h e b a s e p l a t e o f t h e o u t e r s t e e l column
( n e a r e s t t o t h e S o u th S ta n d ) h ad a l l b e e n i n c l u d e d i n t h e m a in te n a n c e programme
and wot}Id be u n d e r t a k e n s h o r t l y .
(c)         North West Terrace

The c r a c k i n g o f t h e c o n c r e t i n g     had been, a t t e n d e d t o by i n j e c t i n g m a t e r i a l from
th e to p .      The r e s u l t s had b e e n        s a t i s f a c t o r y , e x c e p t i n two s m a ll a r e a s where
w a te r s e e p a g e had o b v i o u s l y t a k e n p l a c e and w hich w ould r e c e i v e f u r t h e r
a tte n tio n .

(d)         N o r th S ta n d

The e x p a n s i o n c r a c k s w h ich had  a p p e a r e d i n t h e w a l l o f t h e N o rth S ta n d ( n e a r e s t
t o t h e S p io n Kop) had b e e n i n c l u d e d i n t h e m a in te n a n c e s c h e d u l e and would be
a tte n d e d to s h o r t l y .

(e )         S p io n Kop

The i n f i l l i n g o f t h e s t e p a d j a c e n t t o t h e h a n d r a i l on t h e l e f t o f t h e o r i g i n a l
e x it a t t h e to p o f t h e Kop w ould b e g iv e n a t t e n t i o n i n t h e c l o s e s e a s o n .

W h i l s t t h e b r i c k b u i l t c h i p shop a t t h e b o tto m o f t h e new e x i t from t h e Kop had
b e e n e r e c t e d , i t was n o t y e t i n u s e .     I t was n o te d t h a t t h e s i t i n g o f th e
c h ip shop had r e s u l t e d i n a p o s s i b l e d a n g e r t o s p e c t a t o r s i n t h a t a gap i n t o
w hich s p e c t a t o r s c o u ld b e p u s h e d , o r p o s s i b l y s tu m b le b e c a u s e o f t h e cam ber, had
b e e n c r e a t e d . As r e g a r d s t h e F .A . Cup S e m i - F i n a l ,

IT WAS AGREED -

t h a t a te m p o r a ry b a r r i e r o f s c a f f o l d i n g t u b e s s h o u ld b e e r e c t e d b etw ee n th e end
o f t h e new Kop e x i t o u t e r b a r r i e r s and t h e c o n c r e t e p i l l a r o f t h e lo w e s t o f th e
Kop o r i g i n a l e x i t s t e p s .   I n t h e l o n g e r te rm , t h e e x i s t i n g b a r r i e r s would need
e x t e n d i n g t o f i l l t h e gap and i d e a l l y , t h e a r e a b e tw e e n t h e b o tto m o f t h e new Kop
e x i t s t a i r c a s e and t h e o r i g i n a l Kop e x i t s t e p s s h o u ld b e l e v e l l e d o f f .

 3.          Ground E v a c u a t i o n P r o c e d u r e

W h i ls t t h e Club had b e e n s u p p l i e d w i t h a S c h e d u le on " F i r e I n s t r u c t i o n and D r i l l s "
on 9 th A p r i l , 1980, c o n s u l t a t i o n s b e tw e e n t h e County F i r e S e r v ic e and t h e S outh
Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e had r e s u l t e d i n t h e p r o d u c t i o n o f an "Emergency E v a c u a tio n
P r o c e d u r e " . The Club u n d e r t o o k t o c i r c u l a t e c o p i e s o f t h e p r o c e d u r e t o a l l
S te w a rd s who would b e on d u ty f o r t h e F .A . Cup S e m i - F i n a l.
                       South Yorkshire County Council
                       F. A. Mallett, LL.B., Chief Executive                       County Hall
                                                                                   Barnsley
                       J. C. Harris, M.A., LL.B. (Cantab), County Secretary        South Yorkshire S70 2TN
                       Department of Administration                                Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                                   (STD 0226) 86141
                                                                                   Telex: 547675
                                                                                   Ext.....422.............
                       Our Ref:                       Your Ref.                    Date:
                       DV/MH/583/5                     OPS/PJR/SM                  1 s t A p r i l , 1981




'" '•D e a r S i r ,

    S a f e t y o f S p o r t s G rounds A c t, 1975
    S h e f f i e l d Wednesday F o o t b a l l C lub

    I r e f e r t o t h e t e l e p h o n e c o n v e r s a t i o n w hich Mr. D. Vaughan
    o f my s t a f f h ad w i t h C h ie f I n s p e c t o r Ruddy o f y o u r
    O p e r a t i o n s D i v i s i o n y e s t e r d a y and c o n f irm t h a t a rr a n g e m e n ts
    h av e b een made f o r t h e O f f i c e r Working P a r t y t o v i s i t t h e
    H i l l s b o r o u g h S tadium a t 9 . 3 0 a.m . on T uesday n e x t , 7 th
    A p r i l , 1981.

    As a g r e e d , I s h o u ld b e o b l i g e d i f you would a r r a n g e t o be
    rep re sen te d .     I h av e p a s s e d a copy o f t h i s l e t t e r d i r e c t t o
    t h e C h ie f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t R. H e ro ld a t "F" D i v i s i o n
    H ead q u arters.

                                                                  Yours f a i t h f u l l y




                                                                  C h ie f E x e c u tiv e

    The C h ie f C o n s t a b l e ,
    S outh Y o r k s h ir e P o l i c e
    P o lic e H ead q u arters,
    S nig H i l l ,
    SHEFFIELD,
    S3 8LY.




         DOCUMENT No.
                                                                                             SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL

                                                                                                      W ith th e C om p lim en ts of

                                                                                              THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
                                                                                               To            S u fg fttN T E l'ftitiN T    ^          l£



                                                                                                                            FOR INFORMATION
                                                                                                                                           aU©
                                           I              '

//   • • : * ; ' ■ ' >:         ^ : : i-fe ^ V .
                                                                                                                            FOR ACTION
                                                     '\
                                           ■


              -
                                                                                                                            FOR COMMENT
                          - • 'r '- '/ v - / / v *




                                                                                                                                                            ■   "•'
                                                                                                  From                                         Data >^> • 1

                                                                                                  D e p a r tm e n t of A dm inistration
                                                                                                  County Hall
                                                                                                  B arnsley                 T el. B arnsley86141 Ext t f Z g

                                                                                                    ~~       -P-TT
                                                                                                    : .. ■             *'

                                                                                                                                                        '          ■■
                                                                                                                                                       . - ..    ■■




                                                                                                               V-.-.         •

                                                                                              V         :     v; - : . t ; :




                                                              "• .'W: =• •••';•■' r.   '•■
                                                               Football Club
Sheffield Wednesday                                           lim ited
                                                              Registered Office
                                                              Hillsborough, Sheffield S6 1SW
                                                              Telephone:0 7 4 2 - 3 4 3 1 2 3 /4
Chairman:     H. E. M cGEE
                                                              Telegrams: Wednesday Sheffield 6
Manager:      J. L. C H A R L T O N , O.B.E.
                                                              Registered No. 624 78 England
Secretary:    E. E N G L A N D



             South Yorkshire County Council,                    E E /C B
             County Hall,
             Barnsley, S.70 2TN                                 16th February 1981




             Dear David,

             Many thanks for the notes of the visit to Hillsborough
             of the working party on Safety of Sports Grounds.

             Just one point I would like to clarify and that is
             under (C) North Stand. You do say that we have
             agreed with the police on new accommodation for
             them. This is not so, we are still in the
             discussion stage.

             Your s s ince rely,




             Secretary.



                                        c y .                                                L     A




                                 •\
                                      ch        ca.
                                                          /




                                                      V       DOCUMENT to .
                         SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

         N ote o f a v i s i t t o t h e H i l l s b o r o u g h S tad iu m , S h e f f i e l d
                               on 1 0 th F e b r u a r y , 1981

PRESENT:       R e p r e s e n t i n g t h e S h e f f i e l d Wednesday F o o t b a l l Club L t d .

               K. T. Addy ( D i r e c t o r )
               E. E n g lan d ( S e c r e t a r y )

               R e p r e s e n t i n g ’ t h e O f f i c e r W orking P a r t y ( S h e f f i e l d D i s t r i c t )

               B. A. E l l i s (S o u th Y o r k s h i r e County F i r e S e r v i c e )
               R. H e r o ld (S o u th Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e )
               K. M ettam ( S o u th Y o r k s h i r e County F i r e S e r v i c e )
               B. Mole (S o u th Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e )
               D. S h e r i f f ( C i t y o f S h e f f i e l d M e t r o p o l i t a n D i s t r i c t C o u n c il)
               A. R o b e r t s ( C i t y o f S h e f f i e l d M e t r o p l i t a n D i s t r i c t C o u n c il)
               D. I . Vaughan ( S o u th Y o r k s h i r e County C o u n c il)

1.          P u r p o s e o f M e e tin g

Mr. H. E. McGee, t h e C l u b 's C hairm an, welcomed t h e Working p a r t y .                                   *

As had b e e n e x p l a i n e d i n t h e C h i e f E x e c u t i v e ' s l e t t e r d a t e d 1 0 th J a n u a r y t o
t h e C lu b, t h e County C o u n c il f e l t i t was d e s i r a b l e t o i n t r o d u c e a t w i c e -
y e a r l y programme o f v i s i t s by t h e O f f i c e r Working P a r t i e s t o a l l f i v e o f
t h e League F o o t b a l l Grounds i n S o u th Y o r k s h i r e (n am ely, e a r l y i n t h e y e a r and
a l s o i n t h e m id d le o f t h e Y ear) i n an e f f o r t t o m a i n t a i n p u b l i c c o n f i d e n c e
i n t h e i r s a f e t y a t f o o t b a l l g r o u n d s . A d d i t i o n a l l y , a t t h e o t h e r g ro u n d s ,
i t was hoped t h a t t h i s p r o c e d u r e w ould o b v i a t e t h e r e a l p o s s i b i l i t y o f th e
Clubs c a r r y i n g o u t w orks w hich m ig h t p r o v e a b o r t i v e o r r e q u i r e a d d i t i o n a l
work on d e s i g n a t i o n . T h is was t h e f i r s t o f su ch a programme o f v i s i t s .

2.____       I n s p e c t i o n o f Ground

Mr. McGee l e f t t o a t t e n d t o o t h e r b u s i n e s s , and t h e re m a in d e r o f t h e
r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s made a t o u r o f i n s p e c t i o n o f t h e g ro u n d . I t was a g r e e d
t h a t t h e m a j o r i t y o f m a t t e r s r e v e a l e d ( d e t a i l e d below ) c o u ld b e r e g a r d e d
as r o u t i n e m a in t e n a n c e .

 (a )       S o u th S tan d

The d e t a i l e d i n s p e c t i o n o f a m u t u a l l y a g r e e d p a r t o f t h e r o o f s t r u c t u r e
had ta k e n p l a c e on 1 3 t h / 1 4 t h J a n u a r y a f t e r t h e e r e c t i o n o f s c a f f o l d i n g and
p l a t f o r m s . B e a rin g i n mind t h e age o f t h e s t a n d , r e l a t i v e l y l i t t l e
d e t e r i o r a t i o n had ta k e n p l a c e .    I t had b e e n a g r e e d t h a t t h e a p p a r e n t
d e f l e c t i o n i n t h e s t e e l t r u s s e s s h o u ld be m o n ito r e d o v e r a p e r i o d o f tim e .
W h ils t t h e r e w ere s i g n s o f w a t e r s t a i n i n g on t h e r o o f t i m b e r s , i t was by
no means c e r t a i n i f w a t e r p e n e t r a t i o n was s t i l l t a k i n g p l a c e .       I t was
a g re e d t h a t t h e a r e a aro u n d t h e r o o f h a t c h s h o u ld be p a r t i c u l a r l y i n v e s t i g a t e d ,
w hich would a l s o g iv e t h e o p p o r t u n i t y o f i n s p e c t i n g t h e r o o f t i l e s g e n e r a l l y .

I t was a l s o a g r e e d t h a t s h o u ld any o f t h e e x t e r i o r windows i n t h e L a d i e s '
T o i l e t s below t h e s t a n d b e b r o k e n , th e y w ould b e r e p l a c e d by w ir e d o r some
su ch s a f e t y g l a s s .
(b)          Spion Kop

E x c ep t f o r t h e c o n t i n u i n g m a in te n a n c e o f t h e c o n c r e t e t e r r a c i n g and c r u s h
b a r r i e r s , t h e o n ly m a t t e r r e q u i r i n g a t t e n t i o n was t h e i n f i l l i n g o f a s t e p
a d j a c e n t t o t h e h a n d r a i l on t h e l e f t o f t h e o r i g i n a l e x i t a t t h e to p o f
t h e Kop.

The Club had r e c e i v e d P l a n n i n g P e r m i s s i o n and B u i l d i n g R e g u l a t i o n a p p r o v a l
t o t h e e r e c t i o n o f a b r i c k b u i l t c h ip shop a t t h e b o tto m r i g h t o f t h e new
e x i t fro m t h e Kop (view ed when d e s c e n d i n g ) . The s i t i n g o f t h e c h ip shop
w ould n o t i n t e r f e r e w i t h t h e e g r e s s from t h e new Kop e x i t .

(c )         N o r th S ta n d

E x p a n sio n c r a c k s had a p p e a r e d i n t h e w a l l o f t h e N o r th S ta n d ( n e a r e s t t o
t h e S p io n Kop) w hich r e q u i r e d a t t e n t i o n .

The Club w ere i n t h e p r o c e s s o f b u i l d i n g sh ow ers and c h a n g in g accommodation
a t t a c h e d t o t h e e x i s t i n g gymnasium a t t h e r e a r o f t h e S ta n d . The p u b l i c
d i d n o t h a v e a c c e s s t o t h e f a c i l i t i e s . A d d i t i o n a l l y , t h e Club w ere
i n v e s t i g a t i n g t h e p o s s i b i l i t y o f a c q u i r i n g p r o p e r t y i n V ere Road so as t o
p r o v i d e an a l t e r n a t i v e e x c l u s i v e a c c e s s t o t h e gymnasium w i t h o u t u s in g
t h e e x i s t i n g a c c e s s th r o u g h t h e g ro u n d .

R e v is e d p r o p o s a l s f o r t h e f a c i l i t i e s t o be p r o v i d e d i n t h e new P o l i c e P o s t
and F i r s t A id f a c i l i t i e s had b e e n a g r e e d , and i t was i n t e n d e d t o b u i l d
p erm an en t      accom m odation i n v i r t u a l l y t h e same p o s i t i o n as t h e e x i s t i n g
te m p o ra ry s t r u c t u r e s .

 (d )        N o r th West C o m e r T e r r a c e

The Club had r e c e i v e d q u o t a t i o n s f o r m aking good t h e c r a c k i n g o f t h e c o n c r e t e
on t h e t e r r a c i n g , w hich t h e Board w ere t o c o n s i d e r s h o r t l y .

 (e )        West S tan d

 Some c r a c k e d b r ic k w o r k a t t h e r e a r o f t h e s t a n d r e q u i r e d p o i n t i n g and th e n
 c h e c k in g t o s e e i f t h e c r a c k s r e - o p e n e d .

A p p a re n t d i s t r e s s on t h e c o n c r e t e p i l l a r s u p p o r t i n g t h e s t e p s a t t h e r e a r
o f t h e S tan d r e q u i r e d u r g e n t a t t e n t i o n , and a t t e n t i o n o u g h t a l s o t o be
g iv e n t o c r a c k s i n t h e c o n c r e t e a t t h e to p o f b o t h s e t s o f s t a i r s .

 The w e a t h e r i n g and c o r r o s i o n i n t h e b a s e p l a t e o f t h e s h e e t i n g column i n
 t h e s o u t h - w e s t c o m e r o f t h e s t a n d r e q u i r e d a t t e n t i o n , p o s s i b l y by c o n c r e t e
 sh e e tin g .

 F i n a l l y , t h e s t e e l s u p p o r t s t o t h e new em ergency e x i t ( n e a r e s t t o t h e
 South S ta n d ) s t i l l r e q u i r e d t o be rounded o f f .

 (f)         P o l i c e C o n tr o l F a c i l i t i e s

 The Club p o i n t e d o u t t h a t t h e p o l i c e now had e x c l u s i v e u s e o f t h e box
 ( o v e r l o o k i n g t h e w hole o f t h e g round) p r e v i o u s l y u s e d by t h e d i s c jo c k e y .
 The d i s c o u n i t had b e e n r e - s i t e d u n d e r n e a th t h e o r i g i n a l b o x .
                                                  -3-


3.          Revised Entrance Facilities

The Club o u t l i n e d t h e c o n s i d e r a t i o n b e i n g g iv e n t o t h e s i t i n g o f c a r a v a n s
o u t s i d e t h e P e n i s t o n e Road and L e p p in g s Lane en d s o f t h e g ro u n d t o s e l l
tic k e ts .       I t was hoped t h a t i f t h i s to o k p l a c e , i n c r e a s e d e n t r y flo w o f
s p e c t a t o r s t o t h e g rou nd w ould r e s u l t by r e d u c i n g d e l a y s a t t h e t u r n s t i l e s .

4.           Bar F a c i l i t i e s

The Club a l s o o u tlin e d " t h e c o n s i d e r a t i o n b e i n g g i v e n , a t t h e r e q u e s t o f
t h e P o l i c e , t o r e v i s e d b a r f a c i l i t i e s a t t h e L e p p in g s Lane e n d o f t h e
g ro u n d .

5.           F u t u r e D evelopm en ts

W h i ls t t h e p r o p o s a l s w e re i n a v e r y p r e l i m i n a r y s t a g e , c o n s i d e r a t i o n Was
b e i n g g iv e n by t h e Club t o t h e p r o v i s i o n o f an E x e c u ti v e Club' a t t h e
L e p p in g s Lane end o f t h e c a r p a r k u n d e r t h e S o u th S ta n d and t h e a d j o i n i n g
                                                                                                                        :■■■■•:
s t o r e a r e a . T h e re was a l s o a p o s s i b i l i t y o f t h e e x i s t i n g o f f i c e accomm­
o d a t i o n b e i n g e x te n d e d o u tw a r d s . A d d i t i o n a l l y , t h e r e c e p t i o n lou nge
m ig h t be e x t e n d e d , t h e k i t c h e n a r e a moved and a new D i r e c t o r s ' Room b u i l t .
I t was s t r e s s e d t h a t t h e s e w e re lo n g te r m p l a n s and no f i r m p r o p o s a f s e x i s t e d
a t t h e moment.
NOTE FOR FILE



SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB




A t 1 0 .0 0 am T u e sd ay , 10 F e b r u a r y 198 1, I a t t e n d e d a t S h e f f i e l d

Wednesday F o o t b a l l Ground a s a member o f t h e W orking P a r t y on

S a f e t y a t S p o r t s G ro u n d s.     P e r s o n s p r e s e n t i n c l u d e d Mr David Vaughan

o f t h e S o u th Y o r k s h i r e C ounty C o u n c i l , Mr Ken Memmott o f t h e

S o u th Y o r k s h i r e F i r e S e r v i c e , C h i e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t H e r o l d , F

D i v i s i o n , r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s o f t h e C lub and r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s o f t h e

B u ild in g A u th o r ity .



A g e n e r a l i n s p e c t i o n o f t h e g round t o o k p l a c e and no m a jo r p ro b le m s

w ere i d e n t i f i e d , t h e m a j o r i t y o f work b e i n g i n t h e form o f m a in te n ­

a n c e , h o w ev er, d i s c u s s i o n s w ere u n d e r t a k e n c o n c e r n in g t h e P o l i c e

Room and t h e s i t i n g o f p o s s i b l y te m p o r a r y t i c k e t o f f i c e s b o t h i n

P e n i s t o n e Road and L e p p in g s L a n e.          T h e re w ere no o b j e c t i o n s t o

t h e s e o f f i c e s on a te m p o r a r y b a s i s i n o r d e r t h a t t h e s i t u a t i o n

m ig h t b e a s s e s s e d a s t o t h e t y p e s o f q u e u e s w hich m ig h t d e v e l o p .

So f a r a s t h e P o l i c e Room i s c o n c e r n e d , t h e C lub had r e c e i v e d o u r

s u g g e s t i o n s and t h e m a t t e r was t o b e p l a c e d b e f o r e t h e b o a r d .
                                                                 W ith th e C o m p lim en ts of

                                                              THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
                                                              Ttt-     * s ' I K r e N ^ E N T T lb. rtcM5




                        ■ : ^ S 4 s ' ■■-v.r
                   '■'■'■■S' '•".•■                                         ‘ ■;( : ; ■. ■ ■
                                                                                     ■ S:
■v ;
                                                                                           ■'   ■■■*■:■

                                                                            s
       v-S:f -v.
                                                              ------
                                                                                        ■' ■■■■■'■-■S-
                                                                                       —             ■:'—          -    —        • S S :




                                               ' ■:■■■:'!'-


                                                              D e p a r tm e n t of A dm in istratio n
                                                              County Hall
                                                              B arnsley

                                                                ■■■■■■ ■-.-.'
                                                                         ■■■'.; ■■■ ;■. ■■'■■■■.'■-■■ :■ '■■■■
                                                                                                          ■/-:..■
                                                                      " ..'■■■■,;;■ '■ ■•;■ ■ ' ; ?
                                                                            ■ ■■■ ■■   ■:;;■■    ■       ■■ ■■■.         .




                                                                                                                                                                                                            ■■■■

                                                                                                                                                                           ■ " ":
                                                                                                                                           ■■'/-■: : SS'S---S;S'S^"S>'. : -s.S'--
                                                                                  ::                 :                                                            V       :S -S
                                                                                                '    v
                                                                                                ■s.

                                                                                                                             ,       '           : '    .         ■■■ ■'■■.. " ■..■    ■■■    .     ■   .,•■.      ■
                                                                                                                                                       <■■■. :■                       SSS.;"vv■■.:■:;:;'(■ fv
                                                                                                                                                            T---S
                                                                                                                                                 ssss
                                                                                                                                     •.;■ .;:■ '         ' '
                                                                                                                       ■■ ■■■                ;                                               .• V       ■
                                                                                                                         . .      ■ ■■ ' -


                                                                                                                         "
                               South Yorkshire County Council
                               F. A.Mallett. LL.B., Chief Executive                                                                                  County Hall
                                                                                                                                                     Barnsley
                               J.C. Harris, M.A.,LL.B„(Cantab), County Secretary                                                                     South Yorkshire S70 2TN
                               Department of Administration                                                                                          Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                                                                                                     (STD 0226) 86141
                                                                                                                                                     Telex: 547675


                               OurRef:           D V /B B /5 8 3 /5                  YourRef:                     E E /C B                           Date: 7th November, 1980

                                                                                                      D .V a u g h a n                               Ext. No.
                               This matter is being dealt with by



     Dear          S ir,


     S a fe ty            of      S p o rts      G ro u n d s         Act        1975


     I         th a n k     you       fo r      th e       C e r tific a te s                 e n c lo s e d       w ith     your          le tte r        d a .te d
     1 6 th         S e p te m b e r.

     W h ils t            th e s e       are      g e n e r a lly           a c c e p ta b le             fo r     th e     p u rp o se s            of   th e       C o n d itio n s         of
     th e         G en eral           S a fe ty           C e r tific a te ,              I     w o u ld      m ake        th e     fo llo w in g           p o in ts


         (a )          p a ra g ra p h          1 2 (2 )       of     th e     G en eral              S a fe ty       C e r tific a te                re q u ire s        a      c e r tific a te
                       fro m        an    in d e p e n d e n t E l e c t r i c a l                       E n g in e e r     as      to        th e    c o n d itio n            o f    th e
                       E m e rg e n c y         Power            S u p p ly        a t        le a s t     once       in     each         p e rio d        of        tw e lv e        m o n th s ?


         (b )          c e r ta in       a d d itio n a l             p o in ts          to      th o s e        m e n tio n e d         in     th e      c e r tific a te              re q u ire d
                       by        p a ra g ra p h s          24      and      25 h a v e           been          ta k e n    up      d ir e c tly          b e tw e e n          th e     B u ild in g
                       A u th o r ity           and         th e     C lu b 's       C o n s u lta n ts ,                M es srs.            E a s tw o o d      and P a rtn e rs ;


         (c )          p a ra g ra p h           26       of     th e     G en eral              S a fe ty        C e r tific a te             re q u ire s          a    c e rtific a te             fro m
                        an       in d e p e n d e n t          E le c tric a l            E n g in e e r          not      le s s      th a n        once       in       each         p e rio d      of
                        tw e lv e        m o n th s         as      to    th e      e le c tric a l               in s ta lla tio n                w ith in       th e        S ta d iu m ;       and


         (d )          p a ra g ra p h          29     of      th e      G en eral              S a fe ty        C e r tific a te             re q u ire s           th a t      th e    S ta d iu m
                          fa c ilitie s              and       s tru c tu re s                s h a ll     be     m a in ta in e d            as     e x is tin g         a t     th e     d a te     of
                          th e     C e r tific a te              and      th a t         no      a lte r a tio n s           s h a ll         be     m ade      u n le s s        p rio r     n o tic e
                          in     w r itin g          is     g iv e n      to       th e        C o u n ty       C o u n c il      in      a c c o rd a n c e         w ith        p a ra g ra p h
                          5(2)        (w h ic h        re q u ire s          a t    le a s t          21     days        w ritte n            n o tic e      to       th e      C o u n ty
                          C o u n c il     b e fo re           any       p ro p o s a l          to      c a rry     out       any        a lte ra tio n s               or     e x te n s io n
                          of      th e   S ta d iu m           or     its      in s ta lla tio n s                  is     b e g u n ).


         An      a d d itio n a l            copy         of     th is       le tte r            is      a tta c h e d       in     case           you     s h o u ld         w is h     to   pass
         i t      to      th e     C lu b 's         C o n s u lta n ts .

                                                                                                 Y o u rs        fa ith fu lly ,




r
         M r.       E.         E n g la n d ,
          S e c re ta ry ,
          S h e f f ie ld W ednesday F o o t b a ll                                C lu b         Ltd.,
          H ills b o r o u g h ,
          S h e ffie ld ,
L_        S o u th Y o r k s h ir e .                               S6      1SW
                                                                                                                                                 Co p y
                                                               SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                                                                  REF:
               FROM:       . Pvc 4 904 GARNER.                                                                    STATCON/DEPT:              H e a d q u a rte rs.
               TO:          S u p e r i n t e n d e n t MOLE, O p e r a t i o n s D i v i s i o n .               DATE:                        . . .
                                                                                                                                             8 10 80

                               SUBJECT:                  POLICE FACILITIES - BRAMALL LAMS FOOTBALL GROUND.

                               On W ednesday 8t h . O c to b e r 1980 a m e e ti n g t o o k p l a c e a t B r a m a ll L ane
                               F o o t b a l l G round b e tw e e n t h o f o l l o w i n g r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s
                                                    D. VAUGHAN. ( S o u th Y o r k s h i r e C o u n ty C o u n c il)
                                                    K. METTAM.            ( S o u th Y o r k s h i r e C o u n ty F i r e    S e rv ic e )
                                                    A. SEAMEN.            ( S o u th Y o r k s h i r e C o u n ty F i r e    S e rv ic e )
                                                    B . MOLE.             ( S o u th Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e . )
                                                    P . GARNER.           ( S o u th Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e )
                               The p o s i t i o n o f t h e new p o l i c e c o m m u n ic a tio n s / o b s e r v a t i o n p o s t was f i r s t
                                d i s c u s s e d and two p ro p o s e d s i t e s v i s i t e d . The f i r s t b e i n g i n t h e new S o u th
                               S ta n d p r e s s b o x . From h e r e a good o v e r a l l v ie w o f t h e g ro u n d was g a in e d
                               w i t h o n ly t h e t o p t h i r d o f t h e *Kop* b e i n g o u t o f v ie w , w h e re a s a t t h e
                                s e c o n d p ro p o s e d s i t e , t h e p r e s s box i n t h e o l d J o h n S t r e e t S ta n d q u i t e a
                                s u b s t a n t i a l p a r t o f t h e g ro u n d was n o t v i s i b l e , e s p e c i a l l y t h e a r e a s w here
                                crow d d i s t u r b a n c e s a r e m ost p r e v a l e n t .
                                I t was d e c id e d t h e p o s t w ould b e b e s t s i t e d i n t h e new s t a n d .
                                T h i s was t h e n d i s c u s s e d w i t h t h e S h e f f i e l d U n ite d F o o t b a l l C lu b S e c r e t a r y
                                M r. R ic h a r d CHESTER who s t a t e d t h a t h e w ould l o o k i n t o t h e p o s s i b i l i t i e s
                                o f t h e s i t e b e i n g made a v a i l a b l e f o r p o l i c e u s e .


                                The r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s t h e n r e t i r e d t o t h e F i r e B r ig a d e H e a d q u a r t e r s , D i v i s i o n
                                S t r e e t w h ere d i s c u s s i o n to o k p l a c e o v e r t h e w o rd in g o f p a r a g r a p h 10 o f t h e
                                S o u th Y o r k s h i r e C o u n ty C o u n c il G e n e ra l S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e w h ic h s t a t e s ; -
                                                  " A l l s u c h d o o r s o r g a t e s s h a l l b e o pened by t h e s te w a r d s
                                                   r e s p o n s i b l e and s e c u r e d i n t h e f u l l y open p o s i t i o n a t
                               11 i.‘‘J            a tim e b e f o r e t h e end o f a s p e c i f i e d a c t i v i t y a g r e e d
                                                    b e tw e e n t h e h o l d e r and t h e C h ie f C o n s ta b l e and a t any o t h e r tim e
                                                    on e v a c u a t i o n o f t h e s ta d iu m o r a p a r t t h e r e o f on
                                                    b e i n g o r d e r e d s o t o do by a p o l i c e o f f i c e r i n u n if o r m
(£ )
          A^ax/ - ""I f *                           o r by     t h e s o u n d in g o f t h e a l a r m . ”
                                 A lth o u g h a s s u r e d   by M r. MOLE t h a t i t was n o t p o l i c e p o l i c y t o h o ld                    fan s
i>                   ~~
                                 i n s i d e a g ro u n d a t t h e end o f a m a tch by k e e p i n g t h e e x i t g a t e s c l o s e d i t was
     f        f is
                                 d e c id e d t o o m it t h e u n d e r l i n e d w ords above so t h a t s h o u ld t h e s i t u a t i o n
I) ^ 7                           a r i s e , as i t d id       a t t h e S h e f f i e l d W ednesday v N e w c a s tle m a tc h , t h e p o l i c e
                                 w ould n o t be c o n t a v e n in g t h e w o rd in g o f t h e C e r t i f i c a t e .
          a   - ^    r -
                                 MR. VAUGILW e x p l a i n e d t h a t t h e amendment w ould h av e t o go b e f o r e c o m m ittee
                                 and t o t h e c l u b s f o r a p p r o v a l , b u t i f a l l a g r e e d t h e p h r a s i n g w ould be
                                 am ended. The m e e tin g was t h e n c l o s e d .
         G5N/2                                                                                                           OOCUMEHT No.
                                 P. u*    /
                       MINUTES OF MINTING RK FOOTDALL HOOLIGANISM

                    HELD AT POLICE HEADQUARTERS ON 2ND OCTOBER 1980


P re s e n t:

M r. I . D . Mead - " A s s i s t a n t C h i e f C o n s t a b l e ( O p e r a t i o n s ) - C h a irm a n
M r. R. G o s l i n g - A s s i s t a n t C h i e f C o n s t a b l e ( S t a f f S e r v i c e s )
S u p e r i n t e n d e n t M ole - O p e r a t i o n s D i v i s i o n
S u p e r in te n d e n t L am b ert                     — 'A* D i v i s i o n
C h i e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t W atso n           —' B’ D i v i s i o n
C h i e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t C le m e n t •_ —' C ’ D i v i s i o n
S u p e r i n t e n d e n t A n d e rs o n               — ’Ds D i v i s i o n
C h i e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t M a r s h a l l —’ E ’ D i v i s i o n
C h i e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t H e r o ld         - 'F ' D iv is io n
M r. E . E n g la n d - S h e f f i e l d W ed nesd ay F o o t b a l l C lu b
M r. R. C h e s t e r — S h e f f i e l d U n i t e d F o o t b a l l C lu b
M r. P . B e n n is o n —                 R o th e rh a m U n i t e d F o o t b a l l C lu b
M r. M. S p in k s - B a r n s l e y F o o t b a l l C lu b
M r. R. R eade               - D o n c a s t e r R o v e r s F o o t b a l l C lu b
M r. D. V aughan - S o u th Y o r k s h i r e C o u n ty C o u n c i l


MATTERS ARISING FROM THE MINUTES

Mr-. Mead o p e n e d t h e m e e ti n g an d w elcom ed r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s o f t h e C lu b s
an d S o u th Y o r k s h i r e C o u n ty C o u n c i l and o u t l i n e d t h e p u r p o s e o f t h e m e e tin g
f o l l o w i n g t h e c o n f e r e n c e h e l d b y t h e C n i e f C o n s t a b l e on t h e 22nd A u g u st 1 9 8 0 ,
when i t was s u g g e s t e d t h a t m e e t i n g s o f t h i s n a t u r e s h o u l d t a k e p l a c e i n
o r d e r t o i d e n t i f y i n d i v i d u a l p r o b le m s a t F o o t b a l l C lu b s w i t h i n S o u th
Y o rk s h ire and t o d i s c u s s p o s s i b l e re m e d ie s a g a i n s t h o o lig a n is m .

 A g e n e r a l d i s c u s s i o n t o o k p l a c e c o n c e r n i n g t h e c u r r e n t s i t u a t i o n and
 m e n tio n w as made o f t h e r e c e n t i n c i d e n t s i n v o l v i n g S h e f f i e l d W ednesday
 s u p p o rte rs -

 M r. Mead s u g g e s t e d t h a t ' I t ' may b e ' a p p r o p r i a t e f o r D i v i s i o n a l Commanders
 t o m e e t s e p e r a t e l y w i t h t h e i r r e s p e c t i v e c l u b r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s i n t h e fo rm
 o f S e c r e t a r i e s , D i r e c t o r s / C h a i r m e n , an d t h a t o n c e t h o s e m e e t i n g s h a d t a k e n
 p l a c e a f u r t h e r m e e ti n g o f a l l p e r s o n s p r e s e n t w o u ld b e c o n v e n e d t o d i s c u s s
 i n d i v i d u a l r e c c n im e n d a tio n s . The s u g g e s t i o n w as r a i s e d t h a t r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s
 o f S u p p o r t e r s ' C lu b s m ig h t b e i n v o l v e d a n d , w h i l s t some C lu b s o f f e r e d
 t h e i r r e t i c e n c e a t t h i s s u g g e s t i o n , i t w as g e n e r a l l y a g r e e d t h a t t h i s w as
 a c o u r s e o f a c t i o n w h ic h m i g h t h a v e some m e r i t an d s h o u l d b e p u r s u e d .               The
 m e e ti n g a g r e e d w i t h t h e s u g g e s t i o n o f Mr. Mead an d a r r a n g e m e n t s w e re l e f t
 t o D i v i s i o n a l Commanders t o o r g a n i s e t h e i r r e s p e c t i v e m e e t i n g s .

 A num ber o f com m ents and s u g g e s t i o n s c o n c e r n i n g t h e c o m b a tin g o f h o o l i g a n i s m
 were m ade, i n c l u d i n g t h e m a in te n a n c e o f l i a i s o n w i t h S u p p o r t e r s ' C lu b
 r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s an d t h e i d e n t i f i c a t i o n o f h o o l i g a n e l e m e n t s , t h e d a n g e r s
 o f b a r r i e r s on t e r r a c i n g b e i n g e r e c t e d t o o c l o s e t o b o u n d a r i e s f e n c i n g ,
 a n d a l l o w i n g h o o l i g a n s t o c l i m b o v e r th e m o n t o t h e p l a y i n g a r e a , t h e
 p o s s i b i l i t y o f b a r r i n g known h o o l i g a n s an d t h e d a n g e r s o f m i x in g s u p p o r t e r s
 w ith in g ro u n d s.

 A d i s c u s s i o n Look p l a c e on t h e s e p o i n t s and i t w as g e n e r a l l y f e l t t h a t t h e
 b a r r i n g o f h o o l i g a n s f o r l i f e , w h ic h h a s b e e n s u g g e s t e d , i s a n o n s e n s e
 i n t h a t th e r e a r e d i f f i c u l t i e s in e n fo rc e m e n t, how ever th e s u g g e s tio n r e
 b a r r i e r s w as a v a l i d p o i n t an d w o u ld 1x2 c o n s i.d e r e d w hen v i s i t s w e r e made
 t o g r o u n d s b y t h e W orking P a r t y d e a l i n g w i t h v i s i t s t o S p o r t s G ro u n d s .
V

                                                          - 2




                   ■../tb e rs w e re o f o n e v ie w , t h a t t h e m e d ia w ere o f t e n i n s t r u m e n t a l i n
                   v is in g e x i s t i n g p r o b le m s b y m ass c o v e r a g e and i t w as s u g g e s t e d and
       ;        h c\ th a t,     f o r t h e p r e s e n t a t l e a s t , t h e r e s h o u ld b e o ne v o i c e
             y t e r n i n g t h e p o l i c e v ie w r a t h e r t h a n a num ber o f i n d i v i d u a l s e x p r e s s i n q
            b x \ : o p in io n s c o n c e rn in g th e s u b je c t o f h o o lig a n is m .      M r. Mead a g r e e d t o
      ■ yteal w i t h t h i s m a t t e r a n d a d v i s e d D i v i s i o n a l Commanders t h a t w hen
     A p p r o a c h e s w e re made f o r p r e s s s t a t e m e n t s c o n c e r n i n g f o o t b a l l h o o l i g a n i s m ,
    ' ' t h e y s h o u ld b e r e f e r r e d t o h im o r , i n h i s a b s e n c e , t h e d u t y ' A s s i s t a n t
         C h ie f C o n s ta b le .

      The f o r m a l m e e t i n g b r o k e a t 1 . 0 0 p .m . a n d i n d i v i d u a l d i s c u s s i o n s b e tw e e n
      c l u b r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s an d D i v i s i o n a l Commanders c o n t i n u e d d u r i n g a w o r k in g
      lu n c h , i t b e in g a g re e d t h a t fo llo w in g in d i v id u a l m e e tin g s, a f u r t h e r
      m e e t i n g w o u ld b e c o n v e n e d o f a l l d e l e g a t e s d u r i n g t h e w eek com m encing
      Monday 1 3 t h N ovem ber 1 9 8 0 .




                                                                                                                       v
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL

        With th e C om p lim en ts cf

 THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
  T o        S e ^ ty v    W f r f tv te tt:tR £   P o u iC £



                          FOR IMP)


                                          2 3 JU L19S0



                          FOR COM




   From,                                           ►ate   K >~r
   D ep a rtm en t of Administration
   County Hall
   B arnsley               Tel. Barnsley 86141 Ext
                          South Yorkshire County Council
                         F. A . Mallett, L L 8 .,   C h ie f Executive                                 County Hall
                                                                                                       Barnsley
                         J.C.Harris, M.A., L L .B ,(C a n ta b ), C ounty Secretary                    South Yorkshire S70 2TN
                         Department of Administration                                                  Telephone: Barnsley '
                                                                                                       (STD 0226) 86141
                                                                                                       Telex: 547675


                         Our Ref:                          Your Ref:                                    Date:
                         DV/MH/5 8 3 /5                   WE/KH/1610                                   1 8 th J u l y , 1980
                          This matter is being dealt with by M r . D. Vaughan                           Ext. No. 422




       D ear S i r s ,

       S a f e t y o f S p o r ts G rounds A c t, 1975 -
       S h e f f i e l d Wednesday F o o t b a l l Club L im ite d

       I th a n k you f o r y o u r l e t t e r d a te d 1 5 th J u l y .

       A f t e r c o n s u l t a t i o n s w ith t h e B u il d in g A u t h o r i t y and i n v ie w o f t h e f a c t
       t h a t a l l o f t h e b a r r i e r s w ere t e s t e d p r i o r t o c e r t i f i c a t i o n , t h e C ounty
       C o u n c il i s a b l e t o a g r e e t h i s y e a r w ith t h e c o u r s e o f a c t i o n w h ich you
       p r o p o s e . However, I w ould s t r e s s t h a t t h i s ag re e m e n t i s c o n d i t i o n a l
       upon i t b e in g r e c o g n i s e d and a c c e p te d t h a t i t i s w ith o u t p r e j u d i c e a s
       to w hat may be r e q u i r e d i n f u t u r e y e a r s u n d e r t h e p r o v i s i o n s o f p a r a g r a p h
       2 5 (2 ) o f t h e S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e .

       May I a l s o m e n tio n t h e C e r t i f i c a t e s b y : -

        (a)          a s u i t a b l y q u a l i f i e d C h a r t e r e d E n g in e e r (a s r e q u i r e d by
                     p a r a g r a p h 24 o f th e S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e ) as to a l l s t r u c t u r a l
                     p a r t s o f t h e S tad iu m , e x c l u d in g c r u s h b a r r i e r s and h a n d r a i l s ;

        (b)          an in d e p e n d e n t E l e c t r i c a l E n g in e e r (a s r e q u i r e d by p a ra g ra p h ^
                      26 o f t h e S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e ) a s t o t h e e l e c t r i c a l i n s t a l l a t i o n
                     w i t h i n th e S tad iu m ; and

        (c )         an in d e p e n d e n t E l e c t r i c a l E n g in e e r (as r e q u i r e d by p a r a g r a p h
                      1 2 (2 ) o f t h e S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e ) a s t o t h e c o n d i t i o n o f th e
                     Emergency Power S u p p ly .

       I t a k e i t t h a t i f t h e Club h a s n o t a l r e a d y done s o , th e y w i l l s h o r t l y be
       r e q u e s t i n g you to s u p p ly t h e s e .

                                                                            Y ours f a i t h f u l l y ,




                                                                            C h ie f E x e c u tiv e
r      M e s s r s . Eastwood & P a r t n e r s ,
                                                                                   n
       C o n s u lt in g E n g i n e e r s ,
       Bowmaker H ouse,
       23 K i n g f i e l d Road,
       SHEFFIELD,
(___   S l l 9AS.                                                                  _J
E A S T W O O D & PARTNERS                                                                               BOWMAKER HOUSE
              C onsulting       Engineers
                                                                                                         23 KINGFIELD ROAD
                                                                                                         SHEFFIELD S11 9AS
W . Eastw ood               B.Eng, Ph.D., F.Eng., F.I.C.E,                                               Tel.: (0742) 583871
                            F.I.Struct.E, F.G.S. M.Cons.E.
A. A. W ood                 B.Eng„ Ph.D., C.Eng., F.I.C.E,
                            F.i.Stmct.E, M.LW.E.S., M.Cons-E.
A. G. B u rd e tt           G.M„ B.Sc.(Eng), C.Eng., M.I.C.E.
R. C. A. E a s tw o o d B.Sc., C.Eng, M.I.C.E.. M.LStruct.E.

G toffray Splr              C.En*., H.I.C.E., M.I.H«eh.E.

C. S . Greaves              B.Eng., C.Eng„ M.I.C.E., M.LStruct.E:.                                       WE/KH/1610
                                                                                          Our R e f :
A. J . Clough              B.A., C-Eitf., M.C.I.B.S.. M .I.M «dt.£.
J , A. Strange             C.Eng., M.LStruct.E:.                                          Your R e f :
Consultant:
A. L. Percy                H.T»ch.(Hon.), B.Sc., C.En*.. F.I.C.E.,
                           F.I.Scruct.E.. F.I.Mun.E., M .R .T JU .




 Chief Executive,                                                                                         15 July 1980
 South Yorkshire County Co\mjclT7' ’
 County Hallf
 Barnsley,                   !
 South Yorkshire,            >                                               > -'   L   X b Q
 S70 2TN.                    »


 For the attention of Mr.P. Vaughan


 Dear Mr. Vaughan,
             Sheffield Wednesday Football Club L t d .
              I believe that the County Council wish to have one fifth
  of the crush barriers tested each year so that they will all be
  tested during each five year cycle.                                           The first batch were
  to be tested approximately seven months from the date of issue
  of the certificate of ground safety.
        The Club has therefore asked us to carry out this years
  quota of tests and it is our intention to carry out the work
  commencing on Monday, 21 July.                                        There are approximately 185
  barriers in total and it would be possible to either test barriers
 .1, 6, 11 etc. or Nos. 1 - 37,approximately.                                                      It would be very
  much easier and quicker to test one block of 37 barriers rather
  than testing every fifth barrier throughout the ground because
  the testing equipment is very heavy and requires a considerable
  amount of man handling.                                       There should be a considerable saving in
  cost if all the barriers tested are in one block.
              We have discussed the matter with Mr. D. Sheriff of the
  Sheffield Building Surveyors department and he sees no objection
  to us taking the easier and therefore cheaper course.                                                       Unless we
  hear from you to the contrary this is what we will do.

                                                      Ragiatered in England - No. 1134531
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




          Two copies of our report will be sent to you shortly
   after the testing is complete so that you can then forward
   one to the Building Surveyors department.


                                    Yours sincerely,




   c.c.   Mr. E. England
NOTE FOR FILE


SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS - SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB



1   M ee tin g t o b e a r r a n g e d th r o u g h D avid Vaughan

2   R aking on f e n c e s a g r e e d and w i l l b e i n s t a l l e d

3   F e n c e s , n o r t h and s o u th s t a n d s ; c l o s e
    access g a te s to p itc h

4   I n s t e a d o f P o l i c e Room, C o n tr o l Room Box f o r p o l i c e u s e
    o n ly s u g g e s te d

5   M o bile PA s y ste m




                                         I 00C1IMBITHo.            *552.   [
                        so u th    Y o r k s h ir e c o u n t y c o u n c i l
                            *•                                             ■»

                                 With the Com plim ents eff

                          THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE

                           S^fcy TrT W v ^ ?c(vk        A       •&., S v ^ ^ >U h, S w W l




-   ■
                                                 FOR ACTION


        ■;v;

                                                 FOR
               S¥L:'"


                                         —   —   _          _              _    _


                           From.                                                            , D ate
                           D epartm ent of Administration
                           County Hall
                           Barnsley               Tel. Barifsley86141 Ext M
                                                 W 'H   —       — -~ 1 .        w -.-:------- —----   II WWIl'MirnWMIIIIMWWII.il l llllWiillllil^
                         SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

              Note of a m eeting betw een the Officer Working Party (Sheffield D istrict)
              and the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.

                                 Hillsborough Stadium : 10th A pril, 1980

PRESENT:

Representing the Club

E . England (Secretary) *                     .
Dr. W. Eastwood, (M essrs. Eastwood & Partners)
                    /
Representing the Working Party

F.     Davis                       (South Yorkshire     County F ire Service)
K.     Mettam                      (South Yorkshire     County Fire Service)
A.     M ills                      (City of Sieffield   Metropolitan D istrict Council)
B.     Mole                        (South Yorkshire     Police)
D.     Sheriff                     (City of Sheffield   Metropolitan D istrict Council)
D.     I. Vaughan                  (South Yorkshire     County Council - Administration D ept.)

1.          Purpose of Meeting

In view of the F . A . Cup Sem i-Final at Hillsborough on 12th April and following recent
v isits by the d isciplines represented on the Working Party, the Chief Executive of the
South Yorkshire County Council had raised with the Club by letter dated 31st March various
m atters which apparently were s till outstanding.

A letter of reply dated 3rd April had been received from the Club, a s w ell a s letters dated
4th and 8th April from the Club's Consultants, M essrs. Eastwood and P artn ers, giving
details of the present position.

2.          Inspection of Ground

The Working Party inspected the ground in company with the Club's representatives.

 (i)        Training of Safety Stewards

            The Club had felt there was little point in pursuing thetraining of the Safety
            Stewards until the fire warning sy stem had been com pletely installed, but with
            agreem ent the County Fire Service had instructed som e stewards yesterday.
            A schedule specifying the duties and resp on sib ilities was handed to the Club's
            rep resen tatives.

 (ii)       Exit Signs

            The Club's representatives felt that the exit signs generally had been sited where
            required and were of adequate size and/or illuminated.

            It was agreed that there were a number which could be m ore advantageously sited
            and/or illum inated, and som e which might be more effective with larger lettering

                                                    1.
and/or direction arrow s. The County F ire Service undertook to lia is e with
M essrs. Eastwood and P artners.

Em ergency Lighting in the South Stand

As was evident, com plete re-w irin g of the South Stand with separate circu its had
already com m enced, and the County F ire Service undertook to let M essrs. Eastwood
and Partners know their detailed requirem ents.

Fire Warning System

The Fire Warning System had been installed , except for the trickle charger and
battery equipment. These item s had been subject to delivery p rob lem s, but the
sy stem should be com plete by the end of the month.

It was agreed that a s regards the F . A . Cup Sem i-F inal, the Police Communications
base which would be at the ground would a lso be used for F ire Service purposes if
n ecessary.                                              t

Sealing of Fire R esistin g Fram es

The sealing of the fire resistin g door fram es against the supporting w alls had generally
been carried out, but there were a sm all number which were now showing signs of
sm a ll gaps.

F ire Retardent Paint

The Club pointed out that "Nullifire" fire retardent paint had been specified on the
partitions within the South Stand but, as the Contractors were on holiday until
14th A pril, it was not possible to say with certainty at this time whether it had actually
been used.

Wired          Glass
---------------------------                       -                                       g

The Club pointed out that to the best of their knowledge wired g la ss had been used
wherever required by the County F ire Service.

 The County Fire Service and the P olice were generally satisfied that the sm all panes
 of g la ss in the upper half of the wooden partitions within the South Stand would not in
 normal circum stances be regarded a s a fire and/or safety hazard. The Club agreed in
 the longer term to consider the fitting of wired g la ss and, in the short term , to
 consider fitting wooden battons as an interim m easure.

 Sharp Edges to Steelwork on South-West Stand

 Whilst there were a number of sharp corners on the supports, these were at a height
 of at le a st seven feet. However, the Club undertook to round them off.

 Perim eter Fencing on the Spion Kop

 The Club pointed out that this had been tested where feasib le and the resu lts forwarded
 to the Chief Executive in January. A copy had been passed to the Building Authority on
 30th January.
Possible Step Obstruction on Upper Exit Area on Spion Kop

W hilst it was agreed that the erectio n of the b a rriers at the Upper Exit Area had left
a sm all adjacent area of approxim ately one foot wide by four foot long at a lower lev el
than the rem ainder of the e x it, it was felt that its position coupled with the crowd
flow at that point meant that it did not unduly create an hazard. However, the Club
undertook to give attention to it in the longer term .

Mesh Fencing under North Stand

In view of the normal crowd flow rates on the public side of the m esh fencing and the
fact that there was no public a c c e s s to its r e a r , it was felt that the tim ber framed
m esh fencing under the North Stand providing security to storage a rea s was acceptable.
                                                                                                                     K*




S h e f f i e l d W e d n e s d a y '! ^ , Football Club
                                                                                         Limited
                                                                                         Registered Office
                                                                                         Hillsborough, Sheffield S6 1SW
Chairman:       H. E. McGEE                                                              Telephone:0742-343123/4
Manager:       J. L. CHARLTON, O.B.E.                                                    Telegrams: Wednesday Sheffield 6
Secretary:     E. ENGLAND                                                                Registered No. 62478 England



              S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e C o u n ty C o u n c i l ,
              C o u n ty H a l l ,
              B a rn s le y ,
              S o u t h Y o r k s . , S 7 0 2TN




              D e a r M r. M a l l e t t ,

              SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1 9 7 5

             F u r t h e r t o y o u r l e t t e r o f t h e 3 1 s t M a rc h , my C h a ir m a n
             i s aw ay f o r a n o t h e r t h r e e o r f o u r w e e k s ; s o y o u w i l l
             a p p r e c i a t e t h a t X c a n n o t g iv e you B o ard d e c i s i o n s o r
             o p in io n s.      My p e r s o n a l r e a c t i o n i s s u r p r i s e , a s u n d e r
             t h e ab o v e a c t w o rk h a s b e e n g o in g on c o n t i n u o u s l y s i n c e
             i t w as s t a r t e d l a s t summer a n d a t n o t i m e d o I f e e l
             t h a t t h e C lu b h a v e l a g g e d b e h i n d i n i t s a c t i o n s t o d o
             e v e r y t h i n g t h a t h a s b e e n p r o m i s e d t o b e do n e*

             To t a k e I t e m 4 o f y o u r l e t t e r « t h i s i s v e r y m uch i n
             t h e p r o g r e s s , a n d we a r e i n t h e h a n d s o f t h e c o n t r a c t o r s •

             As r e g a r d s t h e t r a i n i n g o f s a f e t y s t e w a r d s , t h i s w as b e i n g
             l e f t u n t i l t h e w a r n i n g s y s t e m w as i n s t a l l e d *   H o w e v e r, o n
             r e c e i p t o f y o u r l e t t e r I d i d c o n t a c t M r. V a u g h an a n d
             s u g g e s t e d t h a t i f h e w o u ld l i k e t o c o n t a c t t h e C o u n ty
             F i r e S e r v i c e , a l l o u r s t e w a r d s w o u ld b e a t t h e g r o u n d
             f o r o u r m a tc h o n E a s t e r M onday, a n d t h a t m i g h t b e a n
             o p p o r tu n i ty t o d e a l w ith t h i s p a r t i c u l a r ite m . The
             o f f i c e r s o f t h e F i r e S e r v i c e h a d i n t i m a t e d t o me
             p r e v i o u s l y t h a t a n y t i m e w o u ld b e s u i t a b l e t o th e m .

             A ll y o u r o th e r ite m s u n d e r P a ra g ra p h s 2 & 3 w i l l b e
             d e a l t w ith , and i n f a c t a copy o f y o u r l e t t e r I have
             s e n t t o D r . E a s tw o o d f o r h i s p r o f e s s i o n a l a d v i c e .

             Y o u rs s i n c e r e l y ,




                                                                ooM nam      's S ( t
             s e c re ta ry .
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                                                                     BOWMAKER HOUSE
                Consulting    Engineers                                                                 23 KINGFIELD ROAD
                                                                                                        SHEFFIELD S11 9AS
W . Eastw ood            B.Eng., Ph.D., F.Eng., F.I.C.E.,                                               Tel.: (0742) 583871
                         F.I.Struct.E„ F.G.S.. M.Cons.E.
A. A. W ood              B.Eng,. Ph.D., C.Eng., F.I.C.E.
                         F.I.Struct.E., M.I.W.E.S., M.Cons.E.
A. G. Burdett            G.M„ B.Sc.(Eng). C.Eng., M.I.C.E.
R. C. A. Eastwood        B.Sc„ C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.
Associates .*
G eoffrey Spir           c.Ent „ m .i.c.e., m.i.M kH .e.
C. S . G reaves          B.Eni., c .E m ., m j.c .e ., M .i.struct.E.
A. J . C lough          B.A..C.Enf..M .C.I.B.S„M .I.M cch.E.                          Our Ref:          W E / K H / 1610
J . A. S trange         c.E n*., M.i.struct.E.                                        Your Ref:
Consultant r
A.     L. Percy          M.Tech.(Hon.), B.Sc., C .E ni.. F.I.C.E.,                                  *JCIL
                         F.I.Struct.E., F.I.Mun.E., M.R.T.P.I.



                                                                                - 9 APR 1980
                                                                             CC-UNTY h.v.s. •
                                                                            SOUTH             S70 2IH
     The Chief Executive,                                                                               4 A p r il 1980
     South Yorkshire County Council,
     County Hall,
     Barnsley.


     For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan


     Dear Mr. Vaughan,                           ■
                  Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                                Safety of Sports Grounds Act
                Mr. England has sent me a copy of your letter of 31
     March and of his reply dated 3 April.
          I am in a little difficulty in replying to some of the
     points raised as Mr. Clough is on holiday until Tuesday, 8
      April, and Mr. Strange is away until Monday, 14 April.
      Because we are carrying oat re-wiring in the South Stand
      and       Mr. Clough is better equipped to deal with the comments on
      the       Exit signs I will delay replying until he returns.
                With regard to the comments from the Building Control
      department I may need to reply in greater detail when John
      Strange returns from holiday.                                        However, my first comments
      are as follows
       (i) The cracks between the door frames and supporting wall
                 wi.ii be re-inspected.                                 I can only assume that this is
                 something which was not noticed in the inspection which
                 we made and the inspections which were made by the
                 Building Control department at the end of the work.                                                  It
                 may be that due to shrinkage of the timber a slight
                 gap has opened since that time.                                   We will, of course,                have
                                                     Registered in England - No. 1134531
                                                                    SHEET


EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




        the cracks mortared or covered if this is needed, but
        might. I suggest that minor matters of this kind do not
        need a letter or need to be dealt with between the
        periodic inspections which you and we will be carrying
        out.     . After all the next inspection is less than three    /
        months away.


   (ii) I have not been able to discuss the paint used on the
        south stand partitions with the Contractor, who is
        closed down until 14 April.      However, one of my assistants
        believes that Mr.. Sherriff has recently told Mr. Strange
        that Mr. Mills saw a painter with a tin of Dulux instead
        of the Nullifire which we specified.     It would have been
        appreciated if a telephone call had been made at the time
        so that we could have checked with certainty and if
        necessary taken corrective action.     I will write to you
        again on this point.


   (iii) Mr. Strange mentioned that Mr. Sherriff had queries in a
        recent telephone conversation whether wired glass has been
        used where appropriate.      Mr. Strange said that so far
        as we know wired glass had been used everywhere that the
        fire officer had requested it, and that the fire officer
        had of course, made his own inspection.      The conversation
        had ended with Mr. Sherriff saying that he would check with
        the fire officer.


   (iv) We presume that the reference to 'clearance' refers to
        the vertical headroom.     It will be recalled that some
        ingenuity was needed to devise this particular exit, as
        we were constrained by the levels in the existing stand
        and the level of the top of the terracing and the exit
        route.      Our drawings and calculations were submitted to
                                                                       SHEET   3.


EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




            the Building Control department for comment.        They
            inspected during construction and after the work was
            completed.    I am not amused by the fact that the
            headroom is now being queried.     In any case this is
            a matter for the fire officer, not the Building Control
            department.   With regard to the sharp edges I suggest
            we leave the matter until the inspection in June/July
            as the season is now almost over, and there is no
            time to agree further work and have it carried out before
            the season ends.


     (v)    The perimeter fencing at the north-east c o m e r of the
            Spion Kop has been appraised for condition and strength.
            Bearing in mind the likely pressures at that location,
            the tests which we carried out where possible, and that
            we are dealing with an existing ground, the fence is
            satisfactory in my opinion.


     (vi) We will look at the step obstruction, but again unless
            this is something which is obviously dangerous      (in
            which case I would have expected the matter to be raised
            last December) suggest that discussion be left until the
            June/July inspection.


     (vii) The mesh fencing under the North stand was discussed
            with Mr. Jones of the fire service and he, like me, was
            satisfied that there is no hazard which justifies the
            making of changes.


            I will write to you again after Mr. Clough returns from
     holiday.
                                             Yours sincerely,

     c.c.    Mr. E. England
EASTW OOD & PARTNERS                                                                 1/ 't'U            BOWMAKER HOUSE
               C o n s u ltin g   E n g in e e r s                                                      23 KINGFIELD ROAD
                                                                                                        SHEFFIELD S11 9AS
W . Eastw ood                 B.Eng., Ph.D.. F.Eng., F.I.C.E.,                                          Tel.: (0742) 583871
                              F.I.Struct.E., F.G.S., M.Cons.E,
A. A. W ood                   B.Eng.. Ph.D.. C.Eng., F.I.C.E.,
                              F.I.Struct.E.. M.I.W.E.S.. M.Cons.E.
A. G. Burdett                 G.M.. B.Sc.(Eng), C.Eng.. M.I.C.E.
R. C. A. Eastw ood B.Sc., C.Eng., M.I.C.E, M.I.Struct.E.
Associate*;
G eoffrey Splr               C .E nf„ M.I.C.E.. M.I.Mech.E. '
C. 8 . G reaves               B.En*., C .E nj.. M.I.C.E., M.I.Struci.E.
A. J . C lough               B.A., C.En«„ M.C.I.B.S., M.I.Moch.E.                        Our Ref:       WE/KH/1610
J . A. S trange              C.En*., M.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                         Your Ref :
Consultant:
A. L. Percy                  M.Tech^Hon.), B.Sc., C.Enf ., F.I.C.E.,
                             F.I.Struct.E., FXMun.E., M.R.T.P.I.




                                                                            r
The Chief Executive,                                                                                    8 April 1980
South Yorkshire County Council,
County Hall,                                                                                 R1980
B a rn s le y .                                                                 cc:: r l a u i;.^uEY,

For- the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan



Dear Mr. Vaughan,
                                        Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.
                                        Safety of Sports Grounds Act - 1975
              I have now been able to talk with Mr. Clough regarding
the exit signs and have pleasure in replying to your points
ii, iii and iv.


Para ii
              I find the exit signs were erected under the supervision
of John Strange who is still                                              on holiday.        I have quickly
looked through the certificate of ground safety and have not
been able to find any reference to lettering size.                                                      Because
you do not say which exit signs have not been sited in
accordance with the plans it is a little difficult for me to
comment and I suggest this matter be left in abeyance until
John Strange returns.                                     With regard to the illumination of the
exit signs, it may be that you are unaware that we are rewiring
the South Stand and it may be that the signs you have in mind
will be appropriately illuminated by both systems when this
work is complete.



                                                       Registered in England - No. 1134531
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




  Para iii                      .
         We have not been able to understand what it is
  which you say does not comply with the requirements
   of paragraph 12 of the certificate.     The agreement
  with the Fire Service (Mr. K. Jones) was set out in our
   letter of 12 December.    So far as we can see the only
  possible variation from that agreement is that because
   of the rewiring which is now taking place We did not
   implement the agreed measures in the case of the two exits
  referred to in the fourth paragraph of our letter of 12
  December.


  Para iv
         The fire warning system is complete except for the
   supply of the trickle charger and battery equipment.      These
   items were ordered some months ago and if the original
  delivery dates had been adhered to would have been installed
  by now.     Unfortunately the suppliers have failed to
  deliver on time.     We have been applying appropriate pressure
  and the latest information is as set out in the attached
  copy letter from our electrical contractors which was dated
  24 March.    As you will see from this, two of the four
  outstanding items have very likely been delivered by now
  but the signal indicator panel was not expected for four
  weeks from 24 March and the industrial batteries complete
  with steel stand and ancillary equipment was due to be
  delivered by Friday, 25 April.


         I understand that there is to be a meeting at the ground
  on Thursday, 10 April, when these can no doubt be discussed.


                                    Yours sincerely,



  c.c.   Mr. E. England
Brad w e ll E le c tric a l C o m p an y L im ite d
Registered in London No. 745352
                                                                           ELECTRICAL   ENGINEERS

                                                                                            Registered Office:
                                 Electrical Installation s & Plant Maintenance              VOLT WORKS, PRINCESS STREET. SHEFFIELD S4 7UV
                                 Motor Re—winds & Repairs H.F. & L.F. Furnaces              TELEPHONES 29906 & 29907
                                                                                            TELEGRAMS VOLT SHEFFIELD 4
                                                                                            Telex Nos. CHAMCO G 54208
                                                                                                        CHAMCO G 547676

 Y our R e f : W E/TB/SB/l6lO
 O ur R efs GKP/DH                                                                               2^-th March 1980.

 M e s s r s . E a stw o o d & P a r t n e r s ,
 Bowmaker H ouse,
 2 3 K i n g f i e l d R oad,
 SHEFFIELD.
 S l l 9AS          E a S tW O O d &                                           F o r t h e a t t e n t i o n o f M r. Bower
                                     2 5H A RW 80                               I
 Dear S ii        R o c ’d .................................................            ■

                                   S h e f f i e l d W ednesday F o o t b a l l C lu b L im ite d
                                   I n s t a l l a t i o n o f F i r e A larm & Mods t o P u b l i c
                                   _____________A d d re s s S y ste m s .___________________

         R e: The a b o v e w orks we h av e r e c h e c k e d d e l i v e r y d a t e s o f t h e G e n ts eq u ip m e n t
 w i t h o u r s u p p l i e r s a n d we a r e a d v i s e d fro m w orks on F r i d a y 21 s t M arch 1980 a s
 fo llo w s :

         C h l o r i d e G e n ts   M odel 5202   B a t t e r y C h a rg e r                            7 days
                     "            M odel 3213/D S i g n a l I n d i c a t o r P a n e l                 4 w eeks
                     "            M odel 9122 -0 1 6 end o f l i n e r e s i s t o r s                  7 -1 0 d a y s .

         G e n ts I n d u s t r i a l B a t t e r i e s

                  2 k   -   YAP9, s t e e l s t a n d a n d a n c i l l a r y e q u ip m e n t - F r i d a y 25t h A p r i l I 98O.


         The a b o v e d e l i v e r y d a t e s o f t h e e q u ip m e n t w i l l p r e v e n t o u r w orks c o m p le tio n
 f o r t h e en d o f M arch 1 9 8 0 .

       T a k in g t h e a b o v e i n t o a c c o u n t we w i l l e n d e a v o u r t o c o m p le te t h e w orks a s soon
 as p o s sib le .

                                                  Y ours f a i t h f u l l y ,
                                      p . p . ERADWELL ELECTRICAL COMPANY LIMITED.




                                                                                                  G K P ark er.
         SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL

                   With the Com plim ents c#
                                                                           ££tS§?

               THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
               T . S m ’E K i t r m . t e m r R. M   ci .e   .O y f t a t ^ b U ! ^ .
                                   ^ d u j2 W & ,, S«aw|          $r\W K




                                      FOR INFORMATION


                                      FOR ACTION



                                      FOR COMMENT

                                                         ^S?U^'"t£5 vuafit t
                                              cOt            ^v\, ®v\ \ Ww\(L
                                      totx A-frfrV      \     iA 4 > c           1*
               From .                                         - P if 3       • M-,<
               D epartm ent of Administration
               County Hall
               Barnsley                Tel. Barnsley 86141 Ext,




DOCUMENT Mo.
                                                                                                                        •   ••   ■
                                                                                                                             ' - ••


            DV/?,m/383/5                 EE/CB                                 33st 3v*rch,
                                                                                         .
                                                                                            . '-'M
                          4
                                                                 ■                          .                               \
                                                                                                                            -

Dear Sir,
                                                                                                                      • a-.-;
                                                                           '     ■'   - '       •    ■          .


Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975

The County Council is disturbed to find that, following recent bis its by the dioeipUnos ; :
represented on the Officer Working Party, there are .still outstanding at the Hillsborough
Stadium various matters which it was required or agreed.would receive attention.

l’ OT‘ instance, the Chief Fl.ro Officer informs me that:-

<i}    'Whilst the County Fire Service offered assistance in the training o£ safety
        stewards as to their actions in an emergency (as required by I sr.i iraj:-lv 0
        of Schedule 2 of the General Safety Certificate), to the best of my bnowied'-e
        no steps have been token in this direction;

(ii)   Contrary to Paragraph 11 of Schedule 2, some exit sl<ina bavin.; iu^c-vxtc;
        lettering size hays been provided and sited otherwise thru, iu ae-or;!;? ?>•;.! -vith
       the certificate plans, whilst the exit signs at the rear of the booth Sirov.!
       are not UUvmlnaied by V?oth the normal and er/:er;:on:::y irrhtiH-rt

(ui)   The etnerrsncy lighting provisions in the Soufci &awl a.H ihe                                       ?
       leading from it do not comply with the requirements of /'.‘ir-tr-rav.i                       ! ‘3   o;' the
        Certificate, as amended by m y letter of 21st December, .1279;

(iv)   No fire warning system has yet been provided to satisfy the requirements of
       Paragraph 13 of Schedule 2.

The Building Authority had advised the Club's Consultants, M essrs. Eastwood a/id
Partners, that the following matters require attentlom-

(i)    The fire resisting door frames to be sealed against the supv.ortin;'; v- s-aU;




Mr. E. England,
Secretary,                                                       /7i i \
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.,
Hillsborough,                                                                          .        •

SHEFFIELD,                                                                                                           ' ■■■ a
S6 1SW .
        JC* I'nrland                           -2-                           3lst Karjh, JCoU




(U)       'Toftfirrnatkm that fir e retardeat paint has been used on the partitions with! i
          the South Stand;

(HI)      Whether* w ire d g la ss has teen used where appropriate on the partitions
          within the South Stand for fire and/or safety purposes;

(tv)     Whether the pew stat r construction at the South-W est S t a n d ; :aaerj:uaUC
         clcarance, -,vith the sharp edges to the steelw ork being rerbovedfand h
         eonniderr.t’otrbefn;? r'iven to pro.vldinsj a tim ber fa sc ia ;’

{'/)     The perimeter fencing at the North-East corner of the Spurn Ko;:.- to be
          appraise.! for condition and strength;

(vi)      "'he uppe ' ejdt a -.•ea on the Spion Kop to be ehe-sked bn" .'ten c'r:et ^r-’ih

(viL)     Trie mesh fencing under the North Stand to be assessed for rslrenctn and
          potential hazard to crowd surges.

The County ’’ounaU is naturally concerned in the ler^al sen se that si.rr^ of. f. .-jonc'ttions
attached to the Safety C ertificate a r e ap parently not being satisfied, iat' o ^ a d y in a
pva ;th:ial sen -50 it has in mind that the n-ajority of s p e c ta to rs who wilt be alt-'nd inn
the F,;>. hup S e a n -F in a l on I2ch April will not be f a m ili a r v.-iin e a n e r iCa lay-out
o r •aailiihis at tha ntadium.

It r.iciy v,-ell be that the blub has :civen attention to the points ..r^itaune 1 ;i( Lnr i.sst
few days, ;.H<t ne .'iiaps yon will let r^e have your e o r^ n c n ts ay a r. a t t r ' :>f ■•v.'oziy.

                                                           Yours faithfully,




                                                           Chief Executive




                                                                                                          ;r-r- r r
                                                                                                           ’.rr. r,;.r
                                                                                                         h /C b b #
                                                                                    '                * - *\


                                                                                                 m
    F.A. Ballet*, Esq., U..B.,                                w   m   m   m

    Chief Executive,
    South Yorkshire County Council,                                            - ■■■ -• '
    County Ball,                                              26th Ifeirch 1980
    Barnsley,
    310 2TN.
                                                                                    : :          ■
                                                                              :::           :
    Dear Sir,
                                                                                             r
    safety of sports grounds act 1975
    SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBAEE. CSOB
                                                                                            .■       ■
                                                                                            :-. ..-V;;'-
    I refer to your letter dated the 14th March 1980,
    subject and would inform you that so far as our primary
    are concerned, we do not have any current problems in respect o€
    for emergency vehicles, terrace to touch line area or cororaunications•

    The only matter outstanding so far as the Police are concerned is the
    provision of a suitable Police room and I understand that an undertaking
    has already been received from the Club that this will be constructed
    in the closed season of 1980. Sn dealing with this particular aspect,
    it would also be advantageous for a site to be made available, Whereby
    ground control could be maintained from a position overlooking the play
    area and this is a matter which may be properly discussed at future
    meetings.

    Yours faithfully,




<   C h ie f C o n s ta b le
      South Yorkshire County Council
      F. A. Mallett, LL.B., Chief Executive                             County Hall
                                                                        Barnsley
      J. C. Harris, M.A., LL.B. (Cantab), County Secretary              South Yorkshire S70 2TN
      Department of Administration                                      Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                        (STD 0226) 86141
                                                                        Telex: 547675
                                                                        Ext....................
      Our Ref: D V /AW /583 /5        Your Ref. O P S / B L M / J E D   Date: 4th February, 1980




D ea r S ir,

Safety of Sports Grounds A ct 1975
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

You may care to attach the enclosed copy plans illustrating the Chief
F ire O fficer’s requirem ents to the copy of the General Safety
C ertificate forwarded to you by my letter of 21st D ecem ber, 1979.

I apologise for their poor quality, but the a rea s shaded yellow on the
original plan (showing the a rea s covered by the em ergency lighting
system ) have shown up a s dark shading upon reproduction.

                                              Yours foithfully,




                                              Chief Executive.




 The Chief Constable,                                   —1
 South Yorkshire P o lice,
 P o lice Headquarters,
 Snlg H ill,
 Sheffield. S3 8LY
                                                        J
                                                                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                                                   REF*                      f / rh / wo' N/DR
     FROM:    The C h ie f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t ,                  'F ' D i v i s i o n
                                                                                                   STATION/DEPT:              'F ' DHQ
     TO:      S u p e r i n t e n d e n t M ole, O p e r a ti o n s D i v i s i o n , HQ's         DATE:                      24 March 1980

                  SUBJECT:                             HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND

                            I r e f e r t o t h e a t t a c h e d l e t t e r from t h e S o u th Y o r k s h ir e C ounty
                            C o u n c il an d y o u r m in u te s h e e t o f 18 M arch 1980.

                            The o n ly o u t s t a n d i n g ite m t h a t t h e p o l i c e        a r e c o n c e rn e d w ith a t
                            t h e f o o t b a l l g ro u n d i s      th e p ro v is io n o f      a s u i t a b l e P o l i c e Room.
                            An u n d e r t a k i n g h a s a l r e a d y b e e n r e c e i v e d    from t h e c l u b t h a t t h i s
                            w i l l be c o n s tru c te d in          th e c lo se season          o f 1980. C o n s e q u e n tly ,
                            no a c t i o n i s n e e d e d on         our p a rt.




 A
 i'-T*



                            S u p e r in t e n d e n t
                            f o r C h ie f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t


             ^7        -                 ^ v-"• /
              / ' '•   —r   ■.       •     -       C     <j     i
                            /    ,
                                               ,       A --'l




GEN/2
J                                     S'


                                      '                  S outh Y o rk sh ire Police                      o p s /b lm /a u

                                                             MINUTE SHEET                          date      l 8 Mar c h l 980
                              To:-
                            : C h ie f                                  SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB
                                                             Subject.
                            i S u p e rin te n d e n t
                              H e r o ld ,
                              •F* D i v i s i o n

                                                                  The a t t a c h e d copy l e t t e r i s fo rw a rd e d
                                                                  f o r f a v o u r o f y o u r a t t e n t i o n and
                                                                  comments c o n c e r n in g an y o u t s t a n d i n g
                                                                  m a t t e r s c o n c e r n in g t h e g ro u n d from a
                                                                  P o l i c e p o i n t o f view w ith p a r t i c u l a r
                                                                  e m p h a s is t o t h e f o r th c o m in g Cup Semi
                                                                  F i n a l t o be h e l d on 12 A p r i l 1980*


    :   ■   ■■■■■ ' ■ - -


                                                                  S u p e rin te n d e n t (
                                                                  O p e r a ti o n s


                                     SOUTH YORKS POLICE



                                             19 MAR      m
                                           *P D.H.C
                                       SHEFFIELD




                                   GEN/53.
          South Yorkshire County Council
         F. A. Mallett, LL.B., Chief Executive                                         County Hal!
                                                                                       Barnsley
         J . C. Harris, M.A., LL.B. (Cantab), County Secretary                         South Yorkshire S70 2TN
         Department of Administration                                                  Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                                       (STD 0226) 86141
                                                                                       Telex: 547675
                                                                                       Ext       ........
         Our Ref: DV/MB/583/5                  Your Ref. OPS/BLM/JED                   Date: 1 4 th M arch, 1980




D ear S i r ,

S a f e t y o f S p o r ts G rounds A c t, 1975
S h e f f i e l d Wednesday F o o t b a l l Club

R e f e r r i n g t o y o u r l e t t e r o f 7 th J a n u a r y , now t h a t an announcem ent h a s b e e n
made o f t h e F .A . Cup S e m i- F in a l b e tw e e n A r s e n a l and L i v e r p o o l b e i n g p la y e d
a t t h e H ill s b o r o u g h S tad iu m on 1 2 th A p r i l , I f e e l t h a t t h e S h e f f i e l d D i s t r i c t
O f f i c e r W orking P a r t y w i l l h av e t o r e v ie w t h e s i t u a t i o n a t t h e S tad iu m , ev en
th o u g h t h e C e r t i f i c a t e was i s s u e d a s c o m p a r a ti v e ly r e c e n t l y a s 2 1 s t Decem ber,
1979

I am aw are t h a t y o u r o f f i c e r s a r e a l r e a d y a c t i v e l y engaged i n p r e p a r i n g f o r
t h e o c c a s i o n , and I h av e a s k e d t h e B u i l d i n g A u t h o r i t y and t h e County F i r e
S e r v ic e t o l e t me h a v e t h e i r comments on any o u t s t a n d i n g m a t t e r s f o r w hich
t h e y h a v e p r im a r y r e s p o n s i b i l i t y as so o n a s p o s s i b l e and c e r t a i n l y by t h e
end o f t h e m onth.

I f t h e r e a r e any o u t s t a n d i n g m a t t e r s f o r w h ich you h av e p r im a r y r e s p o n s i b i l i t y
w hich you w ould l i k e me t o r a i s e w ith t h e Club th r o u g h t h e medium o f t h e
O f f i c e r W orking P a r t y , no d o u b t you w i l l l e t me know.

                                                                Y ours f a i t h f u l l y




                                                                 C h ie f E x e c u tiv e




 The C h ie f C o n s ta b l e ,
 S outh Y o r k s h ir e P o l i c e
                                                                 %
 P o lic e H e a d q u a rte rs,                                 *
 S n ig H i l l ,
 S h e ffie ld ,
 S3 8LY
              South Yorkshire County Council
             F. A. Mallett, LL.B., Chief Executive                                        County Hal!                       X.
                                                                                          Barnsley
             J. C. Harris, M.A., LL.B. (Cantab), County Secretary                         South Yorkshire S70 2TN
             Department of Administration                                                 Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                                          (STD 0226) 86141
                                                                                          Telex: 547675
                                                                                          Ext.. 422.........

             Our Ref: DV/M B/583/5                Your Ref. OPS/BLM/JED                    Date: 1 4 th M arch, 1980.




    D ear S i r ,

    S a f e ty o f S p o r ts Grounds A c t, 1975
    S h e f f i e l d W ednesday F o o t b a l l Club

    R e f e r r i n g t o y o u r l e t t e r o f 7 t h J a n u a r y , now t h a t an announcem ent h a s b een
    made o f t h e F .A . Cup S e m i- F in a l b e tw e e n A r s e n a l and L i v e r p o o l b e i n g p la y e d
    a t t h e H ill s b o r o u g h S tad iu m on 1 2 th A p r i l , I f e e l t h a t t h e S h e f f i e l d D i s t r i c t
    O f f i c e r W orking P a r t y w i l l h av e t o r e v ie w t h e s i t u a t i o n a t t h e S tad iu m , even
    th o u g h t h e C e r t i f i c a t e was i s s u e d a s c o m p a r a tiv e ly r e c e n t l y a s 2 1 s t December,
    1979.

    I am aw are t h a t y o u r o f f i c e r s a r e a l r e a d y a c t i v e l y engaged i n p r e p a r i n g f o r
    th e o c c a s i o n , and I h a v e a s k e d t h e B u il d in g A u t h o r i t y and t h e County F i r e
    S e r v ic e t o l e t me h av e t h e i r comments on any o u t s t a n d i n g m a t t e r s f o r w hich
    th e y h av e p rim a r y r e s p o n s i b i l i t y as so o n a s p o s s i b l e and c e r t a i n l y by th e
    end o f t h e m onth.

    I f t h e r e a r e any o u t s t a n d i n g m a t t e r s f o r w h ich you h av e p rim a r y r e s p o n s i b i l i t y
    w hich you w ould l i k e me t o r a i s e w ith t h e Club th r o u g h t h e medium o f t h e
    O f f i c e r W orking P a r t y , no d o u b t you w i l l l e t me know.

                                                                    Y ours f a i t h f u l l y ,




                                                                    C h ie f E x e c u tiv e




r    The C h ie f C o n s ta b le ,                                    “1
     S outh Y o r k s h ir e P o l i c e ,
     P o lic e H e a d q u a rte rs,
     S n ig H i l l ,
     S h e ffie ld ,
     S3   8LY
                                                                                ••

                                                                                :•   ••




P.A. Hailett, Esq., tL.B.,                                   DV/AW/583/5
Chief Executive,                                             OPS/BIH/JED
South Yorkshire County Council,
County Hall,                                                 7th January 1980
Barnsley,
S70 2TN.


Dear Sir

Safety of Sports QSpounds Act, 1975
Sheffield Wednesday football Club

I refer to your letter dated the 3rd January 1980 end would Inform you that
the Boxing Day Local Derby held at the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground
took place without Incident and from a Police point of view war a complete
success.
The organisation from all aspects worked well, with excellent liaison being
maintained between the ground staff, the media and the Police. Proas an
operational point of view no problems were experienced.

There is no doubt that the 11.00 a.m. kick off assisted considerably and
liiere practical, this is a practice which may be encouraged in the event
of similar large scale football matches.

Yours faithfully,




Chief Constable

                                          ”     — BW?'.".1'"" i i |
                                          am    u s s
                                                                                                    4th January 1980
                                    Cllief
                                    Superintendent                        S \FETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975
                                    Herold                                SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL
                                   *F* Division
                                                          Attached hereto for your information and
                                                          retention is a copy of correspondence
   -y             p
                   .. V . .   y-
                                                          received from the
        -       y y > ', y y w                            Council concerning the recent issue of a
               .-y-y                                      Safety Certificate to the above-mentioned
                                                          Club.

    V”v..^v      V                                                                                              ••   '   -
 ■' ''y'-'y'
:c y y i
                                                                                                          - ■y                    y
                                                                                                           '•'■y             :'--yyy
                                                                                                                      • ...
    - y - ' - y ^ /y y ^ y f® :;                          Superintendent                                    '   .
                                                                                                                                ,




                                                                                           .':y:V




                                                                                ———
                                                     DOCUMENT No
                                                     .wW WViltovVI *■ •



                                                                                       .   '
                  South Yorkshire County Council
              F. A. Mallett, LL.B., Chief Executive                          County Hall
                                                                             Barnsley
              J. C. Harris, M .A ., LL.B. (Cantab), County Secretary         South Yorkshire S70 2TN
              Department of Administration                                   Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                             (STD 0226) 86141

                                                                             Ext.   No................

              Our Ref:   D V /A W /5 8 3 /5   Your Ref.     O P S /B M       Date:    3rd January, 1980




    D ear S ir,

    Safety of Sports Grounds A ct, 1975
    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

    U n less the Hillsborough Stadium is allocated an F . A . Cup S em i-F in al or
    som e such other representative m atch, it is unlikely that the near capacity
    crowd achieved at the Boxing Day local derby with Sheffield United w ill
    o ccu r again during the current season .

    I am quite sure that, from a purely police operational point o f view , you
    w ill be review ing the exp erien ces gained from the Boxing Day m atch and
    m ay even have done so already.

    The County Council*s in terest is , of c o u rse, from an overall point o f view ,
    and any com m ents which you feel able to make would I am sure be o f great
    a ssista n c e for future o cca ssio n s.

                                                       Yours faithfully,




                                                          Chief Executive.




                                                            m a a tte




p    The C hief Constable,
     South Y orkshire P o lice ,
     P o lic e H eadquarters,
     Snig H ill,
     Sheffield.
     S3 8 LY
South Yorkshire County Council v?x
F. A. Mallett, LL.B., Chief Executive                             County Hall
                                                                  Barnsley
J. C. Harris, M .A ., LL.B. (Cantab), County Secretary            South Yorkshire S70 2TN
Department of Administration                                      Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                  (STD 0226) 86141
                                                                  Telex: 547675
                                                                  Ext......................

Our Ref:   DV/   sy   / 5 8 3 /5   Your Ref.   0 PS/BM            Date: 21st Decem ber , 1979



Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Grounds A ct, 1975
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

Following approval by the County Council and clarification, of certain,
structural a sp ects of the South Stand construction, the General Safety
C ertificate in resp ect of the Hillsborough Stadium of the Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club Ltd. has been issu ed today. A copy is attached
for your retention.

Perhaps you would a lso treat th is letter a s the form al notice of issu e
required by Paragraph 7 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1976.

May I a lso take th is opportunity of thanking you for the invaluable assista n ce
and co-operation so readily given by your o ffic e r s , which undoubtedly
contributed to the m ulti-disciplinary Officer Working Party functioning so
effectiv ely.

                                                     Yours faithfully,




                                                         Chief Executive.




                                                               "" •&<£/ ■




  The Chief Constable,
  South Yorkshire P o lic e ,
  P o lice Headquarters,
  Snig H ill,
  Sheffield,
  South Yorkshire
  S3 8 I Y
                                               South Yorkshire County Council




                          SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975
                              GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE

A ddress of p rem ises for which                                        The Hillsborough Stadium
th is C ertificate is issued                                            Penistone Road, Sheffield,

O ccupier of the p rem ises                                              Sheffield Wednesday Football
          and                                                            Club Ltd.
Holder of th is C ertificate

U se of the p rem ises in resp ect                                       Football m atches.
o f which th is C ertificate is issued                                   R eligious Conventions.

          T his C ertificate is issued by South Yorkshire County Council in resp ect of
          the p rem ises described above, being a Sports Stadium designated by Order
          under Section 1 of the Safety o f Sports Grounds A ct, 1975 as a stadium
          requiring a Safety C ertificate.

          The term s and conditions se t out in the Schedules attached hereto          are hereby
          im posed.

          The term s and conditions hereby imposed are those which the South Yorkshire
          County Council consider n ecessa ry or expedient to secu re reasonable safety at
          the Stadium when it is in use for an activity in resp ect o f which this
          C ertificate is issu ed .

           The words used in th is C ertificate and the Schedules attached hereto have
           the m eaning assigned to them by Schedule 1 to th is C ertificate and
           Section 17 of the A ct.

           The Schedules and Plans attached hereto all form part of th is C ertificate,

           This C ertificate com m ences on the twenty first day of D ecem ber, One
           thousand nine hundred and seventy nine for an indefinite period.


                      21st D ecem ber, 1979 ......................   Signed .
                                                                             Chief Executive on behalf
                                                                             of and duly authorised by
                                                                            the South Yorkshire County
                                                                              Council.



                DOCUMENT Ho. ^          2- •
                            In terp reta tio n

The A ct                             m eans the Safety of Sports Ground Act, 1975.

Authorised P erson                   m eans a person authorised In accordance with
                                     Section 11 of the Act.
The Building Authority               m eans the Sheffield City Council.
The Chief Constable                  means the Chief Constable for the tim e being
                                     o f the South Y orkshire P olice or, a s the case
                                     may require, the P o lice O fficer having charge
                                     of the Stadium on the occasion of a Specified
                                     A c tiv ity .
The C hief F ire O fficer            m eans the Chief F ire O fficer for the tim e being
                                     o f the South Y orkshire County F ire Service or
                                     his designated rep resen tative.
The C ertificate                     m eans the written General Safety C ertificate of
                                     which the Schedules and Plans form part.
The County Council                   means the South Yorkshire County Council.
The Guide                            m eans the "Guide to Safety a t Sports Grounds ’’
                                     a s from tim e to tim e amended, Issued by the
                                     Home Office, or such other code of practice as
                                     m ay be so issu ed .
 The Holder                           means the applicant for and person to whom the
                                      G eneral Safety C ertificate has been Issued and who
                                      is a ’qualified person* for the purposes of the Act.

 Invalid C arriage                    m eans a veh icle, whether m echanically propelled
                                      o r not, constructed or adapted for use for the
                                      carriage of one person, being a person suffering
                                      from som e physical defect or disability.

 The Plans                            m eans the document or documents attached to and
                                      form ing part of the General Safety C ertificate and
                                      signed by the person signing the C ertificate a n d /
                                      or any other document or documents which may
                                      be added to or substituted for such document or
                                      documents and signed on behalf of the County
                                      Council.

 Specified A ctivity                  means a football match or a B eliglous Convention.


 Spectator                            m eans any person occupying accommodation
                                      provided for spectators a t the stadium.

 The Stadium                           means the Hillsborough Stadium, Penistone Road,
                                       Sheffield.                      ^
 Structural Parts                      includes stru ctu res, components, installations,
                                       fabric and associa ted parts of the Stadium.

 V eh icles                            includes invalid ca rria g es.
                            SCHEDULE 2

                  General T erm s and Conditions

(1)    The H older's nom inee for the tim e being approved in w riting by the
        County Council shall be present w henever the Stadium is used fo r a
       Specified A ctivity and he shall on behalf of the Holder ensure that
       the term s and conditions of the C ertificate are com plied with at
       the Specified A ctivity.

(2)    The appointment by the Holder of a nom inee to attend each Specified
       A ctivity shall not absolve the Holder and any respon sib le person (as
       defined in section 12(2) of the Act) from th eir obligation to take all
       reasonable precautions and e x e r c ise all due diligence to avoid the
       contravention of any term o r condition of the C ertificate.

The Holder shall not allow spectators to be admitted to the Stadium u n less a
Specified A ctivity is taking place.

The number of spectators admitted to the Stadium and to the sev eral areas of
spectator accom modation within the Stadium shall not exceed the figures
specified in P a r t i of Schedule 3.

Subject to the term s and conditions hereof and to the statutory controls relating
thereto, the Stadium may be used ancillary to a Specified A ctivity for one or
m ore of the following

(a)    the playing of m usic or singing;

 (b)   the provision of news o r com m ent associated with football;

 (c)   the sa le of tick ets for forthcom ing a ctiv ities, program m es, n ew -sheets
        and souvenirs;

 (d)   the sa le and consumption of refreshm ents;

 (e)   any other use ancillary to a Specified A ctivity which has the prior approval
        in w riting of the County Council.

 (1)   W here the prior written approval of the County Council is required under
       the term s and conditions hereof, an application for that approval shall
        be made by the Holder to the County Council at le a st 21 days before the
       occurrence in resp ect of which it is required.

 (2)   If w h ilst the C ertificate is in operation it is proposed to alter or extend the
        Stadium or any of its installations in a maimer mentioned in Section 8
        of the A ct the Holder shall at le a st 21 days before the carrying out of the
        proposal is begun give notice in w riting of the proposal to the County
         Council.
(1)   The Holder shall agree with the Chief Constable at le a s t 21 days
       (or such shorter tim e to which the Chief Constable may consent)
      p rior to every Specified A ctivity the m ethods of adm ission to be
      em ployed in connection with the Specified A ctivity and (in relation
      to a Football Match) the methods to be used for the segregation o f
      home and visitin g supporters.
(2)   The Holder shall refuse adm ission to, or evacuate spectators from,
      the Stadium o r any part thereof at any tim e before or during a
      Specified A ctivity upon receiving instructions so to do from the
       Chief Constable.

The Holder shall at his own expense arrange for the attendance at every
Specified A ctivity of an adequate number of p olice o fficers to secu re the
orderly and lawful behaviour of the spectators and the number of police
o fficers required at each Specified A ctivity shall be agreed between the
Chief Constable and the Holder at le a s t 21 days (or such sh orter tim e to
which the Chief Constable may consent) before a Specified A ctivity takes
p lace.                                                                             0S\
(1)     Subject to such interim arrangem ents a s may be agreed by the County C oundtf
         the Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction
         of the County Council a suitably equipped F ir st Aid Room . The first
         aid room shall be adequately signed and shall be capable of being lit
         by the em ergency power supply referred to in paragraph 12 of this
         Schedule.

(2)   The Holder shall ensure that during every Specified Activity a
       physician em ployed or retained by the Holder is available to attend
       at the F irst Aid Room if required and that his whereabouts are known
       to those in the P o lice Central Control Room at the Stadium.

(3)   The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every Specified Activity
       of such numbers of qualified F irst Aid a ssista n ts a s the County Council
       shall require but without prejudice to the foregoing the Holder shall
       ensure that at every specified activity th ere is at le a st one F irst Aid    ^
       a ssista n t for every 2 , 0 0 0 sp ectators.                                   ;'

The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every Specified A ctivity of such
number of Safety Stewards as may be required by P art 2 of Schedule 3, and
shall ensure that the Safety Stewards shall be (a) fit and capable to carry out
th eir duties (b) properly trained and instructed (c) identifiable by d ress (d)
provided with written instructions a s to th eir general duties in order to carry
out the following.—

(1)    Manning of e x its as indicated on the plans

(2)    Control and direction of spectators entering using o r leaving the
       Stadium

(3)    Patrolling the Stadium and dealing with any em ergency including
       raising an alarm and extinguishing any sm all fir e .
Training e x e r c ise s relating to the action to be taken in the event of an
em ergency shall be held fo r Safety Stewards and Staff em ployed at the
Stadium at le a st once every three months.

The Holder shall ensure that, except w here otherw ise marked on the Plans,
all doors and gates which form an e g r e s s route between any spectator
accom modation and the public highway, or other open space outside the
stadium , shall be so secured as to open im m ediately and e a sily from the inside
and shall be manned at all tim es by at le a st the number of stew ards required
by P art 2 of Schedule 3. A ll such doors or gates shall be opened by the
stew ards responsible and secured in the fully open position at a tim e before
the epd of a Specified A ctivity agreed between the Holder and the Chief
Constable and at any other tim e on evacuation of the Stadium or a part
thereof on being ordered so to do by a police o fficer in uniform or by the
sounding of the alarm .

(1)     The Holder shall provide and maintain to the satisfaction of the Chief
        F ire O fficer exit sign s com prising white le tte r s on a green background
        over a ll e x its from the Stadium and all e x its from spectator
        accom modation therein and shall ensure that such exit signs may be
        illum inated by both the main and em ergency lighting sy ste m s. Such
        supplem entary illum inated sign s in such locations a s the Chief F ire
        O fficer may require shall a lso be provided by the H older.

(2)    The Holder shall ensure that the corrid ors, gangways and sta ir ca se s
       indicated on the P lans may be illum inated when required during a
       Specified A ctivity by both the main and em ergency lighting sy ste m s.

(3)    The sign s mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) of th is paragraph shall be
       illum inated w henever adequate natural light is deficient during a
       Specified A ctivity or a s directed by the Chief Constable.

(4)    A ll m eans of in g ress to and e g r e s s from the Stadium and to and from
       any Spectator Accommodation therein shall be maintained free from
       obstruction and with non -slip and even su rfaces and in particular
       sta ir coverings shall be secured and maintained so that they do not
       constitute a source of danger.
(1)    Subject to such interim arrangem ents as may be agreed by the Chief F ire O fficer
        the Holder shall provide and maintain to the satisfaction of the Chief
       F ire O fficer a separate em ergency power supply for providing
       e le ctr ic ity sufficient to light all em ergency lighting throughout the
       Stadium, all exit signs and powering all the communication system s
       within the Stadium, such em ergency power supply to be operable
       independently of the main power supply and to com e into automatic
       operation within ten seconds of the failure of the latter and to be
       capable of maintaining the n ecessa ry power output for a minimum of
       three hours from the failure of the main power supply.

(2)    At le a st once in each period of 12 months the Holder shall supply to
       the Chief F ire O fficer a report as to the condition of the em ergency
       Pow er Supply certified by an independent E lectrica l E ngineer.

(3)    On the day of a Specified A ctivity and not le s s than 3 hours p rior to
       its com m encem ent the em ergency power supply shall be tested for
       a period of 30 m inutes. Any defect revealed in th is te s t shall be
       rectified before the com m encem ent of the Specified A ctivity.

(4)    A com petent electricia n employed or retained by the Holder shall be
       p resen t during a Specified A ctivity.

(1)    The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction
       of the Chief F ire O fficer a fire warning sy stem .

(2)   The fire warning sy stem shall be tested periodically to the satisfaction
       of the Chief F ire O fficer.
Subject to such interim arrangem ents as may be agreed by the Chief Constable,
the Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction of the
Chief Constable

(1)    A P o lice Central Control Room which shall be provided with such
       ancillary equipment as the Chief Constable may require.

(2)    Accommodation for the exclu sive use of the police as a detention room
       and for adm inistrative purposes.

(3)    A public address system audible in all parts of the Stadium. The P olice
        shall have the right to use the public address system for police purposes
        in priority to its use for any other purpose.

(1)    The Holder shall at all tim es maintain all structural parts of the stadium
        in sound order and to the appropriate and relevant standards in the Guide
        and in all c a se s to the satisfaction of the Council.

(2)    The Holder shall carry out such works of maintenance, repair and
       renewal to the Stadium as may be required from tim e to tim e by the
       County Council.

The Holder shall at a ll tim es maintain all operational parts of the Stadium
(including the ele ctr ic a l and com m unications installations) and all em ergency
equipment in good and efficient working order to the satisfaction of the County
Council and shall undertake such maintenance repair or renewal as may from
tim e to tim e be n ecessa ry to maintain reasonable safety within the Stadium.

The Holder shall place within the Stadium, at such positions as may be specified
by the Chief F ire Officer, em ergency procedure n otices which shall be
maintained legible and unobstructed in those position s.

 (1)   The parking of veh icles within the boundary of the Stadium shall be
        restricted to those areas indicated on the Plans u n less otherw ise
       approved for em ergency purposes by a P o lice O fficer in uniform.
(2)       The Holder shall provide and maintain within the Stadium to the
          sa tisfaction of the County Council the a co ess routes for em ergency
          v eh icles shown on the plans.

The Holder shall ensure that m em bers of the P r e s s , T . V. and radio ser v ic es
having a c c e s s to the public and playing areas of the Stadium are identifiable
as such.

T elevision cam eras and portable equipment shall be placed only in such
positions as may be agreed between the Holder and the Chief Constable.

(1)       Liquid refreshm ents may be sold o r distributed at the Stadium only in
          containers constructed from soft p lastic or other soft m aterial, o r as
          allow ed by the L icensing J u stic e s.

(2)       No accum ulation of rubbish, bricks, stones or other m aterials which
           in the opinion of the Chief Constable are capable of u se as m is s ile s
           shall be perm itted to rem ain in any part of the Stadium to which
           spectators have a c c e s s .

No accum ulation of flam mable rubbish, dirt, surplus m aterial or goods shall
be perm itted to rem ain in any part of the Stadium except in a place and quantity
approved in w riting by the Chief F ire O fficer.

No flam m able g a ses or liquids shall be stored o r used in any part of the
Stadium without the p rior w ritten approval of the Chief F ire O fficer.

The Holder shall arrange for the Stadium to be inspected by a suitably qualified
Chartered Engineer (Structural o r Civil) in the p resence of a representative of the
County Council within 7 months of the date of the C ertificate and at le a st once in each
period of 12 months thereafter and the Holder shall a s soon as possible after
each inspection supply to the County Council a C ertificate by the said
Chartered Engineer a s to the current com pliance or non-com pliance with good
engineering and building p ractices and with the relevant B ritish Standard
Specifications and Codes of P ra ctice and with the appropriate provisions and
 recom m endations of the Guide of all structural parts of the Stadium excluding the
crush b arriers and handrails.

 (1)       The Holder shall arrange for all crush b arriers and handrails within the
           Stadium to be tested in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the
           Guide by a suitably qualified Chartered Engineer (Structural or Civil)
           in the presen ce of a representative of the County Council within 2 months
           of the date of this C ertificate and for the resu lts thereof to be notified
           in w riting to the County Council as soon as possible thereafter.

 (2)(i)     The Holder shall ensure that not m ore than 7 months after the date of this
            C ertificate and thereafter not le s s than once in each period of 12 months
            a representative sam ple of crush barriers and handrails amounting to not
            le s s than 2 0 % of the total number of such b arriers and ra ils is tested in
       accordance with the Guide by a suitably qualified Chartered Engineer
       (Structural or Civil) in the p resen ce of a representative of the County
       Council and the resu lts thereof notified in w riting to the County Council
       a s soon as p o ssib le thereafter.
(ii)   a record shall be kept of those crush b arriers and handrails tested in
       accordance with sub-paragraph (2)(1) alone and a b arrier so tested shall
       not be tested again within a period of 4^ y ea rs th ereafter.

The Holder shall within 7 months of the date of th is certificate and thereafter
not le s s than once in each period of 12 months supply to the Chief F ire O fficer
the certifica te of an independent E lectrical Engineer as to the current
com pliance or non-com pliance of the e le ctr ic a l installation within the Stadium
with Section E of the I .E .E . Regulations o r other sectio n s or Regulations for
the tim e being in fo rce relating to the E lectrica l Equipment of B uildings.

(i)    The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium fir e fighting
       equipment of such type and in such positions a s may be required by the
       Chief F ire O fficer.

(ii)   The Holder shall arrange for all fir e extinguishers, fir e hydrants and
       other w ater supply within the Stadium to be inspected and tested as
       appropriate at le a st once in each period of 12 months by a competent
       person to the satisfaction of the Chief F ire O fficer.

The Holder shall make and keep the following records which shall be made
available for inspection at all reasonable tim e to Authorised P erson s:

 (1)   A record of the numbers of spectators adm itted to the Stadium during
       a Specified A ctivity and to each area of Spectator Accommodation
       therein mentioned in Part 1 of Schedule 3.

 (2)    A record of any accident or incident occurring w hilst the Stadium is in
        use fo r a Specified A ctivity which cau ses injury to a spectator, such
        record to include the nam e, add ress, and age of the spectator
        injured, the nature of the injury and how it w as caused, as far a s can
        be ascertained by diligent inquiry, and the location of the incident.
        The Holder shall provide a w ritten report to the County Council within
        48 hours of all such accidents or incidents.

 (3)    A record of the training and instruction given and the e x e r c ise s held in
        accordance with the requirem ents of Paragraph 9 of th is Schedule such
        record to include the date and tim e and duration of the instruction or
        e x e r c ise , the name of the person giving instruction, the nature of the
        instruction or e x e r c ise , and the nam e(s) of the person(s) instructed.

 (4)    A record of all inspections, te s ts , maintenance, repairs and renewals
        ca rried out at the Stadium.
The Stadium shall be maintained with the fa c ilitie s and structures including
all crush b a r r ie r s , en tran ces, ex its and m eans o f a c c e ss to the entrances
and e x its in the num ber, s iz e , position and strength existing at the date
of the C ertificate and indicated on the plans and no alteration shall be made
thereto u n less p rior notice in w riting is given to the County Council in
accordance with paragraph 5(2) o f th is Schedule.

No spectators shall be allowed to use th e Stadium in conditions o f extrem e
wind and/or snow loadings acting singular o r in combination and in
particular: -

(1)      No spectators shall be allowed to use the stadium in wind
         speed s in e x c e s s o f 100 K m .p .h . at 10m above ground lev el
         and th is prohibition shall be effective when m ore than one gust of
         th is speed of at le a st 3 seconds duration i s recorded in the area of
         the stadium in the 30 m inutes im m ediately prior to the tim e of the
         enquiry mentioned in (2) to the local m eteorological o ffice.

 (2)     The wind speed in (1) shall be ascertained by the Holder by enquiry
         to the lo cal m eteorological office by telephone not m ore than 30
         m inutes before the adm ission of spectators to the stadium and
         the wind speed given shall be recorded at once in a book kept
         for the purpose.

 Notwithstanding the provision s o f th is Schedule the County Council shall
 have the right at any tim e to require the Holder at his own expense to arrange
 for the conduct of any inspection or te s t which the County Council m ay consider
 to be n e c essa ry in the in ter e sts of securing reasonable safety at the
 Stadium when it is in u se for a Specified A ctivity.
                          SCHEDULE 3

                            PART 1
                         Crowd Capacity

The number o f spectators admitted to the stadium and to the various areas
o f spectator accom modation within the stadium sh all not exceed the following
figures:-

Spion Kop                              16, 850
South Stand Upper                      5*567
South Stand Lower                      3,310
W est Stand                            4 ,4 65
W est T errace                         7 ,200
North W est T errace                   2, 900
North Stand                            9, 882

      Total Crowd Capacity             50,174


                             PA ST 2

                          Safety Stewards

The minimum number of Safety Stewards required for each function shall
be a s follows: -

(1)      Manning o f e x ists                                     ^6   Stewards (2 per main
(2)      Control and direction o f spectators                                       exit)
           entering or leaving the Stadium                             Stewards (1 per vomitoi
(3)      Patrolling the Stadium and dealing
           with any em ergency including raisin g
           an alarm and extinguishing any sm all fire              2   Stewards (under South
                                                                                  Stand)
The Stewards shall be distributed a s follows: -

Section of Stadium                       Number required for each function
                                            1            2         3


  Each Main E xit (13)                           26

  South Stand                                            12

 W est Stand                                                  8

  North Stand                                             18
  Under South Stand
                                                 < 0       P   1



              South Yorkshire County Council
              F, A. Mniiett, LL.B., Chief Executive                                       C>';i.r-S ■/ H;)H
                                                                                          Barnsft-y
             J. C. Harris, M .A ., I.L.8. (Cantab), County Secretary                      South Votkshi'-'., S/U T TN
             Department of Administration                                                 Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                                          (STD 0226! 86141
                                                                                          Telex: 547675 :
                                                                                          Ext.,422

             Our Ref:                 .       Your Ref.;', V;
           D V /ly B /5 8 3 /5


                                                       ■       v v v r :v : - ^                   v- • ■ V■   : ■ - - .
                                                                   '       .   ■ ' ■" •
Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Grounds
                                                                                                                          .      ...

Following approval by t h e      Council
                                 _______ and c l^ ific a tix a i v                                                            ....

structural aspects of the South Stand construction, I am now         formally
                                                                            _
                                                                            •*
issue the attached General Safety Certificate in respect of the Hillsborough
Stadium.                                                    P

As previously mentioned to you, the fee payable has yet to be determined by
the County Council and I will, of course, contact you further on this point
as soon as possible.

I would particularly draw your attention to the following paragraphs of
Schedule 2 of the Certificate:-

8(1)     - the existing First Aid facilities are accepted on an interim basis
           only pending the erection of purpose-built facilities in the 1980
           close season;

12(1) -        the arrangements for Emergency Lighting in the South Stand (as set
               out in the letter frcm Messrs. Eastwood & Partners to the South
               Yorkshire County Fire Service dated 12th December, 1.979) are
               regarded as acceptable only for the duration of the existing
               battery life;
14       -     the existing Police facilities are accepted on an interim basis only
               pending the erection of purpose-built facilities in the 1980 close
               season;

30       - use of the Stadium in excessively high wind conditions
                                 and
         - use of the Stadium in excessively high snowfall conditions.

Perhaps you would also treat this letter as the formal notice of issue requir ed
by Paragraph 7 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1976.



                                          OQCUM Ho.
                                                                                                                                       /

Mr. E. England,                                                                           /Should you have--
S e c re ta ry ,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd
Hillsborough,                                                          ■
Sheffield,
South Yorkshire.
S6 1SW
Mr. E. England                 -2 -                   21st December, 1979.



Should you have any queries on the Certificate, Mr. D. Vaughan of m/ staff
will be happy to discuss them with you.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity of recording the County CounciTi
appreciation of the co-operaticn and goodwill which the Club and its Consultart
has extended to the Officer ^forking Party over the months of the necessarily
involved detailed investigations.                   y .v y y -    y .y -/. ;

                                         Yours

                                                  y ;-                        y > ;y ;\V ^ y y y
                                                  •                 • -=■          •••••             -.=•
                                                                                                 y>-.
                                                             yyyyyy                              •

                                                                                           . .


                                                         .yy'; ■;

                                                                      '     •' \
                                                           . • •-




                                         Chief Executive
                SAFETY OF SPOBTS GBOUNDS ACT, 1975

Note of a m eeting between the O fficer Working Party (Sheffield D istrict) and the
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Lim ited

Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield; 18th D ecem ber, 19 79

PBESENT:

Representing the Club
B. Whitehead (D irector)
E. England (Secretary)
D r. W. Eastwood )
A . J. Clough     ) M e ssr s. Eastwood and Partners
J. Strange        )

Representing the Working Party
F. Davis (South Y orkshire County F ire Service)
D. G. Duckenfleld (South Y orkshire P o lice)
A . M ills (City o f Sheffield M etropolitan D istrict Council)
B. Mole (South Y orkshire P o lice)
W. O’N eill (South Y orkshire P o lice)
A . K. Seaman (South Y orkshire County F ire Service)
D. Sherrlff (City of Sheffield M etropolitan D istrict Council)
D. J. Shlrtcllffe (South Y orkshire County Council - Adm inistration Depa rtment)
D. I. Vaughan (South Y orkshire County Council - Adm inistration Department)
H. E . Wright (South Y orkshire County F ire Service)

I.     Purpose of Meeting

The original Intention of the v isit had been to check that the outstanding m atters
referred to In the Note of the m eeting held on 12th November had been completed
or were In the course of com pletion p rior to the anticipated Issue of the Certificate
by the County Council this week.

2.     Minor M atters

An inspection of the ground showed that a number of m inor m atters s till required
attention, but the Club undertook to ensure that these w ere attended to In the m xt
few days.

3 .____ Major M atters

A.     Em ergency Lighting - South Stand

 The m eetings which had taken p lace between the County F ire Service and M essrs.
 Eastwood and P artners sin ce 12th November on the South Stand E m ergency Lighting
 had produced agreem ent on an Interim arrangem eit which would be regarded as



                                        u           foOCUMEKI lb,   &-g<4        I
acceptable for the duration o f the ex istin g battery life . Further m odifications at
that tim e would rem edy the shortcom ings o f the existing Installation. D etails w ere
contained in the lette r dated 12th Decem ber which M e ssr s. Eastwood and Partners
had addressed to the F ire S ervice.

B.      South Stand Construction

The Building Authority exp ressed concern a s to what they saw a s a lack o f structural
Integrity in the South Stand. In their opinion, corrosion was contributing to the
p ro g r essiv e deterioration o f the Stand which, It was felt, could only be properly
determ ined by a full structural su rvey. The report forwarded by M e ssr s. Eastwood
and P artn ers in the la s t w eek was not considered to be sufficiently com preheaslve
to provide the required inform ation, and the b a sis of calculation used could not be
agreed as appropriate. W hilst It was agreed that there had not b e e n a sp ecific
written request for such a full structural survey of the South Stand, the Building
Authority fe lt that it had been Inherent In the detailed d iscu ssion s which had taken
p la ce that such a report would be fdrthcom log. The Building Authority w ere
concerned a t the p o ssib ility that the requirem ents of the Building B egulatlons and
the Code of P ractice Safety F actors could not be met; In particular the Structural
stability o f the South Stand in conditions of gale force winds and heavy snowfall
was mentioned.

For the Club, D r. Eastwood agreed that the Stand would obviously not be built to the
sam e specification o r the sane construction standards nowadays, but pointed out
that, fo r instan ce, none o f the buildings in Sheffield built before 1970 could m eet
the la te s t wind p ressu re requirem ents. Even the Building B esearch Station was \
evidently thinking in term s that th ese requirem ents w ere u n reallstlcally high. In
h is profession al opinion, the Stand was structurally safe and able in p ractice to m eet
the loadings demanded. In any c a se, the conditions which had been described a s
being p ossib ly dangerous would mean In p ractice that a match could not be played
and consequently no spectators would be p resent.

 E xperience of tie corrosion o f Indoors ste el In the Sheffield area showed this to be
 m inim al, and the Stand was regularly te s t loaded by sp ectators. Structures such
 a s this would show obvious external sig n s, such a s crack s, w ell before tha*e was
 any p o ssib ility o f collap se, and would be readily apparent on even a superficial
 visual inspection. Even though he did not consider It esse n tia l, platin g of the
 front ste el columns had been carried out a s a com prom ise to try and m eet the
 Building Authority's concern. He agreed there m ight w ell be a continuing
 m aintenance problem with the stand, but this was a different m atter to saying there
 was a structural problem . B eference was made to the Guide's advice that when
 a s se ss in g whether existing situations provided adequately for the safety o f sp ectators,
 the criterion to be used is that o f a reasonable degree of safety. In D r. Eastwood's
 view , It would be unreasonable and un necessary to in sist 4>n a full structural survey
 o f the South Stand or to delay the issu e of the C ertificate. It was his professional
 opinion (which he was m ost jealous of and w u ld not put in jeopardy) that the South
  Stand was structurally safe and that the b asis of the calculations provided was
 appropriate. He was prepared to advise the Club to u se the appeal procedure open
  to them should this be n ecessa ry .
IT WAS AGBEED that:

(a)    a s there was no obvious deterioration In the South Stand structure of such
       a nature as to be of Immediate concern, no objection would be raised to the
       continuance o f the derby gam e with Sheffield United on Boxing Day morning
       provided that no extrem e weather conditions occurred in the intervening
       period, and

(b)     a fujrfoer m eeting should be held as a m atter of urgency between the Building
        Authority and D r. W. Eastwood to d iscu ss the structural integrity o f the
       South Stand and the appropriateness of the calculations used (Mr. D. Vaughan
       to be p resen t a t D r. Eastwood’s request).

NOTE A s the d iscu ssion s on the South Stand Construction hinged on structural
     theories and p ra ctices, the F ire S ervice and P o lice representatives felt
     there w as little they could contribute and le ft the m eeting p rior to its
     term ination.
NOTE FOR FILE


On Tuesday 18th December 1979 X attended the Safety of the Sports Grounds
Working Party Meeting at the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground, where
it was intended that a final inspection would be made with a view to the
issue of a Safety Certificate.

On arrival a long discussion ensued between the Sheffield District Council
Building Representatives and Representatives of the Club's Consultative
Engineers, Eastwoods.

It was suggested by the Council employees that they were not satisfied
with the safety of the south stand in that they did not agree with the
presentation of figures concerning stress submitted by Eastwoods.

The discussion was of a technical nature and basically dealt with the
possible danger to the stand in the event of abnormally high winds and
heavy snow falls. In either of these conditions, matches would not be
played in any case and the safety factor would not be apparent, however
the discussions were of such a nature that until further enquiries had
been made it would not be possible to issue a Safety Certificate.




                           foocmiam
                                                                      19th December 197S

                             PROPOSED POLICE ROOM - SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTR*t.t. GBOUNI



    Chief
superintendent   As a result of my visit to Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground
   Gratton       on the 18th December 1979, I have had the opportunity of
F * Division     inspecting your proposed plans for the construction of a
                 Police room at that stadium.
                 The plans appear adequate and I have no comment to make,
                 however I note that on the main plan it is intended to divide
                 the male toilets for staff and prisoners, although I understand
                 this is not practicable so far as the female toilets are
                 concerned.
                 From a welfare point of view, I am sure that it would be more
                 acceptable if seperate toilet facilities could be made
                 available for female officers.




                 Superintendent




                                  DOCUMENT (
                                                                                '   Bc»C€     ^ C lU - T H1


                                                                        CQgp ^ firpfrf     ffro T fiftii      P o<s   *yi>




                                                                                                                                      O   k«A


                                                                                                                                                     F k * it'-ri ^v.tV.r rr * v ?
                                                                                                                      bsvv^l'ioc,.^

   I

/-1 ,^, %
                                                                          ffi£Y\’J£. 1        lArOr.l
                                                                          fr.i$criC/2    fcceprton) t4£YA


                                                                                                                                                ffio
                                                                                                                                                to'-i H                         •i/ f'*; \
   1
                                                                                                                             H4- ■ —- — • M-*
            O   A   ^ e         { ' I ' - v m   c   (       ‘       ;                            [   I OU^ C. 7^'P
            N           .                                           ;                                           CxrrC^Ajcf
                    I           M'a;


                            ■   $ \% O A            6   &       S   ;
                                        South Yorkshire County Council                                                                             O s

                                        F. A. Mallett, LL.B., Chief Executive                        C ounty Halt             U s
                                                                                                     Barnsley
                                  m     J . C. Harris, M .A ., LL.B. (C antab), C ounty Secretary    S o u th Yorkshire S 70 2TN
                                        D ep artm en t of A dm inistration                           T elephone: Barnsley
                                                                                                     (STD 0226) 86141
                                                                                                     Telex: 547675
                                                                                                     Ext..................................
                                        O ur Ref:   D V /SY /583 / 5 Y o u r Ref.                    Date: n t h December
                                                                                                                  1979.

                   .   :: . A i
     -V-. -
              £    >1 V :
                                      Dear Sir,

                                      Safety of Sports Grounds A ct, 1975
                                      Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

                                      Confirming the telephone conversation which Mr.
                                      D . Vaughan of my staff had with Superintendent B . Mole
v y ;& y > c ^ :                      of your Operations Department yesterd ay, arrangem ents
                                      have been made for the Officer Working Party to m eet at
                                      the Hammerton Road P olice Station at 9 .3 0 a . m. on
                                      Tuesday next, 18th D ecem ber, before proceeding to the
                                      Hillsborough Stadium at 10.00 a .m .

                                                                                          Yours faithfully,




                                                                                          Chief Executive.

                                      The Chief Constable,
                                      South Yorkshire P o lice,
                                      P olice Headquarters,
                                      Snig H ill,
                                      Sheffield,
                                      South Yorkshire
                                       S3 8LY

                                                                                                                                      r        '
                                                                                                                             •   '.   .   ■'




                                                                                                                -
                                                                                                                ■■ . '   ~       V




                                               1B11I1
South Yorkshire County Council
F. A. Mallett, LL.B., Chief Executive                            County Hall
                                                                  Barnsley
J. C. Harris, M .A ., LL.B. (Cantab),County Secretary            South Yorkshire S70 2TN
Department of Administration                                     Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                  (STD 0226) 86141   _

                                                                 Ext. N o ...................   I

Our Ref: D V / L G / 5 8 3 / 5   Your Ref. O P S / J P R / A G   Date: 2 5 t ii O c t o b e r , T S 7 9 .




D ear Sir,

Safely of Sports Grounds A ct, 1975
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

I attach, for your inform ation, copy of a le tte r dated 22nd October, 1979,
from the Consultants acting for the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
relating to the e le ctr ic a l installation at the H illsborough Stadium. A lso
attached is a copy of my Memo to the Chief F ire O fficer.

A s you w ill note, I would lik e to be in a position to d iscu ss and agree
a common view by the Working Party to put to the Club on 12th Novem ber.

A copy of the correspondence has been p assed d irect to
Superintendent D. H urst.

                                   Yours faithfully,




                                       Chief E xecutive.
                                 3 ^




 The Chief Constable,
 South Y orkshire P o lice ,
 P o lice H eadquarters,
 S n igH ill,
 SHEFFIELD S3 8LY
  South Y ork sh ire.
                                                  C      D   ?    "1 .

SOUTH YORKSHIRE CO UNTY CO UNCIL
MEMORANDUM
                                                       For the attention of        Your   F P 1 9 /2/4/H E W /
 To       C hief F ire Officer                                                     Ref.   JMB

          C h ief Executive                            Please contact D. Vaughan   Our    D V /A W /583/5
 From
                                                       Tel.           EXt. 422     Ref.


          Safety o f Shorts Grounds A ct, 1975
Subject                                                                            Date         2 5/1 0 /7 9
          Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

                                       ■■■■•   i-'v.                                        ,

                                                                              • '•          ^
          Attached Is a copy o f a letter dated 22ndO ctober from the Consultants acting for
          the Sheffield Wednesday FootJm|| C ^               the e le ctr ic a l installation at
          the Hillsborough Stadium.             1

          It see m s to m e that w h ilst being aware of the recom m endations In paragraph 1 0 .4
          on page 16 o f the Guide to Safety o f Shorts Grounds, the Consultants are asking
          the County Council to e x e r c ise discretion under paragraph 1 .4 on page 1 of
          the Guide.

          N aturally, a common view on the m atter w ill need to be agreed before the
          Working Party m eets the Club on 12th Novem ber, and I would suggest it is
          d iscu ssed at the p re-m eetin g at your Headquarters at 9 .3 0 am on
          that date. Obviously, a s you have prim ary respon sib ility for such m atters, your
          v iew s w ill be o f paramount importance in reaching a decision.
EASTWOOD                           & PARTNERS                                                                            BOWMAKER HOUSE
               Consulting              Engineers                                                                         23 KINGFIELD ROAD
                                                                                                                         SHEFFIELD S11 9AS
W. Eastwood               C.Eng.. Ph.D.. C.fnq.. F.I.C E.,                                                               Tel.: (0742) 583871
                          F.I.Struct.E.. r .G S.. M .C ons.E .

A. A. Wood                G.Eng., Ph.D., C.Fmg., F.I.C F.,
                          F.!.Struct.E.. iVU.W.F.S.. M .C ons.E.

A. G. Burdett             c, m.. B.se.{(=iig). c.Eng.. m .i.c.e.
Associates :
G eo ffre y Spir          C .E n g ., M.I.C.E., M I.M och.E.

C. S. G reaves            B.En?.* C.Enj j., M.I.C .E., MJ.Strucc.E.

R. C. A. E a s tw o o d   B.Se., C .E n * ., M I.C.E., M .I .S tr uc t. E .

CiJnsultJnf                                                                                           Our R e f :         WE/KH/1610
A- L, P ercy              B.Sc., C .E n g .. F.I.C.E.,
                          f . I S m i r r . E ' . , F.J.Mun.E., M.R.T.P.K                             Your R e f :




   Chief Executive,                                                                                                       22 October 1979
   South Yorkshire County Council,
   County Hall,
   Barnsley,
   South Yorkshire,
   S70 2TN.




    Dear Sir,
                                        Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.
                                               Certificate of Ground Safety
                I write to formally place on record the views expressed
    to Mr. Jones of the Fire Service at a meeting held on
    12 October at Sheffield Wednesday's ground concerning the
    emergency lighting in the South stand.
          As you may know, a late evening inspection of the emergency
     lighting in the South stand was made in May following the
     last home match of the season.                                                    This showed that the existing
    batteries are capable of supporting the emergency lighting
     system for a period of at least 30 minutes.                                                                    At that time
    we believed that so far as the South stand is concerned this
    would be acceptable even though one lot of cables and wiring
     carry both the mains current and the emergency battery current.
    We were surprised that there was a change of mind between
     then and the issuing of your report in July which called for
     a completely separate wiring system for the emergency lights.
                 We have, of course, provided a separate wiring system
      for the new emergency lights in the North stand and the
     exits from the West stand since, in the case of a completely
     new system it was reasonable to start with the highest possible
                                                                   Registered in England -   No. 1134531
EASTWOOD f t PARTNERS




  standards.     However, we do not believe that the extra
  expense of completely new wiring can be justified at this
  time in the South stand.      We suggest that this is the kind
  of matter which the green code envisages might be accepted
  when existing facilities come up for certification.
          It should be kept in mind that the stadium is only
  occupied in the hours of darkness for perhaps 90 hours a
  year.      The most likely circumstances which might require
  the emergency lights to be switched on are associated with a
  failure of the grid.      The five figure sum which would be
  needed to provide the completely new lighting system would
  produce very small return in terms of additional safety.
          In these circumstances, we suggested that as a concession
  the County Council might consider deferring the provision
  of a completely separate cabling system in the South stand
  until some appropriate time in the future such as when the
  existing batteries reach the end of their life.      At that
  time the Club may be considering the installation of a
  generator as a replacement for the batteries and there would
  be some saving in the capital cost of the generator if it only
  had to serve a completely new, but very much smaller in demand?
  lighting    system in the South stand.   The saving in cost of
  the generator could be offset against the cost of the extra
  wiring.
          The other matter which was discussed with Fire Officer
  Jones was the necessary duration of the emergency lighting.
  The request for three hours in your report of July seems to u<;
  unreasonable bearing in mind that the ground can be completely
  vacated in ten minutes.      Even if some of the exits were blocked
  by an emergency there is little doubt that the ground would be
  completely emptied in thirty minutes.
          No doubt Fire Officer Jones will have brought these matter
  to the attention of the working party but it is perhaps
                                                             SHEET   3 .




EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




   appropriate that I should place the matter on record in
   writing.


                                      Yours faithfully,
                                                                                      Sw
                      SAFETY OF SPOBTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975


      Note of a meeting between the Officer Working P arty (Sheffield D istrict)
                 and the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Limited


                 Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield: 12th November, 1979

PRESENT:

Representing the Club
R. Whitehead (Director)
E . England (Secretary)
D r. W. Eastwood )
                  ' M e ssrs. Eastwood and P a rtn e rs
A. J . Clough      )
J . Strange        )

Representing the Working P a rty
F . Davis (South Yorkshire County F ire Service)
K. Jones (South Yorkshire County F ire Service)
A. Mills (City of Sheffield Metropolitan D istrict Council)
W. O'Neill (South Y orkshire Police)
D. Sherriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan D istrict Cpuncil)
D. J . Shirtcliffe (South Yorkshire County Council - A dm inistration Department)
W. Stark (Couth Yorkshire Police)
D. I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council - Administration Department)


M r. Whitehead welcomed the rep resen tativ es and explained that delays caused prim arily
by the wet weather, had meant that all of the required work had not been completed by
today's meeting as the Club had originally envisaged.

The Schedule of M atters requiring attention (dated 8th June, 1979) was considered, with
the following resu lts (after site inspection where n ec essary ):-

A. ____ Spion Kop


o     Work c a rrie d out.
& (b)

2 (a) Work c a rrie d out.
     (b)   The additional exit from the top of the Kop was well under construction and
            should be completed by the end of the month.

3.         Work c a rrie d out.

4.         Except for one o r two a re a s on the steps, all of the concrete terracin g had been
           made good.

                                              1.
  The future of the sc o re -b o a rd building was still undecided but, if a decision
  to be made sh ortly was to retain it, supporting calculations would be forwarded
  to the Building Authority.                                                   lorwaiaeci

  Work c a r rie d out.   T e st re p o rt to be forwarded to the Building Authority.

  Work c a rrie d out.

  North Stand

  Work c a rrie d out.

  North Stand (Lower Level A ccess) (Upper Level A ccess!

  Work in hand. Should be completed in next few days.

  North W est T e rrace

 To prevent local damage to the sheeting, p articu larly a t the joints and to
 sp read the anticipated load o v er a la rg e r are a than a t present, it was agreed
  hat a continuous horizontal tim ber m em ber should be fixed to the front of the
 sheets a t a height about one m etre from te rra c e level.

 Work c a rrie d out.

 West Stand

 It was agreed that, whilst the only positive way of proving the adecjuacy of toe
 joint between the new and existing construction was by means of a test load
 the calculations provided would be regarded as acceptable.

 W est T e rra c e

Work c a rrie d out.

Work c a rrie d out.

South Stand (Rear)

It was agreed that, provided se a t no. 26 was replaced by a flush fitting tvpe
without a rm s, the two additional exits from the d irecto rs box would not be
insisted upon.

South Stand F r o n t )

Work c a rrie d out.

Work c a r rie d out.


               S

                                     2.
         South Stand (       i   3     )

(vii)    Work mainly c a r rie d out.

(viii)   The steel columns had been opened up for inspection and ag reem ent on
         n e c e ssa ry rem edial work.

(ix)     It was agreed that a te s t load of 200 lb /ft would be applied along the
         whole length.

(x)      Work in hand.

(xi)     It was agreed that a metal rail extending 10" above the wall should bs installed at
          the foot of each gangway.

G.       G eneral Structural M atters

1.       Work mainly c a rrie d out.

2.       R e -a sse ssm e n t to be c a rrie d out shortly.

H.       Em ergency Lighting

1&        It was obvious that there was a difference of opinion as to what could be
2        regarded as acceptable as reg ard s the em ergency lighting in the South
          Stand. It was agreed that a tria l should be conducted during the hours of
          darkness attended by represen tativ es of the Club and the F ire Service so
          as to identify the danger a re a s . Consideration would then be given to
          possibly installing an ex tra battery and additional wiring to those p articu lar
          a re a s not covered by the em ergency lighting covering other p arts of the
          ground.

_L____ F ire Warning System

          The problem s with the public ad d ress sy stem seem ed to be mainly ones of
          diction and c o rre c t volume level. It was agreed that the police would monitor the
          position a t the next home match and; pending the new police control post being
          erected , would a rran g e for an officer to s it alongside the Disc Jockey in the
          m eantim e.

          It was also agreed that the monitoring point for the fire detection equipment
          should be in the tower between the South and West Stands, and would proceed
          once the e lec tric al work was completed.

J_.____ F i r e Extinguishers

          The fire extinguishers had been delivered and were to be fitted shortly as
          shown on the plan. The F ire Service undertook to c le a r any doubtful points.
K_.____ General Fire Precautions

1.      Work in hand.

2.      Work to be carried out shortly.

3.      Waste paper cleared at bottom - other areas to be cleared shortly.

L.       Training of Safety Stewards and Staff

         To be done shortly in consultation with F ire Service.

M.      Notices - Exit Signs

1.      To be erected after decorations com plete.

2.      Will be put in hand once agreem ent reached on em ergency      lighting.

N.____ Em ergency Procedure

        It was agreed that the F ire Service would supply the Club with details of the
        n e c e ssa r y wording.

0.      .Access for Em ergency V ehicles

1.      It was agreed that w hilst noreal problems hacf occurred in the past, the Club
         would (in consultation with the Fire Service and the P olice) mark out a lane
         from the main gate to the South Stand in which parking would not be allowed.
         It was also agreed that the hydrant outside the South Stand would have to be
         kept clea r.

P .____ Public Address System

        Already discu ssed under "Fire Warning System"

Q.____ P o lice F acilites and R, F ir s t Aid F a cilities

        As agreed, a suitable permanent P o lice Room would be provided in the 1980
        clo sed season.

        The Club explained that it would be preferable from a building point of view
        for both the police and fir st aid fa cilities to be in the same overall building
        although physically separated. The police representatives reserved their
        position on this point, pending the outcome of detailed discussions with the
        Club.

        The question of parking for both police and St. John's personnel purposes
        would also need to be looked at in detail.

S.      Ground Capacity

        Provided the outstanding points were satisfactorily resolved, it was agreed
        that the crowd capacity would be as shown, i . e . a total of 50,174.
T.     Issue of C ertificate

The Club were anxious that toe C ertificate should be in force by the derby game
with Sheffield United on Boxing Day morning, and they were assured that providing
the outstanding points were satisfactorily resolved, it was still the intention to
issu e the Certificate at the beginning of Decem ber.




From bottom of Page 2.

South Stand (Internal Layout)

(iv)   Work in hand - query s iz e of rebate.

(v)    Work in hand.

(vi)   Work carried out.

With regard to the ventilation to open areas of the P r e s s Box, Bar and Luncheon
Room, it was agreed that honeycomb ventilators would be regarded as acceptable,
providing:-

(a)    that the existing purely wooden furniture in the P r e ss Box was not replaced
       by modern p lastic/foam type,

 (b)   that a mem ber of staff was present in the Bar throughout all of the period
        it was open to the public and also w hilst a match was being played, and

       that the use of the luncheon room was confined as at present to use over
       the lunch-tim e period on other than match days and was kept locked at all
       other tim es.
        h J 7 iy
                                               C IT Y OF S H E F F IE L D        MEMORANDUM                                (V j
V   r'   •                                                                           The Director of Environmental
                     Head o f A d m i n i s t r a t i o n and Legal         To
    From
                     Department                                                      Health


    Date             1st July 1986
                     GP262/DMB                                                                    1               yzsu   I
    Ref.
                     4690 - Mr. Bownes                                       Ref.                 I   BT'"*-;,.    ‘    1
    Tel. Ext.
                                                                                    ------------- — ------------- ----- f------


                Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

                As you know, the City Council took over the above safety certification system
                from the County Council on 1st April 1986. As a consequence, I have presented
                two reports to the General Purposes Panel on the Act, copies of which I enclose
                for your information. As you will see from the last report, the Health and
                Safety Executive have adopted a somewhat unhelpful stance with regard to the
                application of Health and Safety legislation to Sports Grounds*

                It has occurred to me that your Officers could perhaps provide me with some
                assistance in this area given your present involvement with Public
                Entertainments Licensing and other licensing areas. In this connection it is
                my understanding that as a result of the abolition of the County Council in
                April you were allocated another post, the duties of which included reference to
                Safety of Sports Grounds.

                   I would be obliged, therefore, if you could let me have your comments on this
                   situation and if you require any additional information, please do not hesitate
                   to contact my Assistant, Mr. Bownes, on the number given above.


                                                                                                             €




                   AA
                                                              DOCUMENT No.                   ]
REPORT OF THE HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT TO THE GENERAL
PURPOSES PANEL

                          Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

Introduction

The Panel will recall that a report was submitted to the March 1986 Meeting

covering the general safety of sports grounds legislation as it affects the City

Council.   This follow-up report aims to deal in detail with the current

situation in Sheffield as inherited from the South Yorkshire County Council.

There are 2 sports grounds currently subject to the legislation - Sheffield

Wednesday Football Club and Sheffield United Football Club; the Owlerton Sports

Stadium is likely to be made subject to the legislation shortly.

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club - Hillsborough

The Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Limited was designated as requiring a

Safety Certificate in August 1978 and such a Certificate was issued by the

County Council on 21st December, 1979.    The Stadium is currently undergoing

major works which, when complete, will form a roof over the Spion Kop and thus

substantially improve the accommodation for spectators.

Sheffield United Football Club, Bramall Lane

The Club was designated as requiring a certificate in August 1984 but to date

a certificate has not been issued as there are outstanding works to be

completed. The County Council took the view that the certificate should only be

issued as and when the Ground was up to the appropriate safety standard and not

before.    This procedure effectively insured that the terms of the Safety

Certificate were not breached as soon as it was issued.       It is hoped that the

Council will be in a position to issue a certificate before the start of the

1986/87 season.

Owlerton Sports Stadium

It is understood that the Home Secretary will shortly be designating the Stadium

as requiring a Safety Certificate in accordance with the Popplewell Report

recommendations.    It will, therefore, be necessary to arrange for a full

inspection of the Stadium in the next few weeks to find out what works are
 going to be required to raise the standard of the Stadium to appropriate levels.

 The Panel is probably aware that the Stadium is Council owned but is currently

 leased to the Owlerton Sports Stadium Limited.   This Lease will expire on 1st

 November, 1987.

 Safety Certificate Standard Conditions

 At the moment the Safety Conditions attached to Safety Certificates are

 standardised throughout South Yorkshire and both the Police and the Fire Service

have indicated that they would wish this situation to continue for reasons of

administrative simplicity.   The Conditions do, however, give some cause for

concern, as they appear to be inadequate or inappropriate in some areas.      The

drafting of these Conditions is of particular importance as it is a serious

criminal offence to contravene any of them punishable by the Statutory Maximum

Fine (Currently £2,000) or 2 years imprisonment or both.


It is proposed to re-draft the Certificate conditions, where appropriate, and to

submit them to the Panel for approval.    The Sheffield Wednesday Certificate

would then be replaced in accordance with Section 4 (1) (b) of the Act.    The

Sheffield United Certificate could then be issued with the new conditions before

the start of the 1986/87 season.    The re-drafted conditions would, of course, be

submitted to the Fire Service, the Police and Building Surveyor for comment;

other authoritiesin South Yorkshire could also be involved in this process.

Existing Administrative Arrangements

The County Council system for administering the Act is based on 2 main

components - (a) bi-annual inspections of the Stadium; and (b) meetings of an

officsr working party.   The bi-annual inspections consist of representatives

from all the interested authorities and involve thorough inspections of the

Stadia and the identifying of any defects.   These defects are at the time of the

visit brought to the attention of the certificate holder and its technical

representative if one is present.   Depending on the nature of the faults found

(if any) steps are then agreed between the Authority and the Certificate Holder
     to rectify them or so arrange matters that no risk to the public occurs.                   The

     Working Party consists of representatives from the Police, Plre Service,

     Building Surveyors and the County Council - It considers In detail various

     matters (such as the Spion Kop development at Sheffield Wednesday Football-

     Ground) and also an, outstanding Items from the bi-annual Inspections.                   The

     Working Party Is effectively a co-ordinating body which attempts to ensure that

     a balanced and consistent approach Is maintained to current Issues at the Sports

    Grounds,      toy recommendations It makes are subject to approval by this Panel.

    . The Health and Safety Executive
• ^ c o m m e n d a t i o n 9 of The Popplewell Committee's Interim Report read as follows

      -There should be urgent consultation between the Health and Safety Executive and

      the Fire Authorities and Local Authorities as to how best to co-ordinate and

      conainicate their inspections and reports".        Bearing this in mind the local

      office of the Health and Safety Executive was Invited to participate In the

      administrative system for safety at sports grounds.           This Invitation was

      declined.     The Executive will apparently take no direct part in. the

jlg| Certification .systems'

       In view of this problem the B o   m    Office was contacted and the position

£      explained; it appear, that negotiations are under way between the Home Office
)
       and the HSE about Popplewell's recom-.nd.tion but as yet there has been no


       useful outcome.
       In these circumstances the Council could keep the Health and Safety Executive

       informed of all developments in Sheffield and to invite             their comments onthem.

                                       ....       £   - F v o m tiv e to   d e c id e w h ether or    n ot to
       It would then be the responsibility of the Executive to aec

       respond.

        Fees
        The basis on which fees msy be charged is set out In Regulation 14 of the Safety

        of Sports Grounds Regulations 1976 which states "14.           A local authority may

        determine the fees to be charged in respect of applications for the issue or
        amendment of safety certificates but such fees shall not in a particular case

        exceed an amount commensurate with the work actually and reasonably done."      The

        South Yorkshire County Council did not fix any fees under the Regulation

        apparently as a matter of policy and the Panel is therefore asked to decide

        which of the following options, to adopt:- (a) state as a matter of policy that

        no fees will be charged in respect of Safety of Sports Grounds legislation or

        (b) decide in principle to fix fees and to ask for a report back on the costs

        to the Council.

        Conclus ion

        The Panel is asked to:-

v/ (a)         Note the broad outlines of the administrative system organised by the

               County Council and authorise its continuation for the time being;

         (b)   Note the position of the Health and Safety Executive and request the Head

               of Administration and Legal Department to keep the Executive informed of

               all matters relating to sports ground safety;

         (c)   Request the Head of Administration and Legal Department to draft new

    v          safety certificate conditions in consultation with the appropriate

—              authorities approval by the Council;

         (d) Either resolve that no fees will be charged under the legislation or

               request the Head of Administration and Legal Department to report on the

                Council's costs in this respect.

                                                               Roger Pensam,
                                                               Head of Administration
                                                               and Legal Department

          Town Hall,
          SHEFFIELD.
          May, 1986
REPORT OF THE HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT TO THE GENERAL
PURPOSES P A N E L ___________ ________________________— --------            —


                                Safety of Sports Ground f


With effect from 1st April 1986, the City Council will be responsible as
L i c e n s i n g Authority for the administration of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act
1985 in place of the South Yorkshire County Council.          This preliminary report is
intended to i n f orm Members'as to the basic framework of the Act and the
delegations required to carry out the Council's functions.

A detailed report will be presented to the next meeting of the Panel by which
time investigations into the current licensing system will be complete.

The Home Office have provided a useful summary of the duties of Licensing
Authorities and a summary of the Act itself; both these documents are attached
to this Report for members to consider.

Following the Bradford disaster, the importance of the provision of a sufficient
level of safety at sports grounds has been highlighted; the responsibility of
the Council in this regard should not be underestimated.

Members will probably be aware that the Report of the Committee of Inquiry into
Crowd Safety and Control at Sports Ground (the Popplewell Report) was recently
published and a copy of its recommendations are attached to this Report for
information.

 Summary and recommendations

 A more detailed report will be submitted to the Panel as soon as possible but
 in the meantime it is recommended that the following delegations be approved

 (a)   All the powers and duties of the Council under the Safety of Sports Ground
       Act 1975 be delegated to the General Purposes Panel;

 (b)   The emergency procedure pcwers under Section 10 of the 1975 Act be
       delegated to the Head of Administration and Legal Department in
       consultation with Chairman or Deputy Chairman of this Panel or of the
       Municipal Enterprise and General Services Programme Committee as
       appropriate.

 (c)   The power to authorise Officers under Section 11 of the Act be delegated to
       the Head of Administration and Legal Department.




                                           Roger Pensam,
                                           Head of Administration and Legal Department


  Town Hall,
  SHEFFIELD.

  M arch 1986
                                                                                  ANNEX A



                           SUMMARY OF PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE POWERS, DUTIES
                                   AND FUNCTIONS OF LOCAL AUTHORITIES




                                      Duties of the local authority


 S.2( 1 X 2 ) and S.3(l)(2)       To determine whether or not an applicant for a safety certificate
 Safety of Sports                 is a "qualified” person - ie likely to be able to prevent con­
 Grounds Act 1975
                                  travention of the terms of issue; and if so to issue such a
                                  certificate which must contain certain minimum safety
                                  specifications.



      (   5)                      To determine the qualification of a transferee of a
     fety of Sports
                                  certificate.
     junds Act 1975


  S. 3(3),4(7),4(8)               In Metropolitan counties and Greater London, to copy such
  Safety of Sports                applications to, and consult, the Chief Officer of Police and the
  Grounds Act 1975
                                  fire authority, elsewhere to copy and consult the Chief Officer
                                  of Police and the "building authority".


  S.4(4)                          To specify the date of operation in any notice of amendment of
  Safety of Sports                a safety certificate.
  Grounds Act 1975


  ^5(1)                           To serve notice on the person concerned of the decision that
 '^'^fety of Sports
                                  he is not a "qualified person".
' ^ r o u n d s Act 1975


  S.5(8)                          To give effect to any determination by the Secretary of State
  Safety of Sports                 of an appeal lodged under section 5 of the Act.
  Grounds Act 1975




                                                    i
                       Powers of the local authority


.2                To insert into a certificate of safety such terms and conditions
afety of Sports
                  as are considered necessary or expedient to secure safety at a
rounds Act 1975
                  stadium, and discretion to include within the certificate a
                  condition requiring records to be kept of spectator attendances
                  and safety maintenance; and to include different terms/conditions
                  for different events.


.3(4)             To require an applicant to furnish information or plans as
afety of Sports
                  considered necessary by the authority.
rounds Act 1975


.4(:              To amend or replace a safety certificate.
afeflPbf Sports
rounds Act 1975


.4(10)            To cancel a safety certificate on death of the holder or
afety of Sports
                  dissolution of the corporate body.
rounds Act 1975


-7(4)(5)          To apply to a Magistrate^ Court for a safety condition to operate
afety of Sports
                  pending an appeal against that condition to the Secretary of State.
rounds Act 1975


.10 (1) (2)       To apply as a matter of emergency to a Magistrates' Court for
afety of Sports
                  an order to limit or prohibit spectators at a sports ground to
rounds Act 1975
                  apply for modification of an order.


.10(4)            To appeal to Crown Court against an order under section 10(1)     ^
afety of Sports
                  and (2) or refusal, of an application for such an order.
rounds Act 1975


.11               To authorise entry to a sports ground to inspect or make enquiries.
afety of Sports
rounds Act 1975
                                                    HM FACTORY INSPECTORATE
                                                    Sovereign House
                                 Health &           4 0 Silver Street
                                                    Sheffield S 1 2ES
                                 Safety             T e le p h o n e 0 7 4 2 7 3 9 0 8 1



                                 Executive           E x t 2 3 0 /2 3 1

                                SOOTH YORKSHIRE & HUMBERSIDE AREA
                                SERVICES GROUP                  w
                                Area Director: M S Nattrass


Roger Pensam Esq, FCIS, MBIM                        Y o u r reference     GP/262/DMB
Administration & Legal Department
City of Sheffield Metropolitan District             O u r reference        GAA/Gi'lG
Town Hall                                           D ate
SHEFFIELD                                                           f |8 JUL 1986
SI 2HH




Dear Sir

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

Thank you for your letter dated A July 1986 addressed to our Area Director
Hr Nattrass, and to which was attached a copy of the letter to you from
Messrs Eastwood & Partners regarding the Sheffield Wednesday Football Stadium.

The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 does of course relate specifically to
the matters referred to in Eastwoods1 letter, rather than the more general
application of the Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974, and I am to advise
that this Department has.-,no-comment to mak<|.

Yours faithfully




G A ALBISTON
HM Principal Inspector of Factories
City of Sheffield              Metropolitan District

Roger Pensam, FCIS, M B IM , Solicitor                                                 Administration and Legal Department
Head of Department                                                                     Town Hall,
                                                                                       Sheffield S1 2HH

Our reference        GP/262/DMB

Your reference
Dat0                 14th August 1986




 The Secretary,
 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Limited,
 P e n i s t o n e Road,
 SHEFFIELD 6

 Dear S i r ,

 Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 - Application
 for Increase in Crowd Capacity on the Spion Kop

 I am writing to confirm that your application for an increase in the crowd
 capacity on the new Kop will be considered at a special meeting of the General
 Purposes Panel to be held on Thursday 21st August 1986 at 2.00 p.m. in the Town
 Hall, Sheffield.  The Panel has the right to decide on your application.

 I n d e a l i n g w i t h th e a p p l i c a t i o n t h e P a n e l w i l l a l s o c o n s i d e r t h e f o l l o w i n g
 m a tters:-

        (a)        The ne«r terrace construction                     does not comply with the plans
                    submitted to the Council for                     Building Regulation Approval, in
                    particular in that the slope                     of the terrace is now steeper
                    than originally proposed and                     as such could be dangerous;

        (b)        it is considered that the vertical distance in some places
                    f rom terrace level to the new gangway level is so great that
                    it is a safety hazard;*

        (c)        t h e s h e e t i n g a t th e r e a r o f t h e Kop n ea r t h e "O zzie Owl” Club
                    s h o u ld be brou gh t down t o ground l e v e l ;

        (d)        the bearings of the pre-cast concrete unit onto the steel
                    rakers are substandard in at least one case;

        (e)        the provision of a kiosk and toilet underneath the new terrace
                    did not feature in the application;

        (f)        t h e F i r e S e r v i c e i s co n c e rn ed t h a t th e e v a c u a t i o n tim e f o r the
                     new Kop i s in a c c o rd a n c e w i t h t h e ”8 m in u te s ” d i s c u s s i o n as
                     d e t a i l e d i n th e Green G u id e , th e P o p p le w e l l R eport and o t h e r
                     r e q u ir e m e n t s . The c a p a c i t y o f t h e new Kop s h o u ld be
                     c a lc u la te d a c c o r d in g ly .

                                                                                                          Cont'd


                                                                                         734690 - Mr. Bownes
                             For telephone enquiries on this matter please ring    .......................... (STD Code 0742)
                                                       Telex 54243 (Administration & Legal)
                                        -   2 -



  I wish to invite you and your representatives to attend the meeting so as to put
  your views on these matters and the capacity issue.  I appreciate that there are
  discussions already underway on the above points with the appropriate Officers.

  I have sent a copy of this letter to Dr. Eastwood.

  If you have any general questions to ask about this matter or if you wish to
  discuss the format of the Panel meeting please do not hesitate to contact my
  Chief Licensing Officer, Mr. Bownes, on the number given below.

L Yours faithfully,




  Head of Department
' City of Sheffield                Metropolitan District                       ■       v
                                                                                                                                          R4482

   T h e H e a l t h and S a f e t y            Executive,                     Environmental Health and Consum er
   Sovereign H o u s e ,                                                       Services Department
   40, S i l v e r S t r e e t ,
   Sheffield,                                                                  Director of Environmental Health and
                                                                               Consumer Services
   SI 2ES
                                                                               Town Hall Chambers
  Fo r the         attention           of      The   H.S.E./L.A.               1 Barkers Pool
  Liaison          Officer                                                     Sheffield S1 1EN

                                                                               Telephone 7 3 4611


                                                                 EPU/DM/MM                     19th August,                 1986
 Your reference                                  Our reference                 Date




  Dear      Sirs,                                                                                        ^ ■ s.v/-
                                                                                   • a_-.          '   .y   }-   ■■   '%/
  S A F E T Y OF S P O R T S G R O U N D S A C T             1975
  SAFETY CERTIFICATES:
  SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL                              CLUB,    HILLSBOROUGH,               SHEFFIELD.

  I w r i t e w i t h r e f e r e n c e to t h e a b o v e a n d f o l l o w i n g the r e c e n t
  telep hon e c on ve rsa ti on that took place b e tw ee n my Envir onm en tal
  H e a l t h O f f i c e r , Mr. M o o r e , an d y o u r Mr. A d d y .

  I w o u l d c o n f i r m t h a t a n u m b e r of d e f e c t s a r e f e l t to be in
  e x i s t a n c e w i t h r e g a r d to s t r u c t u r a l a s p e c t s of t h e c l u b s e x t e n d e d
  " s p i o n k o p " a n d t h a t t h e s e m a y c o n s t i t u t e a s i g n i f i c a n t h a z a r d to
  m e m b e r s of t h e p u b l i c u s i n g t h i s f a c i l i t y .       T h e s e i n c l u d e th e
  a p p a r e n t l a c k of a s u i t a b l e p e d e s t r i a n g u a r d r a i l , the u n s u i t a b l e
  p o s i t i o n i n g of r a d i a t i n g g a n g w a y s a n d t h e g r a d i e n t of the t e r r a c i n g
  at s o m e a r e a s .

 M y o f f i c e r u n d e r s t a n d s that, in the o p i n i o n of the H . S . E . , t h e s e
 m a t t e r s a r e b e s t d e a l t w i t h by th e p r o v i s i o n s of the a b o v e
 l e g i s l a t i o n an d h e n c e by t h e L o c a l A u t h o r i t y L i c e n s i n g T e am.
 F u r t h e r m o r e I u n d e r s t a n d t h a t y o u do n o t w i s h to a t t e n d a
 p r o g r a m m e d s i t e v i s i t or m a k e r e p r e s e t a t i o n s to t h e c l u b’s
 Ma n ag em en t upon these matters.

 I s h a l l , w i t h y o u r a p p r o v a l , c o n v e y t h e s e f i n d i n g s to the C o u n c i l ' s
 C h i e f L i c e n s i n g O f f i c e r so t h a t he m a y r e q u e s t a s a f e t y i n p u t i n t o
 the c e r t i f i c a t i o n p r o c e d u r e from my D e p a r t m e n t .


 Yours       faithfully,
                      ________


                                                                    DOCUMENT
                                                                  [pOCMM No.
 P r i n c JTp-aJ 0 f f i c ^r .




 For Telephone Enquiries on this matter ring                                                Services of the Environm ental H eelth and
 (0 7 4 2 )..................                                                               Consum er Services D epartm ent include:
                                                                                            Health & Safety at Work, Home Safety,
           734659        — Mr.       Moore                                                  Air Pollution, Noise Control, Environmental
                                                                                            Nuisances, Animal Welfare, Food Hygiene,
 All communications to be addressed                                                         M eat Inspection, Drainage & Pest Control,
 "Director of Environmental Health and Consumer Services”                                   Consumer Protection, Trading Standards
                   s-il,
                     p i




                f.'ft' j.- r




                                           mmm



                                                                                   ^    30,944        Sheffield. WednpgH^.
                                                                                                                                  y. August 20 , 1986          17p —         M




 wH!       FFi e LD
I'Yeanesday’s show-;
                                      PleteTpart from one"Lall at SP°*» G r o u n d s^ cf2^ l n h l ^ nfide,?ce the whole he was confident these
Im     j     e 10 acti° n for                                                                                              were resolvable.         6
                                                               bits    the Hand 5 ne'V ■'” !? Dr’ Eas,w°od.            ’
N e a S v e S "’a'Ch
                                     Mates*-#
                                     fcsfiMSWft                                               '^ &    %     s s s s
                                                                                                                          ,-nJhc wJork w i,l h a v e
                                                                                                                          increased the capacitv
                                                                                                                         22°oo ' 6f n° 10 Perhaps
                                       All that remains is fora
                                    Lily Council committee
                                                                         tes-wSr 5
                                                                  * * £ lS t S S i
                                                                                                                         22.00, said Dr. Eastwood
                                                                                                                         fora7,U£ ^ ,wow«ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                  I

[sr™8°f«£                      »"»
                                   tomorrow to decide the
                                   f h ^ 1number o f spectators   S a to t e s              *1was officially unsafe.       But he added: “I see no
                                   that can use the new stand.
                                    J n e figure js neederi r„r                   S » vethere^
                                                                    i fiat might invoive 600 fLn ;i    uni sa,c^ one or tJeanyd4 i^tywhatever.
                                                                  ■ p g a ± i i j i _ » » » ..m a ; l a i "k              “ We 3 re a ll
                                                                                                                                         very
                                                                                                                        pleased.
                                                                                                                                                                 Owls-eye view of the new Kop :
                                                                                                                               ",r - ^         <-      .
                  fcfWllS                                                      spii
                                                                              i»S

                                                                                                                                  >   S i      * i ,   i   •
                                                                                                                                            te. i .    s
                                                                                                                              <S>
                                                          Environmental Health                 & Consumer
                                                          Services Department                                         % 74r-
                                                          Town Hall Chambers
                                                          1 Barkers Pool
                                                          S H E F F I E L D SI 1EN




              BRIEFING REGARDING SAFETY                    A S P E C T S OF S H E F F I E L D W E D N E S D A Y
              _________F O O T B A L L C L U B S N E W     "SPION K O P ” C O NST RU CT IO N


  On T h u r s d a y t h e 7 t h A u g u s t 1 9 8 6 o f f i c e r s of th e E n v i r o n m e n t a l H e a l t h
  a n d C o n s u m e r S e r v i c e s D e p a r t m e n t t o o k p a r t in a s a f e t y c e r t i f i c a t e
  i n s p e c t i o n of the a b o v e f o o t b a l l c l u b ' s g r o u n d s .

  A n u m b e r of d e f e c t s w e r e n o t e d to th e n e w           construction          to    their      spion
  k o p a n d r e l a t e d to t h e l i c e n s i n g o f f i c e r .

         T u e s d a y t h e 1 9 t h A u g u s t t h e o f f i c e r s a g a i n v i s i t e d th e c o n s t r u c t i o n
              to a t t a i n m o r e d e t a i l e d m e a s u r e m e n t s of th e d e f e c t s .  These were
. j p b t a i n e d b e c a u s e th e d e p a r t m e n t ha d b e e n a s k e d to s u b m i t a s a f e t y
   r e p o r t to th e g e n e r a l p u r p o s e s p a n e l o n t h e 2 1 s t A u g u s t .

  In   brief      the       defects   located        include      the    following:-

  a)       S o m e of       the   terraces     are    positioned         at    excessive        gradients
           (31°).

  b)       T h e r e iii ii i ^ ffective p e d e s t r i a n      guard       rails    to   t h e 1 ower.>
         ■ p o r t i o n of t h e ;tert'acft#j|

  c)      T h e radJ -al g a n g w a y s a r e e x c e s s i v e l y     recessed        and    "out    of ,
          p h a s e " *fith th e t e r r a c e s . |

  On W e d n e s d a y 2 0 t h A u g u s t t h e o f f i c e r s a t t e n d e d a p r e - p a n e l    meeting
  w i t h r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s of A d m i n a n d L e g a l , F i r e s e r v i c e s a n d    the
  build ing surveyors .                 A s a t i s f a c t o r y coriclursioatv'fro:Kfc;h©
 ^ot lie reached4




 E P U 1 :F O O T B A L L
 Director,                                    Head of Administration and Legal
 Department of Land and Planning                                    Department
                                         c.c. Acting Director of Environmental Health
 21st August, 1986                              and Consumer Services
 BSD/KWGB/TJH                                 Mr. J. Ward, Admin. & Legal Department
 4169 - Mr. Blount                            Mr. D. Bownes, Admin. & Legal Department
                                              Mr. A. Butler, Land & Planning

                         Safely of Sports Ground Act 1975
                     Sheffield Wednesday: Hillsborough Ground
 Following the meeting of officers convened yesterday at 3*00 p.m. by
 David Bownes, your Chief Licensing Officer, and chaired by Julian Ward,
 I feel I must place on record my concern at the role adopted by the
 representative of the Acting Director of Environmental Health and Consumer
 Services at that meeting.

  My understanding, which is based on the enclosed document setting out the
  roles of the various departments in providing advice to the licensing (i.e.
- local) authority, is that my Department is responsible for the consideration
  of the fundamental design of buildings falling within the safety certificate
  provision of this Act. This role is not a discrete one, but, as the
  document makes plain, involves consultation with the Fire Authority etc.
  on a number of matters.

  In this document no particular role is accorded to the Environmental Health
  Department and I am not aware that the changeover of responsibility from
  the County to the City has changed this situation; the role of the
  "building authority" is still primarily one administered by my Department.

  Whilst we are     aware that there are various matters which require attention
  on site before the new enclosed terrace (The Kop) can be regarded as
  satisfactory and safe, lit is simply not reasonable for the fundamental basi%
  of the design to be questioned as was done by Environmental Health Department
  representative yesterday! at a stage when final concerted advice needs to
  be offered to the General Purposes Panel (M.E.G.S.) at its meeting today.

  The Club's representatives will make their own case at the meeting, but it
  must be acknowledged that this building consists of the adaption and extension
  of a former open terrace, the design of which was fundamentally constrained
  by the factors of existing topography, buildings and roads.

  This has, I suggest, been a fact known to the Safety at Sports Grounds
  Working Party members since the proposal was first mooted and whilst there
  have been various amendments to the design over the past 9 months or so,
  the designers, Messrs. Eastwood and Partners, at the outset endeavoured to
  meet 'Green Code' requirements as closely as possible? given the constraints
  involved.

  The work has proceeded at a very rapid pace and at this stage both ourselves
  and the Fire Authority continue to be concerned that finishing details in
  some respects (e.g. provision of certain safety barriers, access to radial
  gangeways and protective rail heights and construction) are not entirely
  satisfactory and require improvement, but these are resolvable issues.
  I am concerned, as I am sure you must be, tlmt this afterapon's Panel
  is not to be offered conflicting advice about matters which should have
  been reconciled at a much earlier stage by your Working Party on Safely
  at Sportjg Grounds.
                    x i’i r Jbai‘i : 'j v t x a i x u i v   wr    i n ^ i u / ij . u x ± n.x   ^   u ito   m iv u .v j   a o i .   1 1 1D



   "* In order to avoid duplication and division of responsibility, the responsible
      authority has been designated for the carrying out of inspections, reinspections,
      and making final technical decisions necessary using the headings given in the
      contents summary of the "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds", with some additions.
      Vfhere there is an overlap of the spheres of control, the primary authority
      responsible must consult the other authority(ies) concerned before finalising
      a n y decision. The following abbreviations have been used:-

                                      C.               =         County
                                      P.               =         Police
                                    P.B.               =         Fire Brigade
                                    B.A.               =         Building Control Authority

      Subject                       Primary                         To be                                    Matters for Consultation
                                    Authority                       Consulted

Ingress to the                       B.A.                         P.                                                       All
ground

Egress from the                      B.A.                         F.B. & P.                                                All
^j|pund

Terraces                             B.A.                         P.

Stands                               B.A.                         F.B. & P.                        Fire hazards and evacuation times.

 Staircases and                       B.A.                        F.B.                             Fire protection for staircases.
 Ramps

 Fire Precautions                     F.B.                         B .A. & P .                     Auxiliary and emergency lighting.
                                                                   P.                              Emergency procedure and staff training

Access for emergency                  P.                           F.B.                            Fire Brigade appliances.
vehicles

 Spacing of crush                     B.A.                        P.
 barriers

 Strength of crush                    B.A.
j^trriers and
^perimeter walls

 Terrace to touch-                    P.
 line distance

 Estimation of safe                   B.A.                         P. & F.B.                       Final Figures.
 ground capacity

 C oimnunications                     P.                           F.B.                                                     All

 First Aid and                         C.                          Area Health
 Medical                                                           Authority to
                                                                   be consulted

 Police at ground                      P.

 Legal and                             C.
 Administration

 Certificate                           C.
 drawings
                                                                                                                        lillli
                                                                                                            sitillltl                                                       ■M M i
                                                            tlPiSi                                       H « 1H 1
                                                                                                                                                IS »
                                                            AMH9I
                                                          IjS iliiillilS i                     WM&                                                                                         SSiJfes;
     SSl^ij^jgasss^^
        fSilMjla®®                                                   'MM^A
         9/Mimmm
                                                                                           Ifl®!®
                                                                                             ISlSl               IflljlSiifl
                                                                          ffcliflSfi                           siiiii
 §#11I!S                                                                                                                $§§g$gi
                                                W9$0Mp ftp M                  mmmik                                             f4/03§0-0x0i
                    i! # » fi!i i i i i i i
                                               fifiilsf                       |®MtSpJl^i®ilfcI®ifii                                                                              filljfgl               N flM tt
                                                                                          MNSS IS S w                                                              ifili
                                                                                                                                                                                                              •«@§s
                                  ■S ip i®
                                         » i« * S i» i^ s                              181111                                                           m    h     h   i                      fl&SIl#
                                                                                            itiBfiNNttl                                                                                                     IBtlllp iI l lii
StMWiM             iliiilwiisfcaiiii                                                            ■ ■ ■ ■ i spl B M                I 8^              »     g ■M S p B a a a
                                                                                                                                                                                                         MiimiffkM


S * I lifllH
      M
                                                                                          mmwsftftSfS^tM                                                                             S * i
                                                                                                                                                                                           m llim M

              HHmM            M il                                                           :i$^0$Pj0ftS
 IBl®*
                           Ppf^Sf^
                           liM iS i           N IM H                                   wt«wws*!«sajsi»s^ww||^ltf||
                                                                 ?tl|iC§lf|                                                    * IIM K 8
                            wm m m m m m *
                                                                     1^^^1®§i#sli                                                                                 si
                                                                                                                                                                   lsfwcii
                                                                                                                                                                         ptii
                                                                                                                                                                            taa®iil
                                                                                                                                                                                  ^p§si«lp
          lltlsa          [ffiill                          tiiSS^jfepigg^
                                                                                                                             5»g|«i!                                                   llfl^€tSi|P l§!|fj§Is
                          iHfefillfelS                           llllllllllllll                             8llS®llll                                                               M   isliilfS i
                                                                                                                                                                         W K S B Mlipfitiiwi
                                                                                                                                                                         IlmmmM
      SlSlfl                       S® ® ® ®
                                                                                                                            ‘
                                                                                                                            §W
                                                                                                                          iiiiS  M  »§
                                                                                                                                     iiJiM
                                                                                                                          SsS-i5S>S8*A   i^
                                                                                                                                           -;
                                                                                                                                            ;
                                                                                                                                                       lltttSllls      SSIISIIII
                                                                                                                              § ■■1 1 wmmm
                                                                                                                                      8                                                                 H         im m m
  IStj.?^:                 ■llli IH P R B                                                                                                                   M S M H H M fltt
        fSSlili,                                                                  iS B H f                                          UK®!
          II#                                                                 H IM
                                                                                 W m sm
                                                                                                                                                                       f$iiiS&M
                                                                                                                                                                   5?Sf&J      99m m t
          fels                      flSlllleidJlSliiil                                S till                                                                                                   9M M R N I        mM
                                                                                   |Mft4S                                                                               iftiiiMigil
                   i^lp^                                                                                                                                                                             «iii»i»iiiftiii
                                               fe5.
                                                  SS.
                                                    ^sM:
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ij i® i
                                                                                                                                                        if p lig
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      l^ttfSll
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         &M ife;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *-$Si^Sllfei
                                                            VS                                                                                                                                                                           :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     sall^SS
                      ^’ iWSSii                                                                                                                                                                                      i^ H            M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ts&
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       s,
                                                     ^ ll|. .
                                                            .„                              MSS»®i                                                                           i l S i S i
     %
     &M.                                                                                             s i i i   s in *                             ®®®#lpii*pp*ip(sifMMm
                                                                                                                                                mmmm                 a*»fcissi«lli!
                                              m m n ttt             \fy                    W     f S S i^ M
                                                                                                                                                                                       m itH :                        mm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       simsm.
                                  Ml®           W^fM
WmMmm                    i s a        ^
                                                                                                          St. Andrews House
E A S T W O O D & PARTNERS                                                                                23 Kingfield Road
                 ( C o n s u l t i n g E n g in e er * )
                                                                                                          Sheffield S11 9AS
O in c to rs :
                                                                                                          Tel.: (0742) 583871
W. Eastwood                        F.Eng., B.Eng., Ph.D ., D.Eng.,
                                                                                                          Telex:       547266
                                   C.Eng., F.I.C.E., P.P I.Stnict.E„
                                   F.I.M ech.E., F.G.S.. M .Cons.E.
                                                                                                                          and at;
A. A. Wood                         B.Eng., Ph.D ., C.Eng.. F.I.C.E.,
                                   F.I.Struct.E., M .I.W .E.S., M .Cons.E.
                                                                                                            Premier House
R. C. A. Eastwood                  B .Sc„ C.Eng., M .I.C.E.. N U .StructE .
                                                                                                            12/13 Hatton Garden
G. Spir                            C.Eng., M .I.C.E., M.I.Mecl*.E.
                                                                                                            London EC1N 8AN
Associates:                                                                                                 Tel.: (01) 242 7436
 C.    S. Greaves                  B .En(., C.Eng., M.I.C.E.. M .I.Strua.E.

 J.    A. Strange                  C E n f., M .I.Struct.E.
                                                                                        Our R ef:         WE/KH/6648
 S.    Preston                     B.Eng., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.

 ft.   Tandy                       C E n*.,F.I.Struct.E .                               Your Ref:         GP/262/DMB
 G.    M. Seaman                    8 4 * ., C E ng.. M.I.C.E., M .I4truct.E .

 J.    M. Wood                      B.Sc., C E ng., M.I.C.E., M .lJeruet.E .

 Consultant:
 A. G. Burdett                     G.M., B.Sc.(Eng.), C Eng.,
                                   F.I.C.E., F.I.Struct.E.



IHead of the Department,                                                                                  19 August 1986
 Administration and Legal Department,
 Town H a l l ,
 Sheffield Si 2HH.



  Dear-Sir,''
                                                              Safety of Sportsgrounds Act                 197 5
                          Application                         for Increased Crowd Capacity on the Spion                   Kop
                      I       am grateful to Mr. Bownes for sending us a copy of your
   letter to the Club dated 14 August.                                           This enabled me to see              it   over
   the weekend, and to do a little research into the points you have
   raised.
                      The proposed meeting at 2.00 p.m. on 21 August is convenient
'for the Club officers.                                             It is likely that the Chairman will be present,
   but he is indisposed at the moment.                                            A director with special
   responsibility for the ground, Mr. Keith Addy and the club secretary
   will also attend, and I will hope to deal with the technical side
   assisted by John Strange.
                      Turning now to the matters raised in your, letter, I think it
   appropriate to make a preliminary response, so that the members of
   the Working Party may be informed of our thoughts.                                                      No doubt there
   will be fuller discussion at the meeting on Thursday,
                      I will use the same nomenclature a to f, as is used in your
    letter.
    (a)     The statement is made that the new terrace construction does
    not comply with the plans submitted to the Council for Building
    Regulations Approval.
           As far as I can see it is incorrect to say that our drawings


                                              An Unlimited Company, Registered in England - No. 1833144
                                                                           SHEET   2.




        EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




I        do not show the steepest slopes.
*               I should explain that the submission of plans was
I        complicated by changes of mind which were forced on the Club
*        by circumstances beyond their control.     The intention was to
,         redevelop the Kop broadly as the present scheme.     They were
I         informed at a very late stage that the level of grant which
          had been expected may not be forthcoming, because of demands
I   A     from other clubs following the Bradford fire.     The scheme was
    •     therefore changed in January of this y e a r , to roofing with no
I         extra accommodation.     All our drawings had to be changed.
          The contract was let in early February and we sent a very full
■         set of drawings and calculations to the    Council on 24 February
■         1986.    Following a good run in the cup the Board were able
.         to revert to the original scheme in March.      By that time the
I         steel frame for the roof only scheme was ordered and we had
          to make use of it.     The columns and the bracing arrangement
I         against wind now had to be modified to receive the new terracing.
           In effect a third scheme had to be prepared utilising steel whic
■         was more suitable for the roofing only version.      Thus, we had
           to do completely new calculations and drawings in March and April.
    |      This necessitated a re-submission for building regulations approval
|                  However, that re-submission showed the steepest slope
m         which occurs on the terracing, and the drawings submitted in
®        * March and April show accurately what has been built.
                  I enclose a photo-copy of our letter of 30 April which was
■
I        | the one which accompanied most of the drawings relating to      the




         I new inclined terracing.    It will be seen that it lists the drawings
■        I which were enclosed, five of them. Nos. 45, 47, 48, 49 and      51,
■          being   drawings of the Kop terracing.   Prints of these five drawings

          1 are enclosed.
                   It W i n be seen that each of these drawings has a small
H        ■! triangular diagram above the steps which gives the rise and the
™          .tread of the steps, and hence indicates the overall slope.
                                                                          SHEET           3.


    EASTWOOD ft PARTNERS




,r~                                                                          1
\             Four of the drawings, Nos. 45, 47, 48 and 51 show
                                                                                  !

       sections through the main part of the new deck and have a slope            i

       of 173/330 which is just over 27i°.      The drawing 49 shows a            j
       section through one of the two 'wings' at the back of the stand.           1
       This has a slope of 173/285 which is    just over 31°.   The
       slope occurs everywhere in the wings, and there is nowhere
       on the Kop where a greater slope occurs.     Thus it is not correct
       to say that the terrace ’does not comply with the plans                        j
      * submitted.........' and 'in particular....... is now steeper'.        _J
              We believe that because the City Council did not respond
       to the drawings which were sent on 30 April within the five
       weeks allowed, we have Building Regulations approval for the
       construction shown on those drawings.
              It is expected that this development is subject to the
       Safety of Sportsgrounds Act as well as the Building Regulations,
       but as the same officers advise the Council on both matters, there
       could now be a possibility of a charge of maladministration if the
       Council decides to restrict the crowd capacity in the Safety
       Certificate because of the slope of the terrace.
              With regard to possible danger, the Green Guide clearly
      | envisages 30° slopes because the spacing of crush barriers for
       such a slope is given in table 12.3.
               No doubt there will be discussion on this matter at
       the meeting on Thursday, but the slopes we had to use were
       determined by the very crude shape of the existing Kop.        Matching
       the main new part of the terrace to the old part so as to give
       good sightlines determined the slope of 27°, to which we assume there
       is no objection.    Because of the presence of Penistone Road the
       corner had to be swung round and this modified the slope in the
       wing areas to just over 31°.    We consider this difference of just
        over 1° to be acceptable bearing in mind the very good crush
        barrier arrangement and the excellent viewing which will stop the
        crowd craning forward and thus causing a surge when some exciting
        play takes place in the goal area    (the viewing can only be judged
        by visiting the ground).
EASTWOOD &> PARTNERS




  (b)    The vertical steps from terrace level to the new gangway
 can be measured in different ways depending on which foot it is
 assumed will be used to step down.   As a result of observation
 at other grounds where an exactly similar arrangement exists it is
 found that the spectator generally holds the rail with one hand
 and steps down with the opposite foot.     This reduces the step to
 just over 1ft.    Even if he does not use the opposite foot he          4^'
 still steps onto the higher step which is available.
        But if it is thought to be necessary, the addition of a
 short length to the barrier running parallel to the gangway
 can direct the spectator a little further up the slope, so that
 he will automatically take a small step downward. This can be
 discussed with the Fire Service and the Building Control Department.
 Only one or two of the gangways need consideration.


 (c)    It has always been intended to sheet down to the ground
 level at the Ozzie Owl corner, but the precise detail had to wait
 untxl that part of the Kop was built, and the trees cleared,     when the
 frame had been erected it was my view that it was preferable not to ^
 sheet to ground level for reasons which I have expressed to the         ^
Workxng Party.   As my view was not agreed the work is proceeding
as was intended.


 (d)    We are a little surprised that the Building Control officer
who has spotted a pre-cast step resting on    (as we understand it)
a bearing of 50mm instead of the intended 75mm did not point it out
to either my resident engineer or to the contractor so that if there
was need to take remedial action it could have been done there and
then.

        However, we understand that it is one of the concrete steps
which has a short span, and it rests on steel.      In that case it is
probably incorrect to say that the seating is sub-standard.     The
Code of Practice to which we are working gives the Engineer
discretion to reduce the step below 75mm.      (See attached photocopy
of clause 5.2.4.3).    Firstly the seating is subject to a permissible
tolerance so this will reduce the 75mm.     Also this is a solid step
EASTWOOD fr PARTNERS

     With regard to the proposal that a glazed shelter might
     be placed over the disabled accommodation in front of the
     North stand, it was not our intention that any seats within
     the North stand would have an obscured view although a few
     of the spectators might have to look through the glass of
     the canopy to see the near touchline.    There are materials
     available for the glazed roof.which might prove to be safe for
     that purpose.

     I regard it as regrettable that there has been such a
     negative attitude on this particular matter.    We have not,
     of course, taken the design study any further with regard
     to the possibility of a covering for part of the disabled
     area nearest to the Kop end of the North stand, but would
     reconsider the matter if the Working Party has a change of
     heart.


     Enlarged Kop
          With regard to the request for a barrier to protect
     the ladies toilet, it has perhaps not been realised that
     there is handrailing already in place.    A gap will be
     created for an entrance to the ladies toilet.     The
     final version of the proposed arrangements is shown on
     the attached print of drawing number 6648/53.     The new
     brickwork is shown shaded.


     Roofing the Kop
          We are really surprised by the suggestion that the
     steel frame of the gable walls and presumably the back of the
     stand should be sheeted over.   It is a common feature of
     every stand structure that I know of in any football ground
     in the country that the sheeting rails and other bracing
     members are exposed on the inner face.    In older structures
     they are generally only at 1.2 m centres but in more modern
     structures they are generally at 1.8 m centres.    With the
     1.8 m spacing it would be extremely difficult indeed to
     climb up except adjacent to a column.    However, I know of
     no instance where the sheeting rails of an existing stand
     are regarded as being such a hazard that they should be boxed
     in, with an inner skin as well as an outer skin.    I find
     it very surprising that this matter is being pressed.
                                                                SHEET   4


EASTWOOD & PARTNERS

          This correspondence on these matters leads me to believe
     that there would be great advantage if the Club's advisers were
     present for part of each of the meetings of the Officer Working
     Party.   Matters of this kind need to be discussed round the
     table rather than in lengthy correspondence.    We can be of great
     assistance in providing information which may result in fewer
     matters becoming contentious.    It is also inevitable that we
     send you plans which are in some ways preliminary in order
     to give the opportunity to comment at an early stage.    The
     plans are incomplete in some respects and this may lead to
     misunderstanding of what is intended or a lack of appreciation
     of the thinking behind what is proposed.    There is also the
     difficulty^in the light of comments received from the Club, and
     indeed those from the Working Party, quite significant
     changes may take place at a very late stage.    It is desirable
     that any late changes be dealt with in as short a time as
     possible.     In this regard I now enclose six prints of each of
     our drawings numbers 7C, 8A, 9A, 17A and 56.    As the Club
     will be wishing to place an order for the inew building .not
      later than the end of January, it may be that an oral presentation
      to your Working Part of what is proposed might be benefic i al
      all round.


                          Yours faithfully,                                 #
        I   EASTWOOD ft PARTNERS
                                                                                                             SHEET




    I
    I
    I
    ■
    |                o f crowd L b u le n e fJ tii^gfrom      in ^ v a c S n g                        "**** ^
    *                flow. It was not related to emergency evacuation H™              accommodation) on the rate o f
                      Group recommends that the Guide should make this clear.           Paragraph 32 below) and the
■ V




             Photocopy of Recommendation 24 from Final Popplewell Report.


    ■
a
■
|                     '? ” 'd f OT'       to herome (m M sm. i „ ttsse c o ^          , ?
                       dividuals can lose control over their own movement and the rate
                      fro m °Z          feduced- It is therefore suggested that the exits
                             each area of spectator accommodation should be so d e s ig n




■
            Paragraph 6.5 from Green Guide, entitled Guide to Safety at
I           Football Grounds.
                                                                                    I b lO




                             SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT. 1975

              Note of a m eeting between the Officer Working Party (Sheffield D istrict)
                           and the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.

                          Hillsborough Stadium. Sheffield: 2nd A pril. 1979

     PRESENT:        Representing the Club

                     D r. W. Eastwood (Consultant)                     S tL    HEX1          PAGnb.
                     E. England (Secretary)
                     H. E. McGee (Chairman)
                     R. Whitehead (Director)

                     Representing the Working Party

^                    D r. H. Bailey (Sheffield Area Health Authority)
                     D. Hurst (South Yorkshire Police)
           'in‘
              Lo'1   K. Jones (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
                     A. M ills (City o f Sheffield Metropolitan D istrict Council)
                     W. O’N eill (South Yorkshire Police)
                     D. Sherrlff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan D istrict Council)
                     D. J. Shirtcliffe (South Yorkshire County Council - Administration
                                                                               Department)
                     D. I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council - Administration
                                                                             Department)
                     H. E. Wright (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)

    1.     Scope and Objectives of D iscu ssions

   Mr. H. E. McGee welcom ed the representatives, and str esse d that the Club w ere
   am bitious and wanted to make the Stadium the b est in Europe. Crowds had been
^ p v e r a g in g 11,000 this season and, viewed purely a s a football operation, the Club
   had been losing money since 1967. Commercial ventures had made the Club
   viable, and It was hoped to expand this side of the Club’s a c tiv ities. The Club’s
   eventual ambitions obviously had to be tempered by practical considerations.

    IT WAS A G R E ED -

    1.    That, w hilst Designating Orders did not specify time lim its for the issu e of
    General Safety C ertificates, it was essen tia l to aim for the Certificate to be issued
    by the start of the 1979 /80 Season.
2.    That, as the Club wanted to attract representative games, the aim should
be for the Stadium to be certificated for maximum crowds.

3.    That as much work as possible should be carried out in the close season,
bearing in mind that because of the recent continuous spell of bad weather, this
will be more restricted than usual. The Annual Jehovah’s Witness Rally had
also to be borne in mind.

2.    Discussion on Standing Areas

A.    Spion Kop

IT W A S A G R E E D -

1.    That the siting .and-angle .of the new barriers to be installed be the subject
of detailed discussions between Dr. Eastwood and the Building Surveyor.

2.    That the Club consider the installation of simple lateral barriers (not of the
climb proof type) for crowd control purposes in the blocks on either side of the
central block (but not so as to obstruct the gangways).

3.    That, in view of the clearance time of Ilf minutes compared with the
8 miDutes specified in the Guide, the means of escape be discussed in detail
between Dr. Eastwood and the Fire Service (including the re-siting of the grates
in the existing barriers and, possibly the widening of the existing gates and/or
an increase in their number).

4.  That the headroom at the North end under the bridge be increased to the
maximum possible without going to the extent of u n d e r p i n n i n g .

5.    That representative parts of the concrete wall and boundary posts and fences
be tested to the appropriate standards.

6.    That the condition of the concrete at the lower end, the height of some of the
crush barriers and the scoreboard structure.be the subject of detailed discussions
between Dr. Eastwood and the Building Surveyor.

7.   That the Club’s longer term proposals for the improvement of the means of
egress be unanimously welcomed.

8.    That the maximum capacity of the Spion Kop be determined after the foregoing
points have been resolved.
        South Yorkshire County Council
        F. A. Mallett, LL.B., Chief Executive                                             County Hall
                                                                                          Bamstey
        J. C. Harris, M .A ., LL.B. (Cantab), County Secretary                            South Yorkshire S70 2TN
        Department of Administration                                                      Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                                          (STD 0226) 86141
                                                                                          Ext. No.

        Our Ref: DV/BB/583              Your Ref. E E / C B                               Date: 8th June, 1979



                                                  JL.»i s,;.. A.t

                                                                        4 n ss
 Dear Sir,                                                              I                 1*7 7
                                                  Rac’d
 Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

 I have now received the detailed comments of all of the disciplines
 represented on the Working Party.

 These have been collated into the attached schedule which, together with
 plans, confirm formally in writing the matters discussed by the Working
 Party with the Club over the series of meetings held so far and which
 the County Council feel require attention so as to secure reasonable
 safety at the Ground.

 They are, of course, individual requirements on specific matters and are
 additional to the general requirements set out in the specimen form of
 General Safety Certificate forwarded to the Club with m y letter of
 8th December, 1978, and discussed at the meeting held on 13th December,
 1978.

 After the Club has had the opportunity of considering the schedule, perhaps
 you would let m e know which of the requirements you feel will be able to
 be carried out in the close season.

 Should you have any queries, Mr. D. Vaughan of m y staff (ext. 422) would
 be happy to discuss them with you.

                                          Yours faithfully,




                                          Chief Executive


  Mr. E. England,                                               “11             fr
  Secretary,                                                                r>j P
  Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.,                                   a   - a___,
  Hillsborough,
Sheffield,                                                                                   V       ^
 South Yorkshire.                                                   j
S6 1 S W
                SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL

                   Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975

                     Matters regtiring attention at the
      Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground, Hillsborough, Sheffield

Spion Kop

1.       To secure a crowd capacity of 11, 040 people the following work to be
         undertaken.—

(a)      Improve the width of the exit from the Southern end of the Kop to a
         minimum of 4.7 metres throughout. This can be done by providing                    .
         a gate through the perimeter wall in front of the Hillsborough Suite as
         indicated on plan no. 1610/11.

(b)     Increase the headroom of the north east exit to a minimum height of 2.1     s f /
        metres.                                                                         '
2.      To secure a crowd capacity of 16, 850 people the following work to be
         undertaken, in addition to item 1:-

(a)     Provide four gates of at least 1.1 metre wide from the radial gangways to        / /
         the perimeter track of the ground area.                                        v' /

(b)     Provide an additional exit from either the top or side of the Kop of at
         least 3 metres width. It should be so designed that it does not impede
         the egress from any other gangway, (enclosed for guidance is a form                .
         FS 902).                                                                   /

3.      The arrangement for crush barriers as produced by the consultant, whilst
        not complying fully with the guide recommendations, is considered
         adequate if the other requirements are fulfilled. These other requirements
         include the 2 No. radial barriers indicated on Plan 1XA and the provision    /
        of an additional 3 m wide egress route to South-East area, and of gated     V
        openings to give access from the radial gangways to the ground perimeter
        area.

4.      Make good all broken and spalled concrete terracing.

5.      Check and carry out any necessary work to ensure safety of score-board          /
        building.

6.      Replace corroded perimeter rails by construction complying with code
        recommendations.

7.      Improve egress conditions at rear by provision of balustrades, rails,
        etc. as indicated on the plan. C«vx> - iteio/tV).
                                                       WE/JAS/KH/6648




^   Department of Administration,                      25 October 1985
    South Yorkshire County Council
    County Hall,        .
    Barnsley,
    S70 2TN.                       ■-                 A\_t>o   Ove-R   Pa g »E.

    For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan

    Dear Mr. Vaughan
                    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd
                         Spion Kop Development
         As design of the roof over Spion Kop and the extension of the




J        terracing proceeds we thought that the Working Party should be
         given an early opportunity to comment upon the proposals. At this
         stage the roof, although it will be an impressive structure, does
         not hold the individual interests of all members of the Working
    Party and we will deal with the roof at a later date. However, we
    would like to discuss the parameters surrounding provision for the
    disabled, the increased capacity of the Spion Kop and the exit routes
    as we see them.
         Enclosed are six prints of our drawings 6648/7, 8, 9, 16 and 17
    showing in outline the areas of terracing for the enlarged Spion
    Kop together with the exits.
         It was initially thought that the disabled could be accommodated
    along the front of Spion Kop between the North stand in front of the
    perimeter fence, which would be set back about two metres. There
    are disadvantages to this proposal. The advertising boards would
    need to be mounted well into the perimeter track level reducing
    its width. The disabled would be in the 'firing line' of mis-cued
       shots on goal but also it wmii* «
       gates could possibly be obstructed^         TrllT                     SXit
       protection for them from «-h     *                     g Stable
       The new roof cannot be projected^”          " T * ^       ** dlfficult-
                     and . P u U ^ e ^ e T c                     lr   17   *° °“ “
            * the Vision of spectators ^                              «»“
             ere are ways round these dif£iGni4-<
   one    hundred percent oertaln Z t tll T tT                     “ iS DOt
   be accommodated along the front b * n, *                   W i U n0t eventually
   *- ^ l.ave them w h e r e b y ” ”! “! f ™               ““             P-Posa!
   Provide then vith a cover      The’*                         N°rth 3tand' “ d

   :      r   r      ^    c u a ^ ^ h o 0:::: ; : L           i r r tea     u s in 9   -

   probably averages about 33       A °            "9 “atches v" l e e but it
   increases to say 40 or „ o « for      Z                      “ “ DmI>er

   t          s e ^ rr    s   t   — - —            -                  s-
  « » North stand                                      “ * Pla~ d in * ~ » t of
 Propose that toilet facilities                   °' SPl°n KOP “
 the terracing a^acent to the r a j f!!L                 b“ M,ath
 North stand gable. We calculate f w ^ " 9_dOUn the side of the
  *5 will be 21,850,         >h-                !-SggSg^SL°Lg£i°n
 is an increase      nr
                   Sfyy,    '----- ------- .glong the front. This


 in eight minutes <«, t h e r e     ac       t|~    ~ yaCuat^-6^ terrace
 are shown on the prints ~            ~            unlt widths of the nrtt.
      The tunnel exit on the north side w i n h. f„
 to eight clear units              , ;---- ---- -— — reased in width

        We believe that  dravinf
                               c
                               gA«filtielf
you Wish to have a »eeting to                              “
b« Pleased to attend.                   ths Pr°P°sals we shall


                                  Yours sincerely,

® •c « R . Chester
                           South Yorkshire County Council
i
                          D           t   —i     , ____   «   .      _    _
                          R. C. Johnston B.A., I.P.F.A.
                                                                                                        Departm ent of Administration
                          County Treasurer &                                                            County Hall
        m                 Principal Officer                                                             Barnsley
                                                                                                        South Yorkshire S 7 0 2TN

i                         County Solicitor                                                              Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                                                        {STD 0 2 2 6 ) 2 8 6 1 4 1
                          D. A. Hainsworth, H R
                                                                                                        Telex: 5 4 7 6 7 5

                          Our Ref: DV/AA/583/5                       Your Ref: WE/JAS/KH/6648           Date: 14 N o ve m b er 1985

                          This matter is being dealt with by                   D . Vaughan
                                                                                                        Ext. No.   422


            Dear Sirs,

            Safety of Sports grounds Act, 1975
            Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic


             -■^ u !!c!Lw!!“ !!.!arty                      ,
                                                           (Sh e f   5   ield Distri<:t>          yesterday aftemoon
            a53 - k c c L ^ : p:-r S 3 .                      ined in your xet!:er dated25th                             1985

            1 •___ Disabled Facilities

            pie Officer Working Party expressed reservations on both of your sueee^rm.*
            S ' ? \ ? ; abl!d - If ^   diSabl6d COntinue to be accommodated in front of
                an    i     ’ they Wl11 still be in the "firing line" of mis-aimed shots
                   y clear sheeting over the top of the area they occupy could constitute
            an unacceptable hazard to   persons who might vacate the North StanH -in
            e^rgency situation by e lid in g over . h A J ' S                                l ^      th l stfnd o n £ £ .
            for this t ^ b e ' n  ; % “ °er ed that the ” eans o£                 l i t .
             or this to be done, but it has to be recognised that in practice thi« i* 9
            real possibility. The structural strength of such a structure could a i m h.
            something of a problem. The other suggestion of accommodating the disabled
                        thf P?ri“ ter                         f“ “  along the fro n t of the Spion lop (nearest to
            the North Stand) is also                          unacceptable for the reasons s L t e d byyo“

            w r S f ™ 1?       0 t,   ^         P° Uc<! ^ e Pr e 3 e n c a t i v e s was that the front area of the
                     ”                              to the North Stand) should have the terracing
                                               S* l ’     3 tr°7tler level landing on »hich to a ccom j d a t e
            the disabled, with a substantial fence at the rear                       The ovief^n,,      u
        ^ r ev ence in froi,t °f this                                               ^ '™ ve ? ,:n ^ d gi^ L d
        North s t ^ nUe                    aCCeSl,fr0m the ramP between the Spion Kop and the
        di-HSl        u               Present*       would also enable free access by the
        the Spion K o ^ 6 Pr°P°Sed diSabled t0UetS Under the rebuilt terracing of



                                                                                                       /Contd .
                     \.




    r   Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,                                                1   •
        Consulting Engineers,
        St. Andrews House,
                                                                                           iv35
        23 Kingfield Road,
        Sheffield,
        Sll 9AS
                                       - 2 -                     14 November 1985


 The current legislation relating to the disabled was also discussed.
 In the circumstances, the Officer Working Party consider that the
 proposals for the disabled suggested by the Police should be supported
 subject, of course, to there being no obstruction of exit routes and
 flows.

 2 •__ Enlarged Spion Kop

The_ Officer .Working Party agreed with your calculations and proposals to
 increase the_tunngl_exit on the north side of the Spion Kop to 8 clear
VP-1 ^3        to P-ggyj-4e a complete new 6 unit staircase on the South side.

-Accordingly, the Officer Working Party agree that, subject to the following
.2f?i:.nt:s» the proposals for the enlarged Spion Kop are generally acceptable:-

 (a)      adequate headroom being provided between the new roof and the upper
          rear and the new south side exit routes;

 (b)      to barriers being provided adjacent to the refurbished gents’
          toilets and the new ladies’ toilets in the new six unit staircase
          on the south side;

(c)       to landings being constructed in front of the existing emergency
          gates in the pitch perimeter fence (as at Bramall Lane);
(d)       to confirmation of the number of new turnstiles to be provided on
          the south side and on the Penistone Road side;
(e)       until acceptable alternatives are available, the new exit gates to
          be fitted with a t u m - b a r arrangement under the control of stewards,

3.     Roofing of Spion Kop

It was accepted that only an outline of the roofing proposals has been supplied
to date, but the Building Authority point out that it appears that the gables
are not to be lined and thus it would be comparatively easy for them to be
climbed.

Also the Police asked me to stress that should any of the proposed works on
enlarging or roofing the Spion Kop take place other than in the close season,
it will be a requirement that the areas concerned will have to be secured to
prevent unauthorised access.

4.        Crowd Flow at the Leppings Lane end of the Stadium

pie Police reported on the continuing problems caused by the merging of spectators
from all parts of the Stadium at the Leppings Lane end.

It was agreed that it was difficult to see how this could be overcome, as the
p ysical restraints to achieve this could conceivably be more of a danger than
allowing the present position to continue, but I was requested to register the
point.                                                    e

                                           Yours faithfully,



                                           U U U i l WJ   LUL
                                                                        SHEET   5


    EASTWOOD f t PARTNERS




    with a full width of bearing to take the load.     In other buildings,
    precast units sure often narrow beams supporting wide infill pots,
    and all the load is concentrated on the narrow beam.      A smaller
    seating can clearly be permitted where the beam is of full width.
    If as we understand it the beam in question is of short span, which
    means the load at each end is small, I think it highly likely that
^   when I know which one out of the approximately 1000 new steps
    has the smaller than specified seating I shall take the view that
    it is perfectly safe and no action is needed.     If I think it necessary
    we can weld a small plate to the steel on which it rests to increase
    the bearing width, but this is very unlikely to be necessary.
            I am surprised that this matter has been raised in this way.


     (e)    The reference to the provision of a toilet and kiosk underneath
    the new terrace not featuring in the application is surprising.        The
    word 'provision' makes it appear that these have been constructed
    as part of the scheme.     They were built about three years ago.     The
    work was not designed by us, but I know it was subject to building
    control from discussions I had with the Building Control Department
    at the time.
            The presence of the kiosk and the toilets was shown on various
    of our drawings.     For example the drawing 6648/16   (a copy is enclosed)
    shows the way in which the foundations had to be orientated to miss
    the toilets and also the kiosk.     This drawing was submitted for
    Building Regulations approval.     Drawings 7 and 9 were issued for
    distribution to the Working Party together with others to explain
    our scheme, on 23 December 1985    (see last page of attached copy
    of my letter).     These drawings each show parts of the toilets or
    of the kiosk protruding from under the stand (copies enclosed).
            The drawing No. 6648/9 showing the rear elevation of the stand,
    which was included with our planning application in July 1985 shows
    the upper part of the kiosk projecting into the sheeting.       Our
    drawing No. 6648/7 which was also distributed via the Working Party
    secretariat in December, 1985, shows the toilets and kiosk protruding
    from under the roof of the Kop
EASTWOOD f t PARTNERS




           The Building Control department was visiting the site very
  frequently during late February and March, 1986, to watch the
  piles being installed immediately alongside the toilets and the
  kiosk.   Visits have taken place frequently since May.
           I am at a loss, therefore, to understand why this matter is
  being raised now.     However, the kiosk is not used for storage.
  All   saleable material is taken back to a central store after each
  game.     During a match the goods on sale consist of no more than
  packets of crisps, and Bovril, tea and Coke served in paper cups.
  The number of cups and packets of crisps is not great and there
  is no significant fire hazard.
           The kiosk performs exactly the same function as the several
  kiosks inside the south and north stands.     These kiosks are also
  on exit routes, and have never been considered a hazard by the
  Fire Service.
           One matter which might cause concern is the fact that the
  roof of the kiosk is combustible.     If this matter is considered
  critical, the Club would no doubt be prepared to put a fire resistant
  inner and outer skin on the roof.                                       ^


  {f)      The discussion   on evacuation times which has arisen in the
  last month was apparently sparked off by the Popplewell report
  recommendation No. 24.     This says that the Green Guide should be
  revised to make it clear that the suggestion of an eight minute
  evacuation time is concerned with 'the effect of crowd turbulence
  on the rate of flow' which arises if there are delays in evacuating
  spectator accommodation.
           It may be that the wording of the Green Guide had not
  always been understood by other licensing authorities, but there
  was no misunderstanding on this matter in the South Yorkshire
  Working Party when the ground was granted its Safety Certificate
  in 1979.||The calculated evacuation time for the Kop with its
  pre-certificate capacity of 20,000 (23,000 until the Ibrox disaster
  in 1971) had been about 16 minutes (or 181 minutes pre 1971).
  At that time there were far fewer crush barriers to control
  turbulence in the crowd, and the barriers were not so strong.
EASTWOOD f t PARTNERS




 The very experienced police officers on the South Yorkshire
 Working Party, who had been in attendance at games for many years,
 said they had never seen turbulence occur when the crowd was
 sufficient to give an evacuation time in excess of 8 minutes.
 It should be remembered that through the 1960's the attendances
 would be such that more than 11,000 people would be on the
 Kop at almost every game (this number could just get out in
 8 minutes with the exits as they were at that time).
        The present Chief Fire Officer, Mr. Harry Wright, was
 on the Working Party at the time.      He requested an extra exit
 route from the very top of the Kop.      This was constructed by the
 Club at a cost of £16,000 (1979 prices).       He was prepared to
 count the exits onto the pitch as part of the evacuation system
 in an emergency (each gate is controlled by a policeman).         With
 these measures the evacuation time in an emergency was brought
 below eight minutes, and disregarding the gates onto the pitch the
 evacuation time in normal circumstances with a full Kop (16,850)
 would be H 3/4 minutes (see attached extract from Minutes of
 Working Party dated 2 April 1979).
        The Fire Service at that time took the view that the very
 slight risk of turbulance (if there really is such a risk) could
not justify greater expense to the Club. The Fire Service in
its advisory role is always having to balance money against
slight or very slight risk, and this was a calculated decision
which Mr. H.E. Wright supported.
        I am a frequent attender at the ground.      The police are
there every week.       There has never been an occurrence to my
knowledge of turbulance associated with this ll3/4 minute
evacuation time in the seven years since the ground received
its Safety Certificate.      The police can give their own view.
        I know that at other grounds longer evacuation times have
applied without there being the slightest trouble.      For example,
at Bramall Lane, the evacuation time was almost 20 minutes at
the Bramall Lane end until the new exits were constructed onto
Bramall Lane near the centre of the stand about three years ago.
There had never been 'turbulance' of the kind envisaged in the
Green Guide as far as I know.
        Further, in recent years various police forces have
adopted a policy of keeping the gates closed at one end of the
EASTWOOD &• PARTNERS




 ground for 10 minutes or so after a match to keep the rival
 fans apart.   This puts the eight minute rule in perspective.
        The words 'eight minute rule' are not really correct
 of course.  The Green Guide uses the words 'it is suggested'.
 It is not nearly so positive as it is about its other
 recommendations.
        With this as background the Club has been quite shocked
 by the suggestion that the gates onto the pitch should be ignored
 in the calculations of evacuation times, and that eight
 minutes should be achieved by means of ordinary exits.     They
 feel this change of view cannot be justified.    The fact that
 Popplewell has clarified what it is the Green Guide suggests
 is of no relevance in Sheffield where we have always interpreted
 the Guide correctly.  The change of view is not the result of
 Popplewells clarification.
        If the City Council chose to ignore the gates onto the
pitch   in setting the number of spectators which will be
allowed the effect would be to limit the capacity of the enlarged
Kop to almost the same as it has been since 1979.     The completely
new exit which has been built at the south end of the Kop, and
the widening of the exit at the north end, will only cancel out
the loss of the exits onto the pitch.
        It should be emphasised that the provision of the new
decking to accommodate almost 6000 more spectators, the new
exit routes, extra toilets, and the part of the roof over the 6,000
extra places, will have cost about £500,000.     It has stretched
ingenuity to find room for the new exit routes, as the Fire
Service will I am sure agree. I see no way in which further exits
could be provided even if there were unlimited money available.
       However, it should be brought to the attention of the City
Council that I entered into discussion with the South Yorks
Working P^rty at a very early date and kept them informed of our
proposals regarding the exit arrangements for the Kop at all times.
In particular, I sent a clear exposition of our    proposals in a
letter dated 25 October, 1985.   it will be seen that near the end
 EASTWOOD f t PARTNERS




 of the letter I described the proposed new exits and enclosed
 drawings showing their positions.  I also gave the arithmetic on
 which our proposals were based (see copy attached).
         The proposals were placed before the Working Party on
 13 November, 1985, and their decision was sent to me in a letter
 from S.Y.C.C. dated 14 November 1985.    A copy is enclosed.    it
 win   Joe seen that under item 2 on page 2   it is stated that the       A
 Working Party "agreed with your calculations and proposal to increase
 the tunnel exit on the north side of Spion Kop to 8 clear units
 and to provide a complete new 6 unit staircase on the South side".
         The only change we have made since that submission in
 October is to improve the arrangements by widening the tunnel
 exit to 9 units instead of 8.
         In the light of that completely unequivocal acceptance of
 proposals last November the Club has proceeded with the scheme
 m   its entirety.   The Fire Service did not voice any second thoughts
 until July, 1986, by which time the structures were virtually
complete.    It is now not   feasible to construct a new exit route
The new decking for the extra places, thenew exit routes, and the        A
extra cost of making the roof large enough to provide the extra              ^
places amounts to about £500,000. This would now be wasted.
        It is quite unacceptable that with the Popplewell report
being published in January, 1986, only a few weeks after our proposals
had been approved by the Working Party, the Pire Service did not
give any indication of a possible change of mind until July, 1986.
This is clearly maladministration in the Clubrs view.
        The Club did not make the decision to install the extra
decking until March, and did not erect it until June/July.      if the
change of policy had been indicated earlier the Club could have
been saved much of the additional expense.




        With regard to the proceedings on. Thursday, we would like to
have a clear statement of all the points which cause concern, so
that we can properly answer them.   I presume that the various matters
EASTWOOD f t PARTNERS




will be explained to the Committee by officers of the Council or
by the Fire Service representatives.     Following that, I presume
we will be allowed to ask questions.     It will then be our turn to
give our response, and then we will be questioned.
        Finally, I suggest there will be a brief summing up.
        I mentioned in our telephone conversation yesterday that
the Club thinks it would be very helpful to the Committee in
coming to its decision if it would inspect the Kop.     Indeed we
believe it will be very difficult for them to get a true picture
to enable them to make a fair decision from drawings.     They would
be welcome to visit on Friday afternoon, say if they decide to
reconvene their meeting at Hillsborough, or such other time as
will suit their convenience.


                               Yours faithfully,
                                                              WE/JAP/DFD/6648



                                                     30 April, 1936



^ S h e f f i e l d M.D.C.,
    Department of Land Use and Planning Services,
    Town Kail,
    SHEFFIELD            Si 2HH

  For the attention of Mr. Davidson


  Dear Sirs,

            Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic.

                       Spion Kop Development

                         List No. 85/4655B

        In support of our application for Building Regulations
  approval of the above mentioned project, we have pleasure in
^ e n c l o s i n g duplicate copies of the following new or revised
  drawings and single copies of the following calculations for
  your attention.
        Drawing Number 6648/45D                   Drawing Number 6643/19E
                             /51A                                           /40C
                             /47B                                           /98B
                             /48D                                           /96D
                             I/49dI         lf>         OR   a w iw   &     /100C
                             *— — 1    V U H \C H   SHOW S
                                      Tne. SnK.VG.V’C         S l d PC. .   /101A
        Calculation sheets Pi to P8 and AFl to AF19 for the design
  of the precast concrete terrace units and access stair flights
  respectively are also enclosed together with Calculation sheets
r                                                                                    CP 110 : Part! : 1972

            %      £ £ £ £ , * ““ 0UKr • * of                 ^          is« ■ « * » «         ha,r or *. depth aI Ihe face of ^

            with 3J.6.2 ta t using the m odifiT drfritranT f^gT vC T 'abo'vt'1'™ 1''''1 from shear “ "dilions in accordance ’

            o„te                                       : “rP
                                                           t :? r                                 r phof,he— * — •
            be not less than 0.4% of the section at the face of the supporting         T u      ment 30 obtained shou,d
            At the front face of the corbel, the reinforcement should be aTchn W         u u bC adequate,y anchored,
            bar of equal strength or by bending back the bars to form a loon- il lh ?         y Wdding t0 a transverse
            load should not project beyond the straight portion of the bars V o r m t i T "       **" k^'"8 area °f the
              When the corbel is designed to resist a stated horizontal f o r d I T      ^ m a m tension re'nforcement.
           vided to transmit this force in itsentirety; the reinforcement should ,  !°nal re,nforcement ^ould be pro­
           be adequately anchored within thesupporting member                             t0the bearinS P,ateand should
              Shear reinforcement should be provided in th«. fn m ‘
           of the effective depth of the corbel at the column face- thisremforc      di:f ibuted in the UPP<* two-thirds
           ofthe area ofthe main tension reinforcement and should be adeq^tdy^nchorwl!^ 001 ^ *CSS              0ne'^a^


                                                                                                                                            A s am ended
        b o o f lin ^ S                                                              300       deep provides a bearing as on a                 Feb. 1976
        provisions an d definitions:                                         cantilever slab in accordance with the following

           (1) the projection o f the nib should be sufficient     r.™,          j
        m em ber to be supported (see 5 .2 .4 J). T he reinforcem ent in the*" h               W'd th o f bearinS for the type o f
        m em ber should have a minimum nom inal overlap on p lan o f 60 m m ; 3            * * * rem forcement in the supported
            (2) the line o f action o f the load should he           *
       front edge o f the nib, at the beginning o f the c h a m f e r e d ' e L ^ o i ^ T ^ ° f * * ,0aded a rea’ Lc- a t the
       a p p ro p riate;                                    m rered edge, o r at the outer edge o f the bearing p a d as


       distance from its                          i ^ ^ t n^ ^ “I£ ^ ^ e T akt,T Pr°dUCt °fthe ,oad suPP°«ed and the
       reinforcement in the nib should „0, be                Ih„ ^                                     ” ,h' b'* m-       «w k.n


                                                                                        * • of *■ *

                                                 fo™          in                                                                  b°:


      rZ                                                  ^ t h e d i s t a n c e d S d *“ * * -                                  *

      .o                                                                                         ” *“•th' load from           "*>



                                                                                       T    ” 1 unhits sho“id be su® :i'n' w            A s am ended
                                                                                                                                           Feb. 1976
                                                                                          -    of “           iSbs       8i “
     span, height of support and ,he provi*ioi]                                       ’*1fac,ors such « F ra n c e s , loading!
    are used, the minim um anchorage lengths o f reinfnr^                     ’ Nevertheless, when reduced bearings
    precautions must be taken to                                                              «"«« be provided and
    d u rm g erection.                    C0,lapSe o f the “ " .t c a n n o t occur due to accidental displacem ent



    inte™ edl4a; e                                                                       irregularities and when adequate
    exceed 0 .4 /cu under the ultim ate loads. W hen the m em bers a             h     contact area should not norm ally
     ow er concrete strength is applicable. H igher bearing stresses m a v T , ° f.C° " Cretes o f different l e n g t h , the
    to p re v e n t spotting o r s p r i n g o f the concrete a t the in S S e Su l                         me3SUreS 3re taken
                                                              a i m e intertace, such as the provision o f well-defined bearing
                                                               81
     EA S TW O O D & PARTNERS
                   (C onsulting Engineers)                                                      S t. A ndrew s Hotiso
  O lrtcto n :                                                                                  23 Kingfieid Road
  W. Eastw ood               FEn0 , B.Eng, P h.O , D.Eng,
                                                                                                Sheffield S11 9AS
                             C.Eng„ F.I.C.H, P.P.I.S«iuctE .                                    T el.: (0742) 583871
                             F.LM ech.E, F .O .S , M .C oruX
                                                                                                Telex:        547266
 A. A. Wood                  8-En®.   Ph.D„ a E ng, F.I.C.E,
                             F A S tructE . M X W .ES, M.Con*.E
                                                                                                                •n d a t:
 R. C. A. Eastw ood          B .S c, C.Eng„ M.I.CJE, M.I.Struct-E.
 G. Spir                     C f n o , M.I.C.E, M.I.Moch.E                                       Premier     H o u s e ''
 A u o cia ta t;                                                                                 12/13 Hatton Garden
 C. 8. Greaves                                                                                   London EC1N SAN
                            *Xn«’ C-&W- MACE. MXSWW.E
J . A. Strange                                                                                   T el.: (01) 242 7436
                            C-En*, MAStruecE
8. Preston                         « « , , MACE. M A S tnw i                    Our Ref:    WE/DFD/6517
R. Tandy                    t & h FXStniccJL
O. M. Seaman                • A , C E nc, MACE, M-l-StructE.
                                                                                Your Ref:   DV/ST/583/5
J . M . Wood
                            * * , CEb* , MACE. MX»r««tE.
Consultant:
A. G- Burdett
                                                                                 23 December, 1985
Department of Administration,
South Yorkshire County Council
County Hall,                   '
BARNSLEY,
South Yorkshire      S70 2TN
                                                                                            pA(k£. 4 .
For, the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan

Dear Sirs,
               —■
                a^etV~ °f Sport Grounds Act, 1975
             Sheffield Wednesday Football club plr
     Thank you for your letter of 18 December, 1985 enclosing -fte
comments of the Building Authority to w M c h , ^   reply^   follous

Disabled Facilities
a)          There is no doubt that the Kop is covered by the Building
            Regulations and that we shall need Building Regulations
            approval. However, there has effectively been no change
            xn the 1985 Regulations.
           Even if there were a change in Regulations, it is obviously
           commonsense that facilities for the dimbled apply to the
           ground as a whole and not to one particular building   At
         the moment there are perfectly adequate facilities under
         the overhang of the roof of the North stand. There is a
         level approach. The disabled are under the cover of the
         cantilever roof. Any facilities at the front of the Kop
         would be less sheltered from the rain, and more prone to
          lsruption by the fans immediately behind, it is not a good
         place at all for disabled people.


                            An Unlimited Company, Registered in England - No.   1833144
                                                                                                                             S7T
im i t T ee
                                    M UN I CI P AL ENTER PR I SE A N D G E N E R A L SERVICES P RO G R A M M E COMMI TTEE              483


                             applications made to the Magistrates to allow the sale of alcohol during sportine events at (a) the
o r the removal of
                             Riverside Reception Suite and Tavern Bar at Sheffield W ednesday Football G round and (b) the Blades
                             Social Club and Executive Suite at the Sheffield United Football Ground.
emoval o f waste j
                                Resolved: That the Head o f Administration and Legal Department be authorised, prior to
ng 8th September t
                             confirmation of these minutes by the City Council, to attend the Sheffield Magistrates Court to indicate
                             that the City Council does not wish to com m ent on the applications.
                        -jc (5) AMUSEMENT CENTRE
                                Resolved: That the appiication now submitted by Showboat Entertainments Centre Limited for the
                             renewal o f permits to operate an amusement centre at 2A-4A, Middlewood R oad. Sheffield be granted.
-illor J. A. Butler :
)n.                          (6) EXCLUSION OF THE PUBLIC AND PRESS
                                Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before discussion takes place on
ION
                             the remaining items o f business on the grounds that, in view o f the nature o f the business to be
'.he request o f the
                             transacted, if the public and press were present there would be a disclosure to them o f exempt
'ils for financial           information as described in Schedule 12(a) to the Local Government (Access to Information) Act
                             1985 and as detailed below—

                             Item           Paragraph                Reason
                                            7 and 12                Relating to the financial or business affairs o f other persons and
                                                                    legal matters and advice.
>r th e^K e use o f
                             8           ' 7                        Relating to the financial or business affairs o f other persons.
ng ♦ “>e held on             9             9                        Relating to the supply o f goods or services and disclosure would
                                                                    be likely to prejudice the Council.

 an d part o f the      ★ (7) PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT
                             Resolved: T hat the application now submitted by Michael William Powell for the renewal o f the
                          Public E ntertainm ent Licence in respect o f the Roxy Nightclub. Arundel Gate. Sheffield be granted for a
                          period o f 12 months.
d jointly by the
and intended to         ★   (8) MOBILE STREET TRADER

 a n d Planning,               With reference to the request made by the Panel at its meeting held on 30th June. 1986. the Head o f
 to premises at             Administration and Legal D epartm ent reported on discussions which he had held with the holder of
                            the street trading consent issued in respect o f the site in Hartshead and on proposed revised terms for
                            the consent.

 lease o f office              Resolved: That, on the basis th at no precedent is set by the decision now made by this Panel and in
f N ew Oxford               view o f the exceptional circumstances o f this case, the terms of the street trading consent issued in
                            respect o f the site at H artshead be varied as from 1st June, 1986, by the restriction of the trading hours
                            permitted under the consent to Fridays and Saturdays only, from 8.00 p.m. to midnight and the
 for ti^^aking
                            reduction o f the consent fee to £7 0 0 per annum .
                            (9) REGISTER OFFICE DOOR MAINTENANCE
                               Resolved: That the quotation now submitted o f D C SS Door Maintenance Specialists in the sum of
y t   _).-en for
                            £153.20 p e r annum for the provision o f a twice-yearly inspection/maintenance service and an
'remises at 31
                            out-of-hours breakdown service in respect o f the special metal entrance doors to the Sheffield Register
in accordance
                            Office, in accordance with the details contained in the report of the Director of Land and Planning now
ed: and
                            submitted, be accepted.
th e proposed
i the financial
                              Meeting o f the General Purposes Panel held 21st August, 1986. Present— Councillors J. A. Butler
                            (Chair), Ms. Clarke, Ms. Fiore, Hussain, M oscrop, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. Walton and White.
                                    * OF SPORTS GROUNDS
t by Sheffield
                               The H ead of Administration and Legal D epartm ent reported on an application from Sheffield
tadium.
                            W ednesday Football Club for approval under the Safety of Sports Grounds A ct 1975 to an increase in
the proposal                the permitted crowd capacity o f the “ Spion Kop*’ at Hillsborough Stadium from 16.850 to 22,831
                            persons.

                              Representatives o f the Club, the South Yorkshire Fire Service, the Building Surveyor iffld the Acting
 d received a               Director o f Environmental H ealth and C onsum er Services attended the meeting to speak on the
.'omment on                 application.


                                                                           DOCUMENT Ho. S " 7 ~ |
484           M U N I C I P A L E N T E R P R I S E A N D G E N E R A L S E R V I C E S P R O G R A M M E C O M MI T T E E


        Resolved: T h at (a) the maxim um capacity o f the “ Spion Kop'* at Hillsborough Stadium be
     increased to 21,000 by variation of the certificate issued under the Safety o f Sports Ground Act 1975.
     with immediate effect on condition th at (i) the infilling of the crush barriers as now outlined takes place
     prior to the m atch on the 25th A ugust, 1986, (ii) the further five items o f work now referred to are
     completed within two weeks from 21st August, 1986 and (iii) extra stewarding is provided during the
     next two m atches to the satisfaction o f the Fire Service and the Police; and
         (b> the work referred to in (i) and (ii) above be required to be carried out by the Club to the
      satisfaction of the Council as certificating authority and the H ead o f Administration and Legal
      D epartm ent be authorised to take an y necessary action, including the institution o f legal proceedings,
      to secure compliance with this decision.


                 Meeting of the General Purposes Panel held 1st September. 1986. Present— Councillors
      J. A. Butler (Chair), Ms. Fiore, Howson and Hussain.
      ( 1 ) SHEFFIELD FAMILY PRACTITIONER COMMITTEE
         The Panel considered an invitation for the City Council to submit nominations for consideration by
      the Secretary o f State for Social Services for appointment to the Sheffield Family Practitioner
      Comm ittee for the 4-year period commencing 1st April, 1987.
          Resolved: T h a t the H ead o f Administration and Legal Departm ent, in consultation with the Chair
      o f this Panel, be authorised to submit to the Secretary o f State, nominations for consideration for
      service on the Sheffield Fam ily Practitioner Committee.

 ★     (2) STREET COLLECTIONS
         Resolved: T h a t the applications now submitted for the issue o f street collection permits be approved
      as follows—
                                            Organisation                      Proposed Location                     Proposed Date
       Applicant
                                            Variety Club o f Great            The M oor                             18.10.86
       M. S. Sherwood
                                            Britain                           Pinstone Street

                                            Sheffield Riverdale               Fargate (Norfolk Row                  13.12.86
       N. A ddy
                                            R o u n d Table                   Platform)

                                            Sheffield Riverdale               Postal Districts 7, 8, 10, 11         16.12.86-
       N. Addy
                                                                              and 17                                22 . 12.86
                                            R o u n d Table
                                                                                                                    inclusive

 ★     (3) AMUSEMENT CENTRES
          The Head o f Administration and Legal Department reported on four applications for the grant of
       itn n c p m p n t r p n f r e n e r m its .




       permission.




        advice.




        relating to public entertainm ent (Case PE,-3 86).
                                                                                                                                      O'
                                                                                                                            SIS'
EASTW OOD & PARTNERS                                                                                    S t. A n d re w s H o u se
              (C onsulting    E n g in e e r s )                                                        23 K ingfield R oad
                                                                                                        S h e ffie ld S11 9AS
Directors:
W . E a s tw o o d        F.Eng., B.Eng., Ph.D ., D.Eng.,
                                                                                                        T e l.: (0742) 583871
                          C.Eng., F.I.C.E., P.P.I.Struct.E.,                                            T elex :          547266
                          F.I.M ech.E., F.G.S., M .C ons.E.

A. A. W o o d             B.Eng., Ph.D ., C.Eng., F.I.C.E.,                                                                 and at:
                          F.l.Struct. E„ M .I.W .E .S ., M .C o n s .E

R.   c.
      A. E a s tw o o d   B.Sc„ C.Eng., M .I.C .E ., M .I.S tr u c 'E .                                   Premier         House
G. S p ir                 C.Eng., M .I.C .E .. M .I.M ech .E .
                                                                                                          1 2 /1 3 H atton Garden
                                                                                                          London EC1N 8 AN
Associates:                                                                                               T e l.: (01) 242 7436
C.   S . G reaves         B.Enj., C .Enj., M.I.C.E., M.l.Struct.E.

J.   A. S trange          C .Enj., M.l.Struct.E.
                                                                                       Our R ef:     WE/JAS/SEB/7 67 2
S.   P reston             B.En(., C.En*., M.I.C.E., M.l.Struct.E.
R.   Tandy                C .E nj., F.I.Struct.E.                                      Your R e f:
G.   M. Seam an           B.Sc., CEn*., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.

J.   M. W ood             B.Sc., C.Enj;„ M.I.C.E., M.I.Struet.E.

Consultant:
A. G. Burdett             G.M., B.Sc.{Eng.), C.Enj..
                          F.I.C.E.. F.I.Scru«.E.




City of Sheffield Metropolitan District,                                                             27 August 1986
Adminisation & Legal Department,
Town Hall,
Sheffield
SI 2HH
                                                                                                DOCUMENT No.    *8   1^
For the attention of Mr. D. Bownes


 Dear Mr. Bownes,
                Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic
                                     Safety at Sports Grounds Act 1975
                                                       Spion Kop Development

             Further to the meeting held at the Town Hall on Thursday
 21 August 1986, we have pleasure in enclosing six prints of our
 drawings 6648/45E, 47C, 48F, 49C, 51C, 72D, and 56G showing
 details of the barriers and handrails which we propose to have
 installed along the sides of the radial gangways and round the
 outer perimeter of the south east staircase.
             The barriers and posts have been designed to resist a
 design load of 3.4 kN/m and the handrails a load of 2.2 kN/m,
 in accordance with the 'Green Guide'.                                              The height of the handrail
 has been set to satisfy the requirements of BS5396 'Stairs'
 and not the 'Green Guide'.                                               There is a slight difference in
  the way in which the two documents set out the handrail heights.
             As you know, time is short and we have already sent the
  same copies of these drawings to the Contractor for him to
  order the materials.                               We would therefore welcome the comments
  of the Working Party as soon as possible.
                                                                             Yours sincerley,
    R 3719                                                                              7 “7   Sch 91 6 2
                                  CITY OF SH E FFIE L D — M EM O R A N D U M
              Head of Administration and Legal                  The Acting Director of
From                                                            Environmental Health and Consumer
              Department
                                                                Services
              28th August 1986
              GP/262/DMB
              4690 - Mr. Bownes
Tel. Ext.                                                Ref.
                                                                               {-— Q 1 5 £ P l 9 8 f r

            Sheffield Wednesday Football Club - Spion Kop Development

            I refer to the hearing before the General Purposes Panel on Thursday 21st August
            1986 in connection with the above development and enclose a copy of the Panel's
            Resolution for your information.  I would like to place on record my
            appreciation of the considerable efforts put in by your Officers from the Health
            and Safety point of view and for their presentation to the Panel.

            I will be in touch with you again shortly to discuss the future role of your
            Department in the Safety of Sports Grounds system.
            S H E F F I E L D   C I T Y   C O U N   C I L


             MEETING OF THE GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL
     (MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME)

                       held 21st August, 1986


 PRESENT:    Councillor J. A. Butler (Chair), Ms. Clarke, Ms. Fiore,
             Hussain, Moscrop, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. Walton and White.




SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
                The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported
on an application from Sheffield Wednesday Football Club for approval
under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 to an increase in the
permitted crowd capacity of the "Spion Kop" at Hillsborough Stadium
from 16,850 to 22,831 persons.
              Representatives of the Club, the South Yorkshire Fire
Service, the Building Surveyor and the Acting Director of
Environmental Health and Consumer Services attended the meeting to
speak on the application.
RESOLVED: That (a) the maximum capacity of the "Spion Kop" at
Hillsborough Stadium be increased to 21,000 by variation of the
certificate issued under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975, with
immediate effect on condition that (i) the infilling of the crush
barriers as now outlined takes place prior to the match on the 25th
August, 1986, (ii) the further five items of work now referred to are
completed within two weeks from 21st August, 1986 and (iii) extra
stewarding is provided during the next two matches to the satisfaction
of the Fire Service and the Police; and
              (b) the work referred to in (i) and (ii) above be required
to be carried       out by the Club to the satisfaction of the Council as
certificating authority and the Head of Administration and Legal
Department be authorised to take any necessary action, including the
 institution of legal proceedings, to secure compliance with this
 de c is ion.
