                   NOTES FROM T HE CHIEF CONSTABLE'S BRIEFING WITH
           O P ER ATI ON AL STAFF ENGAGED ON F .A . CUP SEMI-FINAL DUTIES

                         9.00 AM,   SUNDAY 16 APRIL I989




Mr P Wright CBE, Chief Constable
Mr P Hayes QPM LLB MA, Deputy C hief Constable
Mr W W Jackson, Assistant Chief Constable (Operations)
Detective Chief Superintendent Addis
Chief Superintendents Ducke nf iel d and Nesbit
Superintendents Chapman, Greenwood, Marshall, McKay, Murray, Parker,        Pratt,
  and Sleath
Chief Inspectors Beal, Creaser, Hepworth, and Sumner
Inspectors Bullas, Delaney, Hand-Davies, Harvey, Sykes and White
Sergeants
Constables!     ,      .    I
                  (Press Officer)




Chief Constable:     I'm not in the business of questioning decisions,
                     qu estioning graphics, I know that everything that was done
                     was done in the prcuer soirir and prouer attitude of
                     dealing with a very very difficult situation but it is the
                     chronology of events which it seems to me are essential
                     for me to get in my mind.     I thought the best way we could
                     do this is to go through the events as I unders ta nd' th em
                     and to get the individuals who can comment on those events
                     as I unders ta nd them to say so.   Don't be concerned about
                     disagr ee ing with me and if you disagree with my
                     understanding of what I think happened say so but it's
                     really an ability to grasp the overall picture.         I think
                     I've got a good idea of it now bpt there will be detail.
                     Each of you will have in your mind the detail of events
                     you wi tn ess ed and we know the parameters of what you
                     see are very n a rr ow when tired and therefore don't try and
                     adjust your mind to what someone else is saying.         Stick to
                     what you know, stick to what you saw and don't attempt to
                     add explanations of it or try and make logic of it because
                     there are so many illogical aspects.      So we open the gates
                     as 12.00 noon and by 2.30 pm the Nottingham section of the
                     ground was fairly full but at that time I think it's true
                     that the control in the ground realised that there were a
                     lot of gaps and a lot of areas to fi 11                 ..
                     Liverpool stand.     That's at 2.30 pm.   fitT any th ing happen
                     Before 2 . 3 0 pm that anybody sees M s signifleant?



Ch Supt             I looked out at 2.30 pm.   The Nottingham fans had got into
Duckenfield:        the Spion Kop and as far as I was concerned it was p retty
                     full, they were in the other areas on the south stand and
                     it was remarkable as far as J K W a s : concerned that the north
                                       -   ?   -




                   stand was almost empty and also           the Leppings Lane stand*;-
                   pa rt i c u i a r l y on the terracing.



      Constable:   Can anyone give an e xp lanation as to why they weren't
                   there?



Supt Marshall:     Because   they were drinking outside



Chief Constable:   Is this pe rsonal perception?



Supt Marshall:     No it's not percep tio n sir I've actu al ly seen it, we have
                   seen it, its fact.   The G a t ew ay supermarket in Kilner Way
                   were selling four packs and bottles of wine through a
                   hole in the door.   There were hoards of people on the
                   grass outside Halfords near Halifax Road drinking.        The
                   same applies there were 200 punteFs outside the       ?
                   public house drinking. Every off-licence that was open
                   was doing a roaring trade.



Insp Sykes:        Can I try and put it into perspective.  At 2.30 pm the
                   mass of people outside was such that I d iscussed with Supt
                   Marshall and we closed the road to vehicular traffic that
                   was the sheer weight of numbers out there at that time.



Supt Marshall:     I have in my notes that at 2.15 pm Leppings Lane was full
                   of fans and in both directions and were drinking and we
                   had to close the road but there was a delay in that
                   because of the fact that service buses were still coming
                   from the roai down into the Leppings Lane terrace.



Chief Constable:   So we've got a picture of people from Liverpool in the
                   vicinity of the ground,        J4gre,we got any evi<fenc% that
                   thpre was a delay in traffic that resulted in the
                   M v e r p o o l fans' arrival at the ground being as late as it
                   feas?



Ch Surt Nesbit:    No sir, I can tell you that as far as Penistone Road and
                   Halifax Road and Langsett Road that they were completely
                   sterile of football traffic, it was amazing, certainly by
                   2.30/2.25 pm I travelled all the way from the city centre,
                   all the way through to Halifax Road.



Chief Constable:   So there is no e v i a e " .s m.aisoever of the delay in transit
                   of the fans.  The fans arriv ed at the g r ound vicinity
                   early enough to go in the eround but instead went
                   drinking.     THIS WAS AGREED.
Insp Sykes:         There were fans there who said there had been
                    no idea whether they came by car, coach, cr t



      ’onstable:    Can we just check on that aspect on the network of points
                    and covers to make sure whether or not there is any delay
                    anywhere.  It's simply to get ...



     Hand-Davies:   Sir, the special was ir. ear_y it was cue at      ana Z:
                    was in at about 1.45 pm and that; was the only train in
                    which is contributory as well ...



Chief Constable:    What about the buses?



InsD Kand-Davies:   No real problems as far as        ...



Ch Supt Nesbit:     No sir, you could travel - at 2.30 pm I drove from along
                    Penistone Road past the ground to Halifax Road and there
                    was no traffic whatsoever.



                    Alri g h t , \v'0 ' 1 let s use as a d as i.s for that t he n i f th.
                                                                     •    „i
                    w a s delay i u was individual delay , ^ u Wcoli t ITicLSS CL6 L
                    and the re w a s n 't any holdups that added to t he f rustr.
                    of people coming to the match.              T hat seems to be sX, rs.



                    Now, <flearly at 2.30 pm we'd got problems in that area.
                    We'd got the road closed, we'd got the sheer mass of
                    people, would anyone like to-^lftve me and ... we've used &
                    figure of 3/4 thousand for about ten to three, that was
                    the sort of fifeoad figure that was given to me.  Now was
                    there a build up between 2.30/2.45 pm.    So what numoers
                    are we talking about at 2 . 3 0 pm?



Supt McKay:         In excess of 3,000 and from what I could



Chief Constable:    At 2.30 pm?



      ■IcKay:       Yes and increasing.  Can I take you back, it's worth
                    mentioning the history and this of course is a repeat of
                    last year's semi-final.  I was at that gate Leppings Lane
                    last year, the fans were certainly not there in those
                    numbers at that particular time last year and the increase
                    came at 2.55 P" when all the drunken louts appeared and
                    wanted entrance      then.



Chief Constable:     But we'd got problems before 2.55 p^.
f



    Supt McKay:            We had,     they w e r e - arriving



    Chief Constable:       Don't let's go/run on ahead and that's what I'm anxious t;
                           do.  The focus of this enquiry will be on the pe riod time
                           as I see it from about 2.30 pm to about 3-10 pm.   After
                           that it's just a question of how we dealt with it after




    Supt McKay:            The picture is one of conjestion at 2.30 pm increasing
                           co ntinually throughout because of the inability of the few
                           turnstiles to process the people as fast as they arrived.
                           They were arri vi ng faster and the situation d et eriorated
                           from 2.30 pm and never improved.



    Chief Constable: -               resources were deployed in that area at that time.
                               a        ,in J^jj^sight enough.   § | P f f ® C ' !#esoupces' that' we've
                               l o c a t e d there deplo yed in that area.          THIS WAS AGREED.



    (Mr Wright then scans room for insp Purdy - who was not present but at that
    tiwc working 6 i S c W h e r s ;



    Chi1                   because s.s i                         Roger,   Mr Pur;   was ver;
                           Invo lv ed .



            Marshall:      Yes he was because by 2.4- pm t h e r ■ was an enormous press
                           of fans pushing ...



    Chie:      1O oC.--1   Oks       but before we get to 2.45 pm, has anyone anything
                           3 0./;   rout the pe riod between 2.30/2.45 pm?



    Supt Marshall:         That was the period when the mounted officers and foot
                           officers were a ctually rounding up fans to get them into
                           the ground.   We were busy trying to shepherd fans towards
                           the g a t e .



    Suot Murray:           To add to that, at 2.30 pm there was a huge presence that
                           we could see on the cameras outside the Leppings Lane
                           turnstiles but that number that were there should have
                           gone into the ground by 3-00 pm.



    Chief Constable:       And shouldn't have been any problem.               AGREED - NONE.

                           Can you tell me what the general picture was, how many
                           arrests were taking place?      "there any arrests t'fikirvg
                           place?  AGREED - NONE.
                                         -     0   -




Insp Sykes:         Vir tually impossible, the people who were arriving had "
                    been drinking and the sheer mass of nur.bers of people wi*
                    dnnK   ana   . . .



3hief Constable:    A n a if we'd started rnakinc arrests we ’would have          ...



                    isj-I me aooui, tr.e racio.     inere was scrrie i au-it/prooiem
                    wi"cn cns i?a a a c a^ cnac uims.



 ipt Murray:        At that time reports were coming in into the control roon
                    from officers outside.



Chief Constable:   ^ 5   you in control?



Supt Murray:       H|kir sir, that there were radio problems that messages were
                    breaking up and they weren't receiving control.    We have a
                    civilian cjiflnunications officer on stand-by and before we
                    could contact him he actually came round to the control
                    room and said 'the radios are breaking up I've come to see
                    what I can d o ' . He did replace the pack set.



Chief Constable:    Can anybody say whether that caused anything other than
                                    l i d it in any way contribute to the events
                    wnic.n ioiiovfea.'



Supt Marshall:     Yes, I think it did.   I was trying to pass a message about
                   the gate and I could not get through on the radio and I
                   eventually changed channel on my set to H a m m e r ” on Road to
                   talk about the probl em of the gate.  I would say that time
                   was a little bit later than 2.30 pm because the problems
                   surrounding the gate were about 2.45 pm.



Chief Constable:   You see now, you've got to be very careful here because we
                   are talking about the gate and the gates.  You are |||J|ll;ng
                         how many gates?



Suot Marshall:      I was talking about            the gate   at the side of the Leppings
                    Lane t u r n s t i l e .



(Mr Hayes clarifies and points on the plan to the gate spoken of).



Chief Constable:   T h a t 's gate 'C '. There's another gate, gate 'B! . That
                   feature it seems to m e , I'm anxious to get this p articular
                   aspect...      You were talking about relieving the press in
                   front of the thing and the press was caused by everybody
                   trving to get in the ground within a short period of time.
                   When the message v,ras pass ed that: you wanted tne                ite
                   opened It wasn't received in t h e first instc r> Ci
                   n.xfi'c/ i 1ve made a statement » » .



:UDt Marsha]                . - t . a   .                   was   iDie



r h -<             t\na t                   wr.a:             we talking      30 Ui




                   Probably about 2.4;



Chief Constable:   About 2.45 pm when you first decided,                 in conjunction with
                   Mr Purdy as well.



Supt Marshall:     The situation becane untenable outside and Mr Purdy was
                   extremis at that stage and was beg-ging for me to do
                   something to relieve the problem.



Chief Constable:   When he was talking about the gate which gate was he
                   talking about?



Sunt Marshall:     He's talking about the gate at the side,                 gat



Supt McKay:        Wo ul d it help if I indicated the ... at this point because
                   the gate 'C' was never under any pressure at that point,
                   it was not a point of entry and it was just ignored.



Chief Constable:   People were not trying to go down the road they ifere
                   trying to get through the turnstiles.  THIS WAS AGREED.

                   Can anybody describe             the nature of the events outside
                   those turnstiles?



Ch Supt            Can I give you a view as I saw it from the control room
Duckenfield:       sir?   Times are difficult but at     some stage we aid have
                    this radio difficulty and I've got it in my mind that the
                    situation couldn't be as ses se d and developed because of a
                    man in the control room changing radios and there was a
                    delay.   Mr Marshall was asking for help and the gate to be
                    opened and for one or two reasons he didn't get it, either
                    firstly because we didn't receive the message from the
                    radio or secondly I know at one stage that I was delaying
                    the situation because of assessing what the consequences
                    would be when the gates opened.      The situation was this
                    about 2.45 ana I'll come back to     the gate as I saw it.  At
                    2.45 there was a crisis and a decision had to be made
                    whether or not to support Mr Marshall and for me to make
                    that decision to support Mr Marshall.      On the outside
                    there './ere 2,000 '3,^00 fans.  As I saw the situation in
                                     - 7 -



                    the ground there were spaces at either end of Leppings
                    Lane.  Behind that west stand there is a concourse area
                    that will easily accommodate if I've got ... right the
                    crowd outside.  The inside was full.  Quite a large area.
                    So on that basis, then the other consideration was right
                    we delay the kick off but sadly before I could consider
                    delaying the kick off the players ran out onto the pitch
                    which must be I prgsuCe 2.50 and that decision was taken
                    away.  Mr Marshall then came across or somebody did and
                    the message came in to the control room 'if you don't open
                    this gate soon someone is going to get killed outside
                    here'.  And I could see the developing situation.



Chief Constable:    And you don't know who said that'



Ch Supt             I don't know who said that, I know that somebody said on
Duckenfield:        the radio in a very distressed state, quite p roperly it
                    wasn't panic it was a case of for*God's sake help us here
                    because there are people who are going to be injured and
                    killed.



Supt Marshall:      I said that.



Ch Supt             Mow I think the people in the control room will say what
DuckenfieId:        we heard.  Mr Murray turned to me and said ’Mr Duckenfield
                    he want's the gates opened what's your decision'.



Chief Constable:    Let's pursue   that.   We didn't know which gate   ...



Ch Supt             Weil no but the thing is I can take it a little bit
Duckenfield:        further.  Now we get a situation where I can see on the
                    video and I think it's the gate on the entrance from the
                    south stand.  I-don't know the number of it but I went to
                    it last night.



(Mr Hayes identi fied and pointed to the gate on the plan).



Ch Supt             Right, now, there's a video sequence that's running that
Duckenfield:        shows that at that point fans were climbing over a wall,
                    fans were not only climbing over a wall they were
                    harassing a horse and a horseman was having extreme
                    difficulty.  Now I know that I've heard someone say it
                    lifted but certainly that man was in great difficulty,
                    that horseman, and the situation there was
                    that gate had burst open.  Now I don't know t h e .truth o f
                    that.



Chief Constable     If anybody opened it it should be obvious on the video.
                                                 - 3 -



Ch Supt                     Well it should, if you look for that corner where         I was
Duckenfield:                watching it, that gate opened...



Chief Constable :           lt\ couldn't be opened from outside      could it?    AGREED NO



                            That gate op ened _:.d i. was shut again and then I'm not
                            not sure but I think it was opened again.    But the
                            situation was tne.n tnat from recollection that people who
                            came in from there didn't appear on the video to be
                            causing major problems and also not only could I w atch the
                            video I could watch the terracing and looking at the
                            terracing tnere was still plenty of space around the sides
                            and considering the video and the terracing the situation
                            didn't look difficult at that stage.



Chief Constable             Coupled with the large area inside the turnstiles.



(Mr Kayes ident. Lfied and pointe d on the plan, the large area which exists
between the rea. r of the west stand and the turnstiles leading to Leppings
Lane)



Insp Delaney:               Sir,   it was no problem because   i went   through there.



                            Anion gs-ts i



I.nso D e l a n e y :       Gate   'C'   it was open and I went through the gate.



Chief Constable:            What time was that?



Insp Delaney:               _ don't know what--time it was.



Chief Constable:            Pre-match,      after match?



insp Delaney-               Pre-match.  My serial was di rected to assist with the
                            situation at 2.-40 pm. We went round to the back of the
                            turnstiles because people were causing disorder at the
                            back.



Chief Constable:            Are you saying...



Insp Delaney:               The public . . .



Chief C o n s t a b l e :   The back of the turnstiles     inside   the ground.
Insp Delaney:          Inside that area,     inside   that area at the back of the
                       turnstiles.



Chief Constable:       inside   that area marked      'AG'.   THIS WAS AGREED.



Insp D e l :r.ey:      .And they were saying tr.at if sometning was not cone
                       someone was going to get killed out there.           I heard a
                       message come over the radio 'open the gates at the bac.-v oi
                       Leppings Lane t e r r a c i n g ’ . The gate was opened and I went
                       through that g a t e ...



Chief Constable:           idea who authoris ed that?         That was at twenty-to?



Insp Delaney:          I don't know who authorised it.  No that was after sir
                       because I was there for a few minutes before...I went
                       through that gate and saw Mr Purdy and I was then engaged
                       in pulling people off the turnstiles because they were
                       getting crushed.  I was pulling them out to get through
                       the gate.



Chief Constable:       Can I just get that clear in my mind.  When you were
                       directed in response to Mr Marshall's plea for help in the
                       area you took your s e r i a l . ..



Insp Delaney:          No, I went I was on my own at that time.  My serial was at
                       the back of the first gate which was gate 'A'.



(Mr Hayes    then p ointed to gate   'A' on the plan)



Insp Delaney:          My serial was there.   In response to that message I went
                       through round to.gate 'C' to see what the prob lem was and
                       the gates were opened.   I went round the back.



(Mr Hayes    then i dentified w hi ch gate Mr Delaney was referring to (gate       'C ') on
the plan)



Insp Delaney:          I went through that gate and the gates were then opened,
                       'C' gate was opened and I went through the gate.



Chief Constable:       When you say it was opened ipfe/topened,. it?



Insp Delaney:          I don't know who opened it,        the gate was opened,   well.



                       Who was,   was   there ar. officer...
                                          10   -




in so ueianey                there muse have been stewards on that



  )t McKay:           -hat gate was op ened a numoer 01      time;
                      gate for some 20 minutes.



                                                   r.any usea x or pe
                      out?



Supt McKay:           That's right and in fact it had to be opened to allow
                       in '<u^ed. persons in. T'nsre were severs.-, injured, cersons
                      went through in a period of 20 minutes and it was opening
                       and shutting ail the time but it was never under the
                       pressure that...



Szt Gutcher:          My serial was betwe en/ on the turnstiles one to 15 sir and
                       I can support there were some very distressed people
                       coming through t h e r e . You could see the crush through the
                       turnstiles and I told the man to just put his foot on the
                       pedal and let the people through to try to relieve some of
                       tne crusning, forget tickets at that stage, I was dragging
                       peoole over the top of the wheel and eventually went out
                       there, it was horrific out there.



        Constable:    Well fine, what we'd got is a real probl em outside the
                      turnsti_es m   wettings i^ane. No douct aocu~ tna^.   x.ie
                      ooeninc of the gate, now can we talk about wnat ha pp ene d
                      when that gate was opened because there were a number of
                      things, one is Mr Duckenfield saying that there didn't
                      seem to be a probl em and that the film just shows people
                      coming throug:. the gate ana into that area and going into
                      the ground and the other one is that there is a rusn of
                      oeoole coming through and aid anybody see a rush of people
                      coming through that gate?



Supt Marshall:        There was a movement of people who had been queuing in the
                      turnstiles, who ducted under the barrier, it's a sort of a
                      it's a ? barrier, they ducted under there and went into
                      that gate.  It was my impression and I've agonised over
                      this that there weren't that many people went through who
                           that. It wasn't an enormous crush on the gate.



Chief Constable:      When we talk about opening the gate,        it's a concertir




Sunt Marshall:         It's a concertina gate but it was only opened for about
                       four foot of its eight or - Lne foot...



Onie:   vOP.s able:   Mow was there a police horse there as well?         AGREED - YhS

                                 |
Sup- Murray.         Yes sir.   Can I give you my p e rc ept io n from the control "~
                      room point of view.   We were getting messages in the
                      control room to open the gates and considering the
                      consequences of that and before w e ’d made the decision to
                      open the gate the gate was opened or burst or whatever and
                      a number of people got into the ground, whoever was round
                      there.  That gate was not the one that was getting all the
                      oressure, tne pressure ./as near tne turrstiiss.       uate '
                      was open.   I'm talking about gate ' C .



Chief Constable:     That's right but when you said the pressure was on the
                      turnstiles.cn the gate 'S' basically, that one, it makes
                     s e n s e ...



Supt Murray:         We couldn't see the gates sir on the video all you could
                      see was tne mass but certainly the gate ' C there was not
                      the tremendous amount of pressure on it.    So gate ’C ’
                      opened sir, now I thought and I was only looking at it on
                      the video because you can't see it visually, I thought a
                      gate had burst open.   It may well be someone had opened it
                      but that was before the decision from the control room
                      came to open the gate.   A moun ted officer recovered that
                      situation and put his horse outside and the gate then
                     closed.



Chief Constable:     So really what we are entering into here is a situation
                      where the gate .          the. gate opened ana-tiiere -was no

                         actual opening* of the g a t e . ’ There d o e s n Tt seem"* to be
                     U«$QmpIete chain of action.



Sunt M u r r a y :   You've got demands from the ground commander wanting the
                      gate open, the de cision is being considered the
                      consequences from tne control room and tne gate is then
                      opened or burst...- It's then recovered by moun te d officers
                      and shut and the requests are still coming in from the
                      ground to 'open the gate open the gate' and getting more
                      demanding and so the decision was taken to open the gate
                      again.  That time from my recollection was a large number
                      of people came in but again a mounted officer was acting
                      as a sort of a wedge and allowing ...



Chief Constable:      And we will m    iact see tne number of people who came          in
                      on the video.



Sunt Murrav:          After that I think the numbers swelled and I just can't
                      recall exactly what numbers came in.



Insp Sykes:           The oressure on all those gates was tremendous and at
                      stages all tne gates 'A', '3' and ' C were all opened.
                      Not just gate ’C  all the gates were opened.
Supt Marshall      I asked for the gate         to the north stand to be opened.



                          we re



                   ihat ■3 une o n e . y e s . (ACiUALlY MEaNT GA.Th ' A 1 ) There was

                   because that gate was being attacked but that would have

                   o e t w e s n . ..



Chief Constable:   S<S the position now is that because of the pressure on all
                   tim'areas at some time all three gates w e i ^ p ^ e n e d . THIS
                   WAS AGREED.   Now can we put any time on the conjunction
                   of, is that a wall? (pointing to the plan)



Ch Supt Nesbit:    It's a fence,        a steel fence.



Chief Constable:   So anyone going through there is of               no concern   because
                    they are going to the north stand.

                   Now anyone who comes through here (pointing to the plan]
                   can get through there as w s , A^n-wiiD, Oar. we out a
                   conjunction on those gates at all?



Ir.so White:       Yes sir.  My attention was drawn to the people coming
                   through gate    u  i was in the area marked one to l o .
                   could see through the     ic in the wall the gate had
                   obviously opened,    I hadn't heard an order for it to be
                   opened but bearing in mind the noise that is
                   understandable.    I fought my way out to see what was
                   happening because obviously there was a tremendous press
                   of people out there and I feared people were going to be
                      isnec   iins   turnstiles aa. . to  and I went outsiae
                   the:



Chief Constable    How did you get outside        there?



     /.mte :       I went out o: gate  o , t was open.   I went out there and
                   we started physically pu ling people out of the crowd to
                   release that cress and i seemed about a minute but it was
                   probably four or five, suddenly the press just seemed to
                   ease I realised gate ’B' then had been ooened.



Chief Constable    Was the end product of all that that all this pressure
                   that was here went through?



  3D ,vn::                   he w.n               was r e l e a s e d .      can I Sc    one
                                                   of                                   : end
                   that if they burst through or went in a deluge through
                   gate '3' the normal place for them to go into the north
                   steps tc the '.vest stand which there would be enough
                   stewards on there to prevent them, the normal way they
                   would go through would be to go round the corner to the
                   el evated section which is on the north end of the terrace
                   the e levated one, they would really have tc turn to come
                   through that gate ar.d then go through.



Chief Constable:   Are you in a position to give us a time for the release of
                   the pressure?  Is the time you took ycur prisoner out
                   there?



Insp White:        I came back from the prisoner and noticed the time when I
                   was in the police room was 2.45.   I came straight back
                   because you could hear there was exciting things on the
                   radio but couldn't make out what they were and I'd be back
                   aabout 2.50 when I realised that someone had opened gate
                   'C' and your're p robably talking another two/three minutes
                   before gate 'B ' happens.



Chief Constable:   Now all that was pre-kick off.           AGREED YES. And so |||i
                   ^ f i o n s In opening the gates took place and the pressure
                          re l i e v e d before the match started.    ^




                   happened in a minute the release of that pressure.    It was
                   like a boiler bursting and they went through the gates but
                   the surge of people from the road outside would take
                   several minutes to put ail those people through that gate
                   and whilst that was going on there was '^''iheer went up
                   ihfide the ground and that added urgeiftjf
                   pfop le inside the gate and I'm convinced that the cheer
                   from the ground whether the players were out or whether
                   the match had started was the catalyst that gave them that
                   extra spur to get into the ground through the gate.



Chief Constable:   Again, I ’m asking virtually the impossible.   The situation
                    is that we have got ticket holders and non-ticket holders.
                    If the people who were there were ticket holders and got
                   inside the ground they were intended to.   lfer* we got any
                   .^irception of the n u mber of people who
                   f ecket holders outside Leppings Lane?



S lidt Marshall:   Must have been at' least 200/250 probably more.



Chief Constable:   But really we're talking about 3,000/4,000 of whom - if
                   you've got a ticket you're not in the queue are you?
Insp Sykes:         There're milling around the area where the queues are.            'At
                    one stage I tut a ccrd.cn of police horses across there          to
                    release the pressure on the actual turnstiles.



C hief Constable:   So we're putting a numb er cn it which is only a rerceotion
                    it's only somethin? we're trying to quantify.   I know its
                    how many people of that c, ^00 ^ho have got tickets is net
                    perhaps a real question but it's going to be a major
                    issue.



Insp Hand-Davies:    I was on duty in that area and I think there are things
                     which need to be said that are crucial to the e v e n t .      '
                    ’
                    |i#$uld say there were more, non-ticket holder's .the
                    f e a r e r a 1 ,00ffiind’'"that would be typical f'or"*'*’'"
                     They are opportunists, they look for opportunities to
                     pinch a ticket, to rob a ticket, to get through a
                      turnstile but the press in there was something I've never
                     ex pe rie nc ed before.     This feeling-that they push the
                     person in front to get in quicker and to go back 2 0 / 3 0 / 1 0 0
                     rows had to be seen to be believed and we were working
                     very hard to say 'look, get back' but they don't seem to
                     listen, they don't seem to have any response, they're not
                     normal in that respect.          I think that we must make the
                     point that drink played a big part.



Chief Constable:    If drink played a big part that will emerge.  When the
                    police actions were central to an issue like this the las:
                    thing we want to be seen to be doing is trying to blame
                    semeone else and I think let other people find that out.
                    I accept that completely.  Everybody's saying it and it's
                    true but it is really a question of how that's used.



Znsp Hand-Davies:   I appreciate t h a t ’s difficult now but if you police a
                    coronation with 1 0 0 , 0 0 0 people a police horse w ould go in
                    and they wo uld move for him and respond to the request.
                    These people weren't responding to any requests or
                    directions they were just intent on getting through those
                    turnstiles as quick as they could.



 nsp Sykes:         When I put the cordon of police      horses across there    to
                    relieve the pressure...



Chief Constable:    What time   did you cordon .Mr Sykes?



insp Sykes:         Across turnstiles one to 16 (shows area on plan) and they
                    were even diving under stomachs of police horses.



Chief Constable:    Hew many people when you put the cordon across what sort
                    of numbers were in Leppings Lane itself.
(At this point    someone said possibly     1,000,   d OO   at least)



Insp Sykes:            More, probably .nor e , because we closed it off to traffic
                       to reduce the mass of people.         It was virtually like when
                       the ground e m p t i e s , you'd got a mass of people there.  At
                       least 7,100/8,000.



Ch Supt Nesbit:       Coes it help to estimate how many non-ticket holders were
                      outside Leppings Lane when we lock at the actual numbers
                      who have gone through the comp ute ri se d system which
                      indicated something in the region of 1 2 ,0 0 0 / 1 2 , 5 0 0 people.



Chief Constable:      So about   1,500...



Ch Supt Nesbit:       Precisely, so we're talking In terms I would suggest if
                      there's 3 , 0 0 0 people outside and there's still 1 , 5 0 0
                      people coming in we are looking possibly...



Chief Constable:      Mind you, how many of those would be for the north stand.
                      We're talking about 14,000 f o r the west stand, we don't
                      know how manv in that s r o u D will be for the north stand do
                      we.



        Nesbit:       Again, 1 think they can tell you how many people nave gen-
                      into the north stand but also there is a dual access...



Chief Constable:      I think what we need to - this is a mathematical thing we
                      need to look at but the real situation is you have got
                      people legitimately trying to gain entry in grave danger
                      of their lives and injury ana action was taken to release
                      that and clearly it's obvious there was need that there
                      was need for action and all we're trying to assess now is
                      the other forces that that allowed into play.



Ch Supt               I can give you a figure for the north stand - 9,800 and
Duckenfield:          Mr Beal's print-out from Sheffield...



Chief Constable:       So there's another 1,300 there who could have been trying
                       to get in there.  Give me a little more so that I c a n . . .

                      W$f.ve spoken about people being injured outside Leppings
                      E $ h e ? ^ ^ P#»nybody give me any idea of how many were
                      ■irtjufe^'T^whether anybody was seriously injured?



Ch Insp Creaser:       The situation outside the section of the Leppings Lane
                       terraces standing area, the inspector there spoke to me
                       and I told him to withdraw his officers who were st ationed
                       two to a turnstile to search people coming througn.   Those
                                             c ~



                    officers were at se rious risk cf in jury.            Shortly after
                    hev W — r 3 v.‘1 z ndr awn there were six. seven people passed
                    joddly c ver ground who hadn't faint ed but who had nearly
                     alHtcG --liao 0 — •    ' es scr.e idea cf wr.ac one situation was




                            I1
                      (U
                               d i d n ’ 0 see anyone n a v m z a.Tibulance treatment but
                    here we        j: ccuo 1e cf 1 3 /i-s being ^assed o v s ” ^*,^e h e a d ^
                    t .o were sufferine from c r u s h - t y o e .




                                                        e , -* j          ~
                   and you have a ticket or.ce you're   a — l you 're looking
                   for is your place to go.   If you h  n ■"T O
                                                              cr\
                                                               '-fu a ticket
                   you're looking for a place to hide   Did any g o ay see
                   anything that happened through the tunne



Supt Greenwood:    I went round the inside cf the ground a nd the timescale I
                   can put cn it is that I went to the area of the Leppings
                   Lane terraces, walked round on the pe ri meter track and
                   when I got to the Spion Xop it was ne arly kick-off time
                   and I went to the players' tunnel.                    So the time span it
                   took me to do that I can now relate to what the situation
                   was in          Leppings Lane terracing.         it was a carnival
                   a t m o s p n e r e . In fact tnere were people, there was no
                   problem with that crowd at that t i m e , there were people
                   who were pushing a little bit in the normal way cf things
                   ana tney were naving a game witn a n g n t w e i g n t beacn bail
                   which was being flipped between supporters.                          Timescale
                   v/i.3 — Z s“ 8:t*~^d ~*ou^d a~ “ he heroines Lane uciri73.cdn.sr saw
                   o m s , n a o o y wocn e v e r y o m n e . no o r o o _ e .~s . wa-L-riea round
                   into the north stand tc the Spion Kop we'd had a p r o b l e m
                   there,          c o u l d n ’t 3 too because it was nearly kick-off time,
                   walked          round tc the players tunnel and shortly after that
                   the olayers came out.



Chief Constable:   So now when you got back to the west               stand the atmosphere
                   was still as you described it.



Supt Greenwood:    We 11, yes, that's prior to the kick-off.        When I went to
                   the p l a y e r s tunnel we had this prob lem it was the strategy
                   that was ar ranged and we knew there was going to be this
                   problems with the press and Brian Clough in terms of his
                   seat and the arrangement was that he would come out after
                   the referee and linesmen that's after the players had gone
                   onto the field and indeed after the trainers what have
                   you.    He came out after the match had kicked-off, in fact
                   we had to clear the press photographers there.         I turned
                   to one of them and said 'what are you waiting for' and he
                   said 'you know damn well what I'm waiting for, we're all
                   waiting for Brian Clough' but by that time the game had
                   kicked-off, we had to clear them off, Clou gh took his seat
                   just behind the dug-out and I went back into the entrance
                   of the tunnel, looked to my left and at that stage I saw
                   oeonle climbing over the fence in that central pen.         I
                   immediately then went round to tne scene at that stage.
                   There was. it was difficult to clearly relate in terms of
                                                                                                  <[) f» i
                         timescale but my distinct impression is that the tunnel"
                         the bad-: of the terracing was not full in other words on
                         ’•* c    q;ircic” ;nci



Chief Con; table:       That t£ie tunnel was jamm ed full of people.



Supt Greer wood:        Exactly.         The terracing was full but not at the tunnel




Chief Cons     :Oi.e:               !.D i€




Supt Greer iwocd:       Exactly.



Chief Cons                          : understand, i've lookec    at   1 0 V/   th e   pres surf
                                    ip to so many deaths.



Supt Green .wood:       Seen it before, if I can comment on that first if I may.
                        In fact if I can comment on tne Liverpool s u p p o r t e r s , I
                        think this has got to be very relevant and the problems
                        and the way my serials and inspectors are being talked on
                        in terms of the Liverpool supporters.   In 1980/31 we had z
                        similar problem.  That was the FA cup match with Wolves
                        -v- Sours.  Sours had th.6 Lsooin^s Lans snd and so ms Sours

                        they were transferred to the Leppings Lane end and as you
                        know we have the FI community constables who sit on the
                        front of those pens and it was necessary on that day for
                        us to cosn. a gats.



Chief Cons table:       Row many times during the course of a season...                    *
                              *              t            ■      t       1 .',        I   *4 ^

Supt Green wood:        It's the only time I've known it.



Ch Supt                 No,       in 1979 sir.   It's happened before          in that area.
DucKen fie i



Sgt Goddar              We have done that before sir with Liverpool and Man U and
                        they are about the only two teams.  Not necessarily FA cup
                        no rm a 1 mat che s .



Chief Cons              And the reason we've opened the gate is for the self same
                        pro olem?



Sgt Goddar              No,   when w e 'rs talking about      transferring people across.
                                                                    '   9



Supc G r e e n w o o d :   The 1 ? 3 0 / S 1 is interesting, it certainly is from          point
                           cf view because tragically it went one stage further
                           ye st erday than in 1980/81.           Certainly in 19EO/81 tne same
                           thing was apparent that people were screaming out, they
                           •■•ere tressed against the fencing, there were people who
                           had      come early, they opened the gates and on that o ccasion
                           we managed to get them out but it 'was again pressure from
                           the back and I want to make that point quite clearly that
                           i|f's an experience that I have seen before but not to this
                           extent,                    .to.. fehe_ Liverpool supporters my
                           i n j e c t o r s were briefed on the basis of' this.     Liverpool
                           supporters from my experience of them if e verything is
                           going well         then there really isn't muc h problem.    But if
                           things are         against them they turn, they are nasty, and
                           they have and this was experienced during the miners'
                           strike where there was trouble outside the Leppings Lane
                           area a Land Rover almost went over on that particular
                           occasion, and that was when some people I think were being
                           tt ra nsferred or. that day from the Spion Kop again and they
                           •were not Liverpool supporters put in another pen,            until we
                           *■,'" ^      ~       ~       \                   Y — v 3. Z. L i V r f C t t l 3 t l t t C     3 T3    3 .n t   r,*CU
                           had   rival supporters near to them was something you had to
                           witness and it was necessary to get the staffs out on that
                           occasion.    So my people were briefed cn    that basis.
                           They're okay when everything is going for them.     Nrcw I
                           made a specific comment to say that if the game goes
                           z . z c . ' T .s t       tit 6m -'Z   a 'i ll    t £ ir. t r r s s t i r , z.    1 6.1st       S3.it     tc     t-tsrr.
                           tnat         tn          terms   Gi     cs.CA^t'oun.c.        os . ^                         L.r.crc VuU-u
                           much more interest in Liverpool because of how things were
                           going with their particular league run.   And we were
                           locking and we had a plan and it was working well cn the
                           Spicn Kop becau'e we expected and did indeed get Liverpool
                           supporters on the Spion Kop and had a segregated area at
                           the top.  Now I expected that there would be more of them
                           appearing on the Spicn Kop than actually appeared.    That
                           happened last year, on that particular occasion again
                           there was a thin blue line and the only way that was
                           actually sorted out was when the officers got their staffs
                           out.  So I want to set it against that backgr ou nd of the
                           supporters and what have you.

                           I, cn reflection now, I cannot understand, I can't come to
                           terms with the fact that there must have been so many
                           oeople that we took out of there.   I cannot come to terms
                           with the fact that there were people that were dead in
                           there pressed against the fencing.   It was not evident at
                           the first arrival.  Ivhat was certainly evident on the
                           first arrival was that people were against that fencing
                           and that there was presc ,r; from the back.  The officer on
                           there, the community constable, had the gate open at that
                           stage when I got there.   There were people coming over the
                           top as well.  They did try and assist us those people as
                           well.  Setting this in the arena of, it was total mayhem.
                           Even with an ear-piece and I was wearing one, one cculu
                           not hear anything it was absolutely bananas if you like in
                           that sense.  What was clear was that the pressure was
                           coming from the back.   So there were 2/3 officers down by
                                     - 19 -



                   the gate who were trying tc get people out.         They cculd
                   net get thett out the pressure was so tight,       it was
                   different than !8C/'3i.   Sc the only way v;e      could approach
                   it was to try and get that pressure off the        back and I
                   went up onto the fencing, I dittoed up onto        the fencing

                   absolutely no response, absolutely none.  People should
                   have realised that there was something seriously wrong and
                   the people at the front were in trouble but there was no
                   reaction to that at all.



Chief Constable:   lift:i£he question of putting Liverpool at Leppings Lane,      are
                   Wif^tivolved in that decision?    AGREED - YES.



Supt Murray:       Yes.  This was discussed with Chief Supt Mole before Mr
                   Duckenfield came and the main reasons are obviously
                   Liverpool cone from the north and west and N ottingham
                   people from the south and they head for those areas of the
                   ground.  I asked Mr Mole if we could, if there was any

                   We looked at it again, we looked very carefully because we
                   were getting pressure not only from Liverpool Football
                   Club but from British Rail who wanted to bring special
                   trains from Nottingham into the W a d s ley Bridge station
                   rather than Liverpool because there were more passengers
                   for this.        The “ air. treble" that ve had exactly the same
                   fixture last year and last year Liverpool had the Leppings
                   Lane and the north stand and Nottin gha m Forrest the other
                   two sides of the ground.          We were of the opinion that if
                   we tried to change it round, even got over the logistical
                   problems of changing it round, the people 'would come to
                   exactly the same place as last year, park in the same
                   p l a c e s , head for the same p u b s , and we would have had too
                   muc h ...



Chief Constable:   We were involved in the decision and the reason that went
                   behind it is the reason just put forward.  AGREED - YES.



                   Right, I think. I've got enough of a feel of the thing to
                   be able to talk it through.   Is there anything anybody
                   wants to say about it?



Ch Supt Nesbit:    I think one thing has to be said sir, I got there, Mr
                   Greenwood was there and it's fair to say Sergeant Gutcher
                   and Sergeant Morton had to physically climb over bodies,
                   they were four or five deep against the fence and the only
                   way we got the pressure off was because they went to the
                   back and started to pull bodies from the back and then
                   they eventually started to make a chain of people and were
                   cassing policemen bodies tc each one and through to get
                   them off.
Chief Constable:        How ma ny bodies were             in pen four.



(The Chief Constable then refers to the plan and points to the pen which had
^ —d ^       c *•>           ' ~ s.nd trer n o *3s ,k*~ ~ w ^ ■"s.s sc t s d slts,z s z.c d '
and cc.T_T.sr.ted cr. the fact that when. moving down the pen the reason whether yc
go left or right is immaterial because the fence is smack in the middle)



Chief Constable:        Do we know...



3gt Morton:             t||§.--.fi rst five rows in three were de £Q                   .

Supt Greenwood:         It's difficult to put this again into perspective.
                        Certainly when I got there I'm sure there were people who
                        were dead.  I'm sure cf that on reflection but we'd no
                        impact of that at ail.  I had no Impact, no.      I think in
                        terms of that there were clearly potential deaths and I'm
                        satisfied now that they must have been dead.      I've seen
                        that horrible photograph in the green paper that's been
                        printed in one of the Sunday paper's today.     I'm convinced
                        at that stage because the actual requests, going there
                        when they were actually were dead but it w a s n ’t until and
                        again timescale is difficult but an officer turned round
                        to me and said 'these people at the front are dead' and I
                        looked at them, they'd sot the srey look and they were
                          cd   c:T3.’^d.i.r~'-sr 11o .   HT
                                                          *■sv"'   5^   v ^ ’ s ’"’*
                                                                                   ’       2.p f ~   it   iln
                        terms of numbers because there must nave been people who
                        were actually underneath.  Well they were standing up but
                        there must have been people who were cn the floor as well
                        but even then the fact that w e 'a created a funnel and we'd
                        got them out I can't relate to that total ... I saw in the
                        gymnasium.



C hief Constable:      Nor can I.  Looking at the nature and the size of the
                       enclosure I just can . . .and ^iSs'ferei'e"there :desths;:.'in four?



Inso Bullas:           A lot of dead people being passed to the back of the
                        terracing.      I was in the stand looking down and I think it
                        ties in what was said at the front.      At the kick-off there
                       was definitely a consolidated push to the front.       It came
                       straight down looking at them, saw the crowd, could see
                        the people screaming at the front.      I ran to the back,
                        took seme officers down the back and when I got to that
                        t u n n e l ...



Chief Constable:        Through the tunnel?



Insp Builas:            io the tunnel at the back, in contradiction of what,H r
                        Gre enwood has said that tunn#Ip:^r6 s -packed and we were
                        trying to drag people back and then the dead...
C hief Constable:     Was          there anybody dead and injured in the tunnel?



j.nsp Bullas:         They were starting tc pass the dead people back,             there was
                      a large number cf dead people.



Chief Constable:      3 ul . really then we have a position where the terraces are
                      full and there is still a tunnel full of people trying to
                      get out.      AG REED - YES.



(Chief Constable then refers to plan regarding fence in pens             three/four and
the fact that he recollects fence being same size)



Chief Constable:       'Stere there any dead bodies in four?      When you come down
                        the tunnel in the centre of the passageway t h e r e ’s an iron
                        fence with a similar size gate, i t ’s in half.           the
                    •■’i-fa'pre s’s ions I gathered up to now is that all the d e a d ’were
                            three where the barrier went.



Supt Greenwood:       I c a n ’t tell you that. All I   can say to you is that there
                      was certainly three was where     the major problem w a s .
                      There were officers at four and clearly there were people
                      being taken cut of four.    Somehow they managed to get that
                      ^ A —;   ^    r-   ™ ^ f r~   T   ^ ^   —* — ’ •




Chief Constable:     Which fence?



Supt Greenwood:      The link fence.



Supt McKay:          Ole point whi ch may be significant i s ;some of the bodies
                                  'all'IKree" sections of their tickets w h i c h would
                     vindicate that they were the people who. went through, the...
                     ^8t¥;;fand it's unlikely I would have thought they died at
                                 ' o f that crush having gone in.



Det Ch Supt Addis    Albeit that quite a few of the injuries, facial injuries
                     indicate that these people have been 'walked on.



(There is general discussion here about Mr A d d i s ’ comment)



Ch Supt              Picking up what Mr Greenwood said and people in the
Duckenfield:         control room might add to it, it was not evident that
                     there was a problem in three at the kick-off.  There was
                     no evidence as far as I see, when you see a situation
                     developing, any crowd problems, pushing, but it wasn't
                     evident from there and I have a recollection of thinking
                     why have they let that officer opened those gates onto the
                     track?  Why have we got people going onto the track?
                      It wasn t rea_iy a long time oeiore that gate was ocenea
                      onto the track sir, because I went in through t w o , the
                      gate into pen two was open and I went in through that gat«
                      into pen two and I must have taken between 10/20 people




                      them over dragging them the top. by that time wnen it nad
                      cleared a little bit you could see I had a vision of a
                      woman's face in a pile of people and she was purple.   I

                       of the first*officers who leapt into pen three.           At that
                       time the gate still wasn't open.



[nsn Delaney:          My imp: :ss: )n sir when 1 got on the pitch wh en I hearc :he
                         ;aues t for assistance v'as not a problem w i t h the pens I
                         lougnt it was a pitch Invasion.



     White:              that's,what 1 was told when I went on the pitch, it was a
                      '•‘fii'tcb i n v a s i o n . that's what we went onto the pitch for.



Set Gutcher:           When I got into pen three sir and i was trying to give
                       'ITS  cid Wu£v 6 V 6r  could do and there was just no way
                       ;o get people out.    here were officers up on the fence
                                             the tor but the sate wasn




Chief Constable:       Will why wasn't the gate open, does anybody know why the
                       gate was open.  W h o 's got the means of opening it?



Ch Supt                The g h t e is spring loaded, you press it down and it flies
Duckenfiel             open, easy.     Maybe it caught on the hoardings restricting
                       it, I don't know I'm just throwing that it, I mean that's
                       off the top.



Chief Constable:      -Weil you've had a terrible time yesterday and certainly
                       thinking about it over the night to be involved in
                       something like that is the main difficulty you've got is
                       the feeling of not oeing ac_e to do anything about it.
                       It's just happening.



Supt Greenwood:        i'd like to say sir i f I may that, and I told Qui t e a few
                       afterwards, I think when the officers who acted there in
                       clearly extremely harrowing circumstances I was proud of
                       them.  They really worked hard.



             table:    So, where do we go from here now.     We    've got the Prime
                       Minister coming at lunchtime 1-0
                                                     w^ cro^^er
                                                           ^        wit h Dougl as H u r d ,
                       that's immateria 1 that's how they see       i t . This is the
                       oi^ssst disaster in a footba]LI ground       out side Pe r u . It's
-l1.^0 j.^ — tTiir.;*. tn 0 re t,vl_1 ce some         forr. ci   *ucic"’
                                                                       *5.^_

have taken decisions, w e 've dene things cn the basis
what we saw and what circumstances pr es ented themsel



Jt is that the drunken marauding fans, and _ thoug
this last night, contributed to this let soniebody else say
•that. D o n Tt i e " 1s be m a position wnere we are trying to
be seen to be shedding any responsibility.       We carried our
r 0 s o o n s i o i ”y y e s t e r d a y .   /<c q i c w n a t wc s a w as ssssncia-.
in order to'deal with the situation and the knock-on
effect is fate in a sense and we don't need to harrow
ourselves over it.   At the same time we've get to be
professional in the way that we pull together this
evidence and again we've go; to think about that and w e 're
here, we are central to the issues which emerg ed yes terday
and we've got to be very careful about whether we're seen
to be central in pulli:       tne CO nclusions of this toge the r
Now at the present t i m e , J ^ * - Tve answered the cue stion 5
aDGUv tii0 gazcS ana we w*  ■ere z a—Kins aoou z z n r £ e sra uc s u ' i a'

level of pressure that   C .S    u ne r e   anc. tne n a z ur 0 an d scai e
of people.    It nay be  .at w hen we 5 e t a little close r t 0
eeople who  were in the *r> a c c ma ■*-» L-o q one *-L- 0 *10^ ~a ir~>. d a. to S
                               •%
we'll get some real ic . c: the movement down that tu nne 1
into these two sections.      I don't see that there's much we

pursue i irs~ anc tc i m o out w n s t n 0 r gate o had oesn
opened.     We know gate '3' had been opened, we know from Mr
White and Mr Sykes that gate 'A' was opened as well,       so
there's no     mystery about it the real issue is the timing
and the effect cf those actions.        We've got the enquiry up
to now.     I'm just a little bit doubtful about whether we
should pursue it and that simply is a question of trying
to stand back from it see what other people might think of
it later.     We have got the Coroner's enquiry which he has
got to pursue.     The question of all the aspects we've
talked about today are matters for the Coroner ought to
know about so at this stage we will continue with the
enquiry as we wculd be conducting a Coroner's enquiry and
simply gathering all the evidence together instead of
pursuing priorities and aspects w h e r e the
r e sp onsibility/blame lies.   It will be with us for a long
time.     The most distressing and harrowing of situations
and I could see it on the faces of the officers last night
and I can still see a presence to an extent today and
that's as it should be.      We cannot accept these things
lightly.     There're not easy, they are terribly hard and
the events which follow on...      I think we're over the
worst in publicity terms given the press have had a run
and w e ’ve tried to be as open as possible yet at the same
time not give too much away.      I don't think there's much
else we can pursue at this stage but you did a good job
and I feel for you in terms cf what you have to deal with.
But it's events which are forced on us rather than sort
out.     Operational decisions are taken in tne light of
all the information available and IggflQtt n o reason to say
                                                   - 24 -



                   that those operational decisions are questionable. What
                   we've got is a situation which was properly responded to,
                   The mounted branch knowledge of e v e n t s , your knowledge of
                   events and what happened before.   We've been on that



                   with it as the professional people we are and give our
                   response in the Drofessional way that is ex cected of us.
                   T h a t ’s not to say that we don't give a true impression of
                   what we saw there that it something w e ’ve got to do.    Wha
                   ^VU. OG.lt vV-       VC    q —'W   U'-/ i"'~O “ wV _»i O.           *W C.i\*
                   r e s p o n s i b l e ' w a y , not hide it, but in terms of projecting
                   it publicly I d o n ’t think that we would be right now to
                   be talking about the animalistic behaviour of fans, the
                   level of drink.                 Whoever is looking at it overall will
                   find that without any problem.



Chief Constable:   Anything else anyone wants to say?


                                                                    -   -c> r> j   ^
                   T . .c   --- ~>
                                     lari fy all the    ial 'drsirr ate A               T. .
                                                                                           * 'S 3. — —
                   £ ’ g        2 . 25
                              £ V*           rp]   was s o ms s ^ ■ gh t;/ s o m
                                                      T 1p 0 r-»a                O T C ffic
                   coming fr om 5 tocksbridge t nro ugh Cughti bri dg e but that was
                   c ° a i n 1 v cle area by ^oi; or cy clist just be fo T6 2 . - 0 pm.
                           DE-BRIEF WIT H SUPER VIS OR Y OFFICERS
                     D E PLOYED AT LEPPINGS LANE ON 15 A PRIL 1989

                   HELD IN LECTU RE T H E A T R E , POLICE H EAD QUARTERS
                 BETWEEN 4.00 P M / S .40 PM WED NE SDA Y 19 APRIL 198=




Present:

Deputy Chief Constable (Chairman)
Superint en de nt Gr eenwood
Chief Inspectors Creaser and Waring
Inspectors Bennett, B u l l a s , Darling,   Delaney,   H a n d - D a v i s , Purdy and Sykes
Sergeants




The below Is a precis of the notes       taken.




TUNNEL CONTROL

It is possible that a spectators' rush through the tunnel impacted into the
back cf densely packed standing spectators and caused a surge which resulted
in the disaster.

One police witness (Sgt          | says that £i®6B three and four were filled       by
2,-00 pm. An ot her witness (Supt Cfps&wood)        that f p p p e n s at this time
were not tightly p ack ed and   refers to a spectator climbing into the West Stand
and then out again into the crowd.

One officer (Insp Bullas) in the West   Stand   looking down over pens three                     and
four saw a crowd surging In   both pens which   went forward but didn't come                     back
and remembers hearing about this time the whistle blown and a roar of the
crowd to indicate the start of the game.

Within minutes of the tragedy the tunnel was clear.
found in the tunnel but casualties were ev acuated this way.  The same police
witness (Sgt       ) who after the tradegy mov ed from the track through the
tunnel found that spectators there, including police officers, were completely
unaware of what had occurred.

There is nothing in the op erational order nor at the briefings                about
contingency for police protectiori^sf the tunnel to restrict or                prevent
spectator entry.  Officers r em emb er ed (particularly Chief Insp             Creaser) that
in previous years the above has been done by the use of horses                 and static
police lines (referred to as Supt F r e e m a n ’s policy).



COMMUNICATIONS

There was general comment that because of crowd noise on occasions                   it was
impossible to use the radio even "with ear pieces.

There was further comment that the normal mode on these occasions                   is   ’talk
t h r o u g h ’ which can soon over loa d the system.
There was specific comment by more than one officer that circa 2.00 pm
t r an smission became impossible due to loud i n t e r f e r e n c e .

.oug h a n e r s ver< U S 6 msiae t n
                                    He    rend t o   effectively   appeal   for   calm.
Greater use of these as a contingen          no i        considc



MOUN TE D

Deployment

Five    de ployed at 11.00 am (under control of Sgt         1. Eight more arrived
with    the train s pectators at circa 2.15 cm making a tcial of 13-   A b ou nd
2.30    pm following a request for assistance more (number unknown) wS£re d e p lo ye d
from    behind the South Stand.   (Insp H and-Davis in charge from 2.15 pm).

General Comment

The crowd refused to respond to the persons on horses ( u n i q u e ). From 2.15 pm
onwards the crowd was so densely packed that the horses had diffic ul ty or
could not get in and those in became so jammed that the riders feared any
move me nt w o ul d cause injury and one horse was p hysically lifted by the crowd
(un i g ue )

Mo u n t e d officers' opinion is to effec tiv el y deal wi th that situation it would
have r equired poss ibl y 10 times the deployment of horses used.




TURNSTILES

Normally entry to the North Stand is through turnstiles one to six and from
Pen!stone Road.  On this occas io n Penistone Road turnstiles were closed, and
Leppings Lane turnstiles one to nine fed this area.

No r ma ll y entry to the Wist Stand seating and terracing is through turnstiles
seven to 16 and 'A' to ’G '.     On this occasion only turnstiles 10 to 16 and 'A'
to" 'G' were used.

There was general feeling that far too few turnstiles were used to fe ed these
areas when crowd capacity was      this high.

Ticket touts were seen near Vere Road selling tickets          for other entrances        -
purchasers using these at Leppings Lane entrances.

From 11.30 am onwards a crowd amassed outside the turnstiles composed of
non-ticket and ticket holders who were not wishin g to enter the ground at that
time and mounted officers had to clear away.

Selected turnstiles opened at 11.30 am.         By 1 2.^0 pm all the turnstiles had
ODe ne d a n d orderly queues formed - these soon extended b a c k as far as Leppings
Lane.       No significant problems.

Circa 2.15 pm - around the time the train contingent arri ve d -
lost, the spectators merge and become solidly packed outside the turnstiles.
Queues never re-formed.
                                           -   3   -




Officers are outside the turnstiles checking re. offensive weapons,
drunkenness, etc., but their duties never interrupted the maxim um throughput
flow.

Se co ndary S ea rching Inside

This o pe ration became   impossible   circa 2.15 Pm due to crowd density.

Throughput Problems

a.      Non-ticket holders;
b.      Wrong tickets;
c.      A t t e mp ted unlawful entry - climbing over etc.;
d.      C ro wd compaction;
e.      At some point turnstile 'G' becomes jammed due tophysical distortion
             caused by pressure (Sgt             ) (u n i q u e ) ;
f.      At tem pt ed corrup tio n atxfcurnstiies•
g.      A point may have been reached towards the end wi th turnstiles  being
             freed.




MATCH DELAY

If spectators had been informed that the match was to be delayed this may have
re duced their frustration.

One officer (Chief Insp C r e a s e r ) >ttsing police Land Rover radio requested that
consideration be given to delaying start of the match.




MANPOWER     (FOOT)

Ma npower deployed at the ground from circa 11.00 am:-

        a.   outside the turnstiles and into Leppings          Lane - four
             serials and supervisors;

        b.   inside the turnstiles - 2i serials initially, reinforced
             by a further serial (Insp Delaney/Sgt Higgins) circa
             2.45 pm at Gate *A '.

Plus    13 mounted officers   (see   'Mounted'     section).




CROWD BEHAVIOUR

The crowd started entering the ground at 11.00 am.  By 12.30 pm queues were
forming but were orderly.  The queues over time extended all the way back to
Leopings Lane but no problems experienced.

By 2.15 pm the queues were lost and spectators were now packed outside the
turnstiles in large numbers extending back to the perimeter gates in a solid
mass.   The train contingent arrived and spectators were entering the ground
in an injured and distres se d condition.
                                          -    4   -




By 2 . 3 0 pm the si tuation is wor sening - 3,000/4,000 crowd (some officers sees
this as low figure).      Despite the continuous entering of spectators into the
ground the c^owe outside tne turnstile area increases as fans in large numbers
continue to arrive from along Leppings Lane in both d i r e c t i o n s .

One o f f i c e r ’s (Chief Insp Creaser) description   "...like a video of fans
leaving the g round played backwards...".

The above s ituation continued more or less up to the start of the game at
3.00 pm, relieved at times when gate openea.     The crowd pressure is such that
turnstile  G   is di storted and oacame inoperable.  Also believe wall adjacent
to the river is shifted 5" out of line.

Large scale drunkenness is evident.           Spectators are attempting to take alcohol
into the groun d in large quantities.

The crowd at times is ve ry frustrated, hostile, and mjs§:iles are thrown at the
p o l i c e .- Man y sp«s3tator*'Completely ignoring police d l ^ H i o n s “tunTqlie). On
one o ccasion when one pe rimeter gate was closed and a'line of horses were
across the road the spectators forced their way between horses legs.




SE QUENCE OF O P EN ING OF THE GATES

One officer (fiisp Bennett) states that he arrived at gate 'A' inside the
ground and the stewards were making sure the gate was secure.   Fie described
the scene as chaotic with officers being urged to get people through the
turnstiles as quickly as possible.

That same officer then climbed onto the roof of the turnstiles and saw the
crowd was tightly pacxed, no-one coula move and pfeople were being crushed.

bgt Morgan said he went through gate ’C r with Insp White and started to pull
people out who were p u s h e d up against the metal barrier leading to the South
Stand.   A                 w e r e pessLsting.-any attempts to rescue them because
they w oul d lose their place in the ’q u e u e s ’.

Sgt iMorgan also said gate " C 1 was the first to open and it was opened at .least
twice.   He said on the occasion when the gate was first opened, just before it
was opened he saw Insp Bennett in the area behind the turnstiles and when he
got outside Insp Bennett was on the turnstile roof.

Insp Delaney said about 2.40 pm he was at the area between the Spion Kop and
the North Stand with his serial when he received a message to go to Leppings
Lane.  He d eployed the serial at gate ’A', went to gate ’C' and that's when he
heard a radio message to open the gates.   He went round and saw gate 'C' open.
He assisted to pull people through.   A number of people  entered the ground
before the gate was closed.   He then looked across and gate  'B' opened.

Sgt Burns said that gate 'B 1 was opened by two uniformed officers,         there was a
massive rush and the gates were then closed.

Insp Bennett thought it was about 2.45 pm when he climbed onto the roof of the
turnstiles.

Insp Purdy said he saw Insp Bennett climb onto the roof and gate          'B' opened
five to 10 minut es after that.
                                          - D -




Sgt Higgins was the sergeant in charge of Insp Delaney's serial deployed
inside gate 'A' and it was definitely 2.40 pm when he got there.    Insp Bennett
was not on the turnctiles roof,  JHflP1       fas at gate 'A' about 10/15
minutes taking abuse from people about tne crowd outside.   He §6'dked into the
turnstiles and three people were stuck in the area where one should pkss
through. That was like that for some considerable time and this was because
the pressure was     so great one person could not enter the turnstile alone.

Ihsp Sykes said it was about 2.50/2.55 pm when he was outside and gate 'A'
opened and hundreds went through.

                          hfv- ^ Atiwre about:2.50/2.55 anssi,,.ths.t:,,^e;;opeairig of
that" gate -(1A 1) appeared to make a terrific difference in releasing the
pressure outside.

Sgt
o§ened,vthere is going to be serious injuries and possibly iossr
riieivetf a reply to the effect that "if that is the case open the"gate .
                                                                         mmK
             said that at 2 .5 0 /2 . 5 5 pm he radioed and said "if the gate isn't
                                                                               and

First of all the steward w o ul d not open the gate and after a few more minutes
his officers assisted in opening that gate.     He added that during the
preceding 10/15 minutes the gate had been bouncing and it looked as it if was
going to come off the wail.

Insp Sykes went     through that gate.

It was agreed that it was a negative rush through gate          'A'   in terms of the
happenings on the West Stand terracing.

                 fas at the perimeter fence further up Leppings Lane. He did not
see gate      'A' open and there were still many supporters outside turnstiles 'A'
to    'G '.

Insp Purdy said that gate 'C' was opened a second time but was unable to
supply an exact time or sequence In relation to the opening of the other
gates.

               -believes that the numbers 'going through gate ' C     were not massive.

Towards the end it seems m m r - likely-all three gates wereopened.         This
M v e resulteW-from the rafessage from force contro^fa|f«St3^(ii&|*’fiigfins,




RECOMMENDATIONS RE.      PUBLIC SAFETY

 1.     Co nsideration should be given to flfe‘
                                              ater use of loud haliers.

 2.     Suggestion made that all the ppftfftlles-               "and replaced with
        a semi-circle of new ones.  There are gaps in the area where the
        turnstiles are currently and this is where people are getting crushed and
        trapped.

 3.     At niBMnal matches entry to the North Stancl i s i f e a g a ^ ^
        six aftl’Ilso access via"Penistone Road.       15-^.§9 Penistone Road
         turnstiles were closed lOtid only turnstiles one to nine used.      JRtfcrSs
         insufficient.
                                          -   6   -




       At normal matches entry to the West Stand is by way of turnstiles seven
       to 16 and 'A' to 1G ' . On 15 • -S 9 only turnstiles 10/16 and ’A' to 'G'
 VJ1




       Poor siting and insufficient numbers of indicator boards showing the
       routes to the stands and terraces.

 6.    Design of tickets very poor - they were ail the same type of print and
       would have benefited from being colour coded to match the indicator
        boards (at 5- above).

 7-    Many of the supporters en-rcute to the West Stand tended to go via the
        tunnel.  Sug gestio n was made that as an alternative in future the tunnel
       be closed thereby making supporters go round to the Stand via both sides
        and easing conjestion in the tunnel.

 8.    No- incentive for crowd to get to ground early - pre-match entertainment
       could be provided.

 9.    More horses   to be deployed at big capacity gafites than on 15.4.89.

10.    Re. timing o f the mat ch - woirld have been good idea to hol d game on
       Sunday morning thereby pubs/off licences being used less by supporters
       before start of game.

11.    Suggestion made that pubs near to the ground should have been closed
       prior to the m atch on 15-4.89 but general feeling re. this was that if
       near-by pubs had been closed supporters would simply visit licenced
       premises further afield.

12.    Suggestion made that there is no need for the fencing on the terracing
       which forms the actual pens.

13-     Suggestion made re. the removal of the wall which leads from the r«t§?,vof
        tSe West Stand to the rear of the turnstiles allppfihg-greater freedom in
       “the area of the West Stand terracing.

14 .   Suggestion made that in future ^’
                                       f o r m ation of queues would benefit   from
       being like those used in Post Offices.

15.    Suggestion made that lay-out of the ground is not conducive to a large
       cfowd, therefore we have always had problems with people securing entry
       into the ground.  Because of this the police have had to do too much
       stewarding re. which turnstiles suocorters go through.
NOT:    OF                     ,D ON MONDAY           APRIL



CC - Need to es tab li sh how the build-up of s? ectators occurred outside
Leppings Lane, why it occurred, ana was tnere any asoecc of policing that
caused the build-up.

Loz at 2.17 on shows a request                    for ^eppirgs ^ane to oe c_Gsec. cecause or              t.te



CC - Were we searching oeoole                    - were we hindering the flow 01 pecp-Le.'

Marshall      - No     searching outside           from that time o n w a r d s .

CC - O u r vi ew       is that the turnstiles cope w i t h the volume of                    people.

Murray's perce pt ion - 2.30 pm north stand about half full; 4/5,000 people to
go into there.    West stand was quite full - centre two pens filling.  Sti_i
auite a bit of room at Leppings Lane.    Majority would have to go into the
north stand - 8 turnstiles and the other 15 service the West Stand and the
Lepoi.ngs Lane terrace, fitere were a lot of people who, had to go through the
north stand through the     turnsfiles.




CC - What is the total number of people that would be approaching Leppings
Lane to get into the West Stand and North Stand jointly?  Almost 2 4 ,000.

CC - First       ingredient that led us down the path was                      the fact    that given the



CC - How many people were in the ground at 2.30 pm.  At 2 . j Q                            pm we are told
that a gats man on his own initiative opened the gate there.                                Do any police
officer know anything about that?

McKay - PC Rich.

CC - We need to identify police officers around gate 3.                                Should be able to do
that    from our deployment plan.

CC - 17, 13, and 19 are the serials that were                        there.         S omebody amongst   them
must have known what was happening then.

CC - This was entirely outside police direction but it gives an indication
that the steward had recognised the probl em that caused him to take action.

McKay - Not taken statements from anyone.        Interviewed the PC yesterday -
about 2.30 pm the steward was concerned about the press on gate B.        On his own
initiative the steward opened the gate.        PC estimates aoout 50? people went
through but the D r o o l e m was then that tnose inside were passing their tickets
over the wall and under the gate.

CC - What time was             the radio down?          Were you receiving spasmodic
communication?

 'ur” ay - Several messages came m          'we cannot read y o u , Dreading up at
 ’o n t r o l " . Before we could ring the communications officer who was at the
 r..„n a s ,:     he t.;rnea u o . He had been listening to the radio and knew there
 v a5 so m 0 z i n ^ v.’t o n 'Z v/1 1 n i z .   -—            ^   o - —.   / cm.
                                            ccrnmunic




CC   - How did we get the message over to open the gate?

Murray - Pass ed over personal radio,

CC - It seems to be an area for a great deal ox"' investigation as to now and by
whom the gates at Leppings Lane were opened.

Duckenfield - Conscious cf the fact that messages being asked to open the gate
and in the process of discussing the options the gate burst open and people
went     through.

CC - Let us see if anybody knows what was going on there.

McKay - Series of photographs which show the iacx of pressure                                      that tne gate
was under.

               —              Gate not norma.L_y uncer oressure                  oecause 01          oamer          ^na^ acpsrai/Ss
gates A and 3.

r "* —   'i.-'vsr,,'';:   f       Z ~ ZLZ    i5 a   UG      sT2.” 6   wclHt    Oj6ri6G.   3.1? 6   >c? -   C -cET   3.^

th_s stage.   There was a demand to do something about the prob le m outside and
there was a reauest and a requirement for that gats to be opened.     It is
immaterial about the chain of command.     How and why does not seem to matter,
the number of times does,       'Ifcvel of control has got to be thought about,
h'as there any attempt once the pressure had gone to control people going m .
How many people who should have been in the north stand swept into the other
stand we will never know.

CC - Rfc: gates between pens 4/5 and 2/-3-                    Du ckenfield said the gates were open
and Nesbit said they were shut.

Nesbit - The gate on the top of the fence that runs right angles to the pitcn
was closed when I got there.

CC - Whose responsibility is it to open the gates?

Mole     — Inspector i/c of the sector who has a padxocK k e y , and it is checKeo
before       the match that the gates are open.

CC - We need to be able to say who opened it.  f e d ' t o determine wheth er 'the
g^tes were opened or closed and be able to supply the identity of the
individual who had the responsibility.

Mole     - Inspector White always works                  the Leppings         Lane   terraces.         C on vin ce d he
would have unlocked it.
CC - Go back, to the control inside                the tunnel.     Whose responsibility is it
there to divert people         - anybody?

Duckenfield - Insoeccor Wrii.ce wita serials                     and 1 3 .   Soecii^c ins L.rjc^iOns
on the Order ax phase         1.




                                     _r.3DcCs.w_        a-v
                                                          _
                                                          <




an arres:

Tod   of the tunnel solia witn iiorsss - tnat procedure nc.ppcjsg.d ias*, ysai .

CC - Was there any element of that control put in the Order?

CC - Unicue situation.  The factor that encourages me is that we have a team
of officers who have sssn and done it all beiore.  Your experience is wide.

M 0 j_p - Selected the officers          for various duties        in the- knowledge that tney hac
the knowledge.

CC - Other area cf controversy is planning.

;,r0 io _        bv the ground, can we deal with a semi-final and how would we
deal with it. " He explains the manner of allocation.     FA prepared to accept or
r'.~>t    Aocroaches from Liverpool for a change . Could we reconsicer a llocation
- no way.     -og-s^Co      ^e . t . i i . ^ ,




-CC (0oj ) - I went into the control room about 2.20 pm.  n v e r y t m n g seemeo. to c
~o inc al"i~ht.  There were not many of the Liverpool fans in at that stage but
that°is~not unusual.   They usually leave it until the last minute.         Went to
~’
 "e directors entrance - no more crowd than u s u a l .

CC - Is it true that they come at the last minute.  Why is it with the same
crowd, the same factors, what happened this year to change it?  2 .1 ? closing
Leopings Lane.       What    is the unknown factor?

McKav - Whilst we thought we had learned from a good match last year, the
Liv--oooi'supoorters have also learned - vulnerability of this area - and
decided to come in force.   Ce rtainly we didn't have the same situation as last
year when during the last five minutes the drunken rowdies turned up.    For a
sno-’t neriod the turnstiles can cope.   This year there were far more people.

CC - Issue     to address our minds              - same ingredients,     same crowd,   same   c^ubs,
 same    factors,   same   level of policing          - all gone    sour.

 Mole    - Co ventry v. Leeds match two years ago put back 15 minutes because ot
 tne same problem.

 Mole    - Sheer weight of numbers was extreme                in my view.     Where did it all come
 from.

 c-^ _ p'-^ose of the meeting - not                sitting back,    need to keep    talsmg    aoout    it.
Nesbit - I don't know where the crowd came from.   I travelled Penistone Rc
Halifax 'Road to Parson Cross and back - 2.25 pm no mass of supporters.

CC - Division     to try and e sta bl ish where the crowns             came from causing the
build up w hic h flooded d c v m .



to one grou.no and now many w^rc                             .

McKav - Not: a mass ~ r r i v a _ . inere was a_ways going to           c . :U C . C O CL________ __


one las" tew minutes as _as^ vcar.         ..ar.. _.e iuc^ o   --- .
were already choked and had been for some tome.              Appea re d to oe iitt-s or no
movement throusrn tne t u r ns oi_es .

CC - Probl em at 2.14 pm - Leppings             Lane closed at 2.17 pm.

Marshall - Message didn't immediately get through.                     Vehicles still coning by
the roundabout and probl em with service D u s e s .

Ods   — -What was done from about 2 .it onwards outside                to ^ry and a~j_evic.te tne
problem.

                                  de to deal with 1.1 .

Duckenfield - From the video it didn't lock too bad when Roger asked for
Leooings Lane to be c-ossd.  Rememoer seeing traif_c flowing on Leppxnga Lane
and'a bus having difficulty in getting through.

         —            ResDonsibie       for tne 1o £ — nooning a i ^e r       .u _ pm,   co.i u ^ n ^ .■< w n,y .

Marsnail     - Soecoaoors         shepherded towards      tne turnst~__es.

pr* — i;1C« C '.VG.^c- p
                       CL n ^ —a n a.iU
                                    d   w"n^~ we^e we coins: to address -t - we seemec to



Marshall - The practice             is to get people      into tne ground as quxcsxy as
Dossioie     to stop tr.em l 0 i~er_ng.

CC    - pT’gssu ” s and oroblems around the turnstiles ana we seem m                     terms ot
responding     to t h a t . ...

Nesbit - P & told me that the p r oble m with the turnstiles was that fans from
Liverpool were getting into the area of the turnstiles, getting to the bar and
had no tickets, and were then bartering and offering money to get in.      Police
officers were trying to get into the crowd to pull those blokes out.

CC - Can we get hold of that evidence.

Mole    - Same problem last year.            P u o n c i t y to say d o n ’t come   n   you haven     u got
 a ticket.

 Marshall - Instructions to the Inspectors at the checking points and
 Tanke rsl ey and Oughtibridge to ce vigorous aoout cnecKing tne tickets.
 Dilemma if half have tickets ana na_:               aon t.
D u ck enf ie ld - No          ticks- situation clearly sec out in the press - d o n ’t
you haven't got a              ticket.      Spoke on Radio      Trent and Radio Merseyside,
co Liverpool and               Nottin gha m fsr notice to he put in official programme
~ ~~        ~~                 “ *'••£ w 1.~ ~ vC P.£” EC-5 S .

Marshall - My exrerier.ee is that yc„ get a press of people in tne last 10
minutes - imp ortant to set people into the ground before the last 11 minutes.
                 ^-nc s~            C"r'f'i-Cwi*s v « * c c h s r*d ir . sr c s o c l . ^ s.1.1 trie t i i r . c . Hot
sunny d a y , st a-ting  a r o u n d .  people    nc- mov: :g.

CC - Significant factor - that                          type    cf individual getting to tne turnstiles
and clogging up the system,

Nesbit - Which gate was the moun te d officer across - pressure on him?

CC - Across gate               ’C ’ .

Duckenfiela - What action aid we take about the build up at the ground.
R e co llection of looking at the crowd situation on the terrace and thinking its
building uo.     Put out a tannoy message for people to disperse.  Car with
loudhailer.

Marshall - Message broadcast but people                                could not hear.

CC - what message was he sending cut?

Marshall - Tannoy about tne turnstiles to get people to stop pushing.  Also
asked control to send Mike Buxton? in the landrover with a double PA system
which we use at matches.

.'iCr.iV ~                 .-6S S 5.5c C u . "•

Ms.’’’ s h s .— 1   “ 'Asni i n ~ o     t r. s   crov/c ~c   slsk p - s c p —^ z o   stop   pusnm s.

Duckenfield - 2.45 pm approx. consider delaying the kick-off because or the
situation.  There was an assessment tnat we should get these people' i n .
Whilst considering delaying kic k- off the teams came out. If last push came at
2 . 5 0 pm when the teams came out...

CC - Which came               first?

Marshall - Never saw gate B open.

CC - Sykes?             said A .and 3 were open.

Marshall -             1A ’ not significant.

Marshall - Attemot being made to storm the gate and the gate was being shaken
vigorously.  Not worried because they c a n ’t go anywhere under the north stand.

Marshall            - Concern about injuries                 from     being pressed up against         the gate.

Duckenf ield - When you sent the message Roger, I responded, I thought there
was also a message from somebody in difficulty - give us permission to open
tne gate or i t ’s going in any way \gate A).

Marshall            - That was me.               There were people          climbing over the parapits.
numbers of people who cannot see over the heads.

Mole   - ‘"What did we do about the tunnel and people seeing it and going for ii

Murray - Total lack of information,        apart from Mr Marshall's information.

Mole   - Somebody has agreed to open gate C.         What we have done      to accommodate
opening    'C '.

Murray - A lot of people in the centre pens.

DCC - Who is opening ana closing gate         'C?

Stewards    out policemen are m e r e .

CC - (looking at p h o t o g r a p h s ) It was not open at 14.53.   14.52 clearly show:




DCC - After you had the steel        gates closed was it tnen you sai
pressure a w a y .

Marshall - Gate C was ooenea ana tnen tns mounted closed oil              th
gates.  Perimeter gates under attack and snakeru
flcc.
Ops - That barrier was broken ana wants looking at.

                                                                        T»C to mee           t.
Mole - If we opened gate A and exp; :uSC 3. -US n , mo oil ised off ice
the same question is going to be a =    about gat e C.

Murray - Nobody ever said open gat;        A , D , Ui. — requ e s t for Op en the ocr'a*-*te ,
ooen the sate" - no specific gate.         Gace C came •~\’"'iO and the o    vi a s shu t




Duckenfield - The Order has o f f i 1        1-Is ted, and once that ce air al tun nel
becomes full the officers concro           tai and it is shut off an d pe 0 0 le d.ire cted
oil to the wings.

                                           ' the experie nee they will St ill have the
                                           :he Order?  M'r Whi te when bri.e fing his team
wiii as part 01      the oriel m g   ;      the event of etc?


Duckenfieli - Briefings were j             :d :for Friday morn ing in the no r z h 3 Z 3.nd .
                                           ind looked at t*'"l.p problems      c,.ery
Serials walked around the gan;
Surerintendent took his men ai             :h e ■t>- 1   ‘d poi need c ut : an.d talk:ed
through the problems.

hole       - Significant to know v/hen the perimeter ga.,es were                                                                       c_oseu.

ICC    - 2.-; on Roger asking for tne                                                gates        to fcs opened,

CC -       u n d e rsta n d            the       b u s in e s s        a b ou t      tn e    lo g     out i t        is          a   f a c t o r          th a t som ebody           is
g o in g     to   make             so m e th in g       of.            Not    c r i t i c i s i n g     i ."Urray         .< .




CC - For Leppings Lane we have a series of photographs which in themselves are
good enougn for the log as to what is happening.            Whilst    the north stand
o r o b l e m was recognised, the p r ob le m assoc iat ed wi th gate C and the opening of
gate C and the control of movement of people once they were going tnrougn gate
C, there was no action taker, on tnat.           You were well aware that there were
contingencies to deal with the filled stand, i.e. tne shutting ofx oi t-he
tunnel.

Marshall - Inspector White was believed in difficulties througn the
turnstiles.  Inspector Bennett climbed over tne tcp of the parapit. Inspector
Bennett asked for additional serials because he could see the problem.

Eight serials deployed at 2.50 pm.

CC - It dees not mean                                that we should not be seeking                                        to find the evidence and
—          eruuirv            uc iu.        Ii: fi ;ulcia.5  or "ce zr+6     - Sceir.g o.ic
gaze^en - people w i z h c u z z i c k e z s crying to get inoo the ground etc.

             ^             ^                 n ^         ^^~ hs rs ?


      c *■   —     c r ^       0       ^ ~   0     2.0 3 O    CU       3 6 C U r          6 V 1 U 6 P. C S 5 , n C    S9 u                  Uu                ; uc i   —. i C i. j
  _^         __ ____               ^                               ^                                        ; r      TVO         Zi.ZZl.-z         'n t      c-VtT.    t    t S .:l 5 T.

statements.  So far as tne enquiry team is concerned - set down your
recollections over the next few days.  We should be doing that with officers
at     the game. Prepared a                                  proforma              to a.i officers.

CC     -Verv           sood ooir.t - all office"s at the game                                                to      make records                           of their
re collect i o n s .

McKay        - Any other area _ should oe taking action?

CC - Paint the cloture of what was taking place in the first instance -
i dent if v those officers in the area - ass the c:i icers to pui_ together ^..ei~
recollections not only in terms of what they did but what they saw.

Mole         - Value of stewards                             being seen.

      - Need to be doirs  nouse~to-ncuse enquiries, puos, e.mou_ance                                                                                             men e.^.
Should get early contact with whoever is running the enquiry.

CC - Identify the oersons wno were on tnat turnsti~e and ask L-ne ques^^on what
were vour perceptions of it, capture t n a t , and direct the attention oi the
enquiry team.

McKav - Should we be circulating Merseyside asking                                                                    for officers who were at
 the club?

CC - The enauiry team will clearly do that (see the injured persons).  Rather
    the emiiiry" team see the injured people. Need to pull out the evidence
                                                -   3   -




and attitude of people       in Wadsl ey and Leppings Lane.

     •'.ay - We do need to secure the evidence o: tne s^ewarus.
     ig Lock and Basil Jones should have the names of stewards.

        On the Leppings   Lane terrace,     you can go in any pen can't you?

          Certain turnstiles     filter to the left and others              to the

CC - No control where people go inside                  the ground.

Addis    - What he would like to do but don't                 feel it prudent until somebody in
West
Merse_                      .mportan
e q u i p m e n t , ana to use their indexes.       We should be getting on with that.

D u ckenfield - Computer printout        situation.   Is it right and proper that we
seek the information before the          enqui ry team comes.  it would heip us to know
what the printouts      say at 2.-5 etc.

Mole - ? has them locked in his safe.

CC - How many people in pen number 3?

ncdis - Health ana Safety Executive nave got cracking on wnat tney neea to a o .
Don't want H i 3 to dig up the barriers and take them away.  They have carried
out some stress tests and one barrier removed.

CC    - Has no indication of 'where      the deaths and            injuries occurred.

Nesiit    - Ben 5 ^description of scene             - couies     - uest etc./

Addis - There is nothing in the tunnel to indicate which way the spectators
should go, it is a matter of choice.  Clear from the damaged barrier In pen 3
indicates that is the main area and agree with Mr Nesoit that it was not a
sudde.: surge   from    the back.

CC - We are in no way seeking to interfere in any way with the enquiry but
simoiy the problem of running SYF and policing events in the future.  We need
this type of discussion and to know what actually happened.  The focusing of
evidence that will assist in this is our problem and we cannot ignore it.
Identify and feed into the system.

McKay - Report to the Coroner has to be                     done by us.

Addis    - It is a sudden death 9 + times.

McKay - Had assumed responsibility for Coroner's enquiry but due to aspects
arising from the meeting will leave that to Mr Sleath.

CC - What is the nature of the enquiry?    The enquiry is the gathering of
evidence.    The judicial review which is going to beannounced today is going
to review the evidence that is gathered and if we leave it to West Midlands     to
provide the evidence we might not get the    broad scope of evidence flowing in.
•■•e have to be the authors of most of the information fed in. We have to be
active and find the areas where the eviaence can oe round.
                                     _   3   _



CC - How are we going to organise this.     identify the turnstile people and
w h e n we have names see the people concerned.
