                                                                                        /
RICHARD ANTHONY MARPLES
                                                                                    T
POLICE SERGANT 1203
                                                          /
CLAYWHEELS LANE TRAFFIC DIVISION



I am a Police Sergeant in the South Yorkshire Police, at present stationed

at Sheffield Road Traffic Division, Claywheels Lane, Sheffield.

I have over 14 years Police Service.

During   the   weekend of Friday      1*1 April and Monday 17 April   1989, I was

between postings, transferring from Woodseats sub-division and the Traffic

Section.

As such it was my weekend off and on Saturday 15 April 1989, I was weekly

leave, working at a football special duty, due to take place at Hillsborough

Football Stadium Sheffield.

I had for some time previous been aware of the duties I was to undertake on

 that date and was in possession of a briefing sheet, setting out my basic

 duties and time of briefing and listing the officers deputed to my serial.

 (Serial 8).    These officers, all



 1.               PC   411 Bellamy

 2.               PC    41 Walmsley

 3.               PC 2975 Woodcock

 4.               PC 1123 Thornhill

 5.               PC   145 Tew

 6.               PC 3122 Andrews

 7.               PC   265 Fletcher

 8.               PC 1267 Lougher

 9.               PC 3200 Grey

 10.              PC 2656 Yardy
The match to be played was the FA Cup Semi-final game between Liverpool and

Nottingham Forest, kick off at 3-00 p.m.

A   full   briefing   was     commenced    at   10.00 a.m.   the   same date    and all my

officers were present at it.

Immediately after this briefing, my serial were instructed to take a meal,

and to be present on specific points at 10.45 a.m.

The duties given to my serial on that day was to Police the Spion Kop, with

emphasis on the raised section of the Kop, which was to house the 250 or so

Liverpool supporters, who were believed to have bought tickets in Nottingham

for this area which was specifically designated for sole occupation of Notts

Forest fans.

The Spion Kop at Hillsborough stadium will hold about 22,000 persons when

full to capacity and this was to be the situation on that date.

Together with my serial, I took up position on the Kop at the above time and

saw that Police Sergeant 752 Batty and his Serial                  (Serial 7) were there

also.

A short time after, we were joined by Police Inspector Calvert, who was to

be the Serial Commander.            Inspector Calvert further instructed both myself

and Police     Sergeant     Batty     as   to his   specific policing    requirements    and

reiterated to me his desire to maintain strong presence at the raised corner

section of the Kop where both rival supporters would come into contact with

each other.

This duty was given over to me and my serial, which was to be reinforced, as

and when the need arose.

Sometime     after    11.15    a.m.    Police    Superintendent     Greenwood   the   Ground

Commander, came to where the serials had gathered and spoke further to us,

firstly outlining the arrangements of the day and indicated to us in general

of the violent propensity of the Liverpool fans.

The entire serial and I were in no doubt as to the nature of our duties on

that date and each Constable had in turn been briefed by myself as to their
                                               -   3   -




specific role.

As the build up towards the match commenced, I left half of the serial to

man the point at the raised section and with the brief that only Liverpool

supporters were to have access.

The remaining officers patrolled the ramps giving entry to the Kop area.

Whilst    undertaking      this    duty,   a       large    number   of   Liverpool     supporters

covertly made themselves known to me and the officers and requested that

they be directed to the Liverpool section and they were guided in this

direction.

After a short time the Kop began to fill up and the general bustle of the

area increased and with it came the attendant problem, of rival fans being

separated only by a line of Constables.

I saw several groups of Liverpool supporters, much the worse for drink, jeer

and taunt at the far larger Notts Forest contingent.                         As a result several

ground ejections were made immediately by my serial officers.

On seeing this the undesireable Notts Forest element assembled close by, and

the situation changed to one of difficulty.

I then saw several Police Officers from Sergeant Batty's serial eject about

five     persons   from    these   Notts   Forest          supporters,    and    as   a result   the

situation quietened for a short time.

Throughout this time the crowd was building within the kop and it was fast

approaching a capacity situation.                  Entry and exit from the immediate area

began to get harder, and as a result I requested my entire serial to the

raised section,       in order to reinforce the line of officers, who were now

experiencing difficulty in achieving proper segregation.

With the full serial of 10 men, and myself, now almost isolated from other

officers, I maintained the cordon, with abuse being shouted at us from each

side,     as   well   as    each    faction        of      fans   shouting      and   swearing   and

gesticulating obscenely at each other.

It became obvious to me that the situation would develop and deteriorate
further and in anticipation I signalled to Sergeant Batty and his men to

come to our assistance.

With the new serial now backing up the cordon, the situation became easier

for the officers and myself and a double Police line was formed, with Police

Officers standing tightly behind one another.

Faced with this situation,     it was difficult   to perceive problems in any

other part of the ground, but theoverall impression was that of a full    and

capacity attendance    was expected.

Radio transmissions were frequent      and for my part often went unheard and

lost within the general noise and disturbance of the crowd.

As the teams emerged from the players tunnel the obscene chanting and melee

continued, but by now, any attempt to eject unruly fans, would serve only to

deplete the line of officers struggling to maintain order and because of the

capacity crowd, ease of exit/entrance was severely curtailed.

A short time after play began, I was aware of an incident at the opposite

end of the ground, and saw fans, Police and players at the Liverpool end.

My initial reaction, was that there had been a pitch invasion and this view

was obviously shared by the Notts Forest supporters, who immediately resumed

their hostile attitude to the Liverpool supporters near me.

I heard them shout in an obscene manner, and push and surge towards them.

This situation caused me some concern and I rallied the Police Officers to

maintain the line.

This situation prevailed for some minutes.

As the first of the Liverpool fans ran towards the Notts Forest end, (now

known for makeshift stretchers) I saw a surge forward of fans on the Spion

Kop and again the situation was disturbing.

When the first of the injured were carried off the area, through access at

the base of where I was standing, the Notts Forest supporters laughed and

cajouled at them,     probably thinking they sustained their injuries whilst

invading the pitch.
                                                      -   5   -




As the fuller circumstances unfurled directly in front of us, the entire

mood of the Notts Forest supporters changed, to one of quiet disbelief, and

they began to applaud, the emergency services, Police, Fire, Ambulance, and

those supporters who had rendered assistance to their friends.

Almost everyone of the injured persons was stretchered away within our full

view and exited the playing area from directly beneath us.

Whilst these events were taking place, two doctors made themselves aware to

me and I saw that they were escorted to the field by Police Constables 1123

Thornhill, 41 Walmsley, 411 Bellamy.

I did not see these officers until much later, and I was informed they had

taken up rescue duties and that Police Constable Thornhill was now detained

with a body.

As     the     events    continued,       many   of           the   supporters    of    both   teams,   were

obviously shocked and sickened by what they had witnessed and many were

making       their way        out of     the ground quietly.               However,       the hardcore of

supporters remained, some of them showing little concern for the situation,

enquiring continuously when and if play would resume.                                  I was even asked by

Liverpool supporters where they could obtain their money back.

After some time, when the main operation had ended, it became obvious to

everyone that play was abandoned and all supporters were encouraged to leave

the ground.

When     the    Spion     Kop    was     cleared,         I took my      serial    to the      area of the

Gymnasium, where I saw numerous other Police Officers.

I was there approached by Chief Inspector Beal, (FI) and instructed to take

my serial on mobile patrol, due to sporadic outbursts of fighting about the

area of the ground and went on mobile patrol using call sign 'Mobile 8' at

4.40 p.m.that date.

Once     outside        the    ground,     I   went        with     my   serial   to     Middlewood     Road,

Sheffield, and stood by for direction to any incident.

At 5.50 p.m. that date, I was instructed to return to Hillsborough stadium
                                    -   6   -




to-stand down.

At 7.00 p.m. that date I was instructed to go off duty and did so from the

ground.

I took no further part in the events of that day.
