<A .. -».                                                                         Poi,,a fva|Q.*o*

 Other Documsnt Form                      Date and time raised
                                                                   ^      'to
                                                                                                 Number



 Title                        .f.rtvA -    J h > (L C -                                          C e-<^v \ss.Arvg?vN>^
 (Include source and any document number if relevant)


 Receivers instructions urgent action Yes/No ^ 'T 3 fS>          caV ^ > —      ^^4*^— \ _
                                                                                                                Receiver



 Document registered/indexed as indicated                                                                        Indexer

 No(s) of actions raised

 Statement readers instructions                                                                                 Statement
                                                                                                                Reader


 Indexed as indicated                                                                                            Indexer

 No{s) of actions raised

    amined - further action to be taken                                                                      0/M             SIO




                                                                                                                   Indexer
 Further action no(s)
                                                                                                                    \
 When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
<*   ...

           DCC

           I have received a message from Belinda Norcliffe (0274 734700) as follows.


           1.       She asks if she can have three copies of just the mortuary scenes taken
                 (approx. 10/15 minutes duration) and sent up to her office not later
      ,/         than lunch-time 15.6.90.

                 I have spoken with Sgt Foster (AVA) and instructed him to prepare the
                 copies.   I will arrange for a motor cyclist to take them to Bradford
                 a.m. tomorrow (Friday) morning.


           2. Belinda wants to inform you      that   technically   the   mortuary   scenes   are
              a 'discoverable document'.

                 With any discoverable document strictly speaking you are not allowed
                 to put any terms on what is done with it. (Just to give you an example,
                 once disclosed as a discoverable document it could subsequently be
                 released to a newspaper).    Also if you have such a document to be
                 disclosed it should be disclosed at the start and not half way through
                 proceedings.

                 Notwithstanding the above, Counsel want to disclose the mortuary video
                 because it is relative to quantum which will come in due course. However,
                 they will (subject to our approval) disclose on the basis that the
                 plaintiffs solicitors do not disclose to the plaintiffs or anyone else.
                 Counsel feel this will be accepted by the plaintiffs solicitors on
                 humanitarian grounds (ie, not wishing to put the plaintiffs through
                 watching the video scenes) and that our 'terms' would be adhered to.

                 For information - if and when the Judge sees the video, and this will
                 not automatically happen but only when asked, he will view it in private.

                 Some time ago Belinda 'floated' the above with Norman Bettison but would
                 now appreciate your views on the above.    (Norman Bettison is currently
                 on leave)

                 I informed her you will probably not be free to speak with her until
                 after your 3.30 pm appointment                  She agreed to this saying
                 after 4.30 pm might be an even better time for you to telephone her as
                 she will probably have another matter ready by that time which she also
                 needs to discuss with you please. On your behalf I agreed to this.


                 J.
                 14.6.90




           At 5.30 pm I (DCC) spoke with Belinda Norcliffe who reiterated the above
           and we agreed that the videos be made available to the Court as 'discoverable
           documents'.

           She then referred to the mortuary photographs,       ie,   those used as part of
           the identification process.

           She has received information via the Liverpool       Steering Committee      lawyers
           that they now want these on the same basis.
The Coroner has the originals and will release them.      The arrangement is
that West Midlands Police, who have enlarged glossy prints of these same                  ')
photographs, will copy the Coroner's originals and through Hammond Suddards
these will be made available to the plaintiffs lawyers and to the Court
on request in the same form they were seen by the plaintiffs.

Whilst not enforceable, when making the videos and photographs available
we will ask that no copies be made and for them to be returned to the police
after the hearings on the grounds this is sensitive information which could
be misused by third parties and cause unnecessary distress.

Re. evidential "bundles" - pleadings, statements, medical reports, legal
authorities, generic medical report - now submitted to the Court;    a copy
will be sent to me on 15.6.90 so that if from 19.6.90 onwards we need to
make decisions with the lawyers regarding possible admissions etc., we will
each (them in Liverpool and ourselves in Sheffield) be considering the same
documentation.                                               ^

The BBC and IBA media guidelines appear to have been breached and further
consideration is  being  given to enjoining    them in the    Contribution
proceedings.

The insurers and Counsel have agreed the plaintiffs proofs will be submitted
without the need for direct evidence.     This will spare the witnesses re­
living the incident - more importantly we cannot refute their allegations
such as "I saw the whole thing on television", "I became extremely distressed
at this" etc.

If the media are   enjoined   in   the   Contribution   hearing we   can   call   these
witnesses.

Counsel wanted to admit liability in accordance with the McLoughlin -v-
O'Brien Lords decision doctrine - in short parent or spouse viewing bodies
in the immediate aftermath of an incident (in the case it was a road
accident) can be assumed to have suffered psychological damage.

After discussion with Hammond Suddards senior partners and consultation
with the insurers, this is not agreed as subsequent cases have sought to
distinguish with some success from McLoughlin.  This may become an issue
next week.

The nervous shock cases are to determine liability only not quantum at this
stage.

Immediately after the nervous      shock cases post-death     suffering cases will
be heard - Hicks and Wafer




Deputy Chief Constable

 Copy to;    Chief Constable
             Chief Supt Wain (War Room)
