                                        618




F3 SOUJ&ToN




l'U\ •   H V w*^             «•



LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:              Thank you very much, Mrs. El


              FREDERICK JAMES ECCLESTOK Called
                   Examined by MR. PHILLIPS:
                                        7
                                                 F.J. ECCLBSTON



                  LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I am sorry you have had to
            come back, but I am sure you understand.

    Q.            MR. PHILLIPS: What is your full name please? -
            A. Frederick James Eccleston.

    q   . I think you are a Senior Nurse Manager? - A. I am indeed.
B                              ■%   •


    Q. And you live in the Wirral near Liverpool? - A. That is
       right.
    q   . You went to the match, did you, with your son and another
          young man? - A. That is right.

    q       What time did you get to the ground? - A. Approximately
            approaching the Leppings Lane ena 25-past-2.

    0. What was the situation that you saw as you approached at
       that time’ - A. We came from the river end, across i-he
       bridge, having parked some two miles
       The actual approach to where you get to the turnstiles
       it was not too bad at that stage.  I am aware of a bus
       discharging some of its passengers, a coach. At tnac point
       I actually spoke to a young man who works m the theatre
       of the hospital that I work at so we were not crusned, we
       had a quiet and pleasant conversation for a couple of
            minutes.
        o   were vou able to get to the perimeter gates ox the ground?
            - A Yes quite easily, but once you got to tne periaeter
            aates which were open, there was then a tremendous crush.




F




G




H                                       /Q. Were the people
                        8

                                                   F.J. ECCLESTON




Q. Were the people behind you still coming along? r- A. There
   were people coming along the Leppings Lane and there were
   people behind me across the bridge. There was no crush at
   that time.

Q. How long did it take you to get to the turnstile? - A. It
   took us a good ten minutes or more and that journey to the
   turnstiles was probably the worst I've had.  I mean I go to
   every Liverpool game, home and away, and we were a little
   frightened to say the least, but there was humour in the
   crowd.  For instance there were three Police Officers on
   horseback and one of the horses nudged my glasses and the
   Police Officer, we smiled at each other and he apologised
   in fact/ and there were Police Officers at the side of the
   river on foot.

Q. Did you see any in the crowd itself? - A. Yes. The
   Police Officers on horseback were actually in the crowd but
   there was no orderly forms o£ queues as there normally is
   at football matches these days.

Q. Which turnstiles were you going through? - A. There was
   one of four we were aiming for. There wasn't one in
   particular.  We were trying to get in one oc those four.

Q.    Which set of turnstiles? Would you like to         look at
     the plan?   - A. It is those four.

Q-. Those over there?   -       A. Yes.

Q. Turnstiles A to G?       -    A. That is right.

Q. Was it crushed the whole of the time that you were going
   through?  -    A. From the perimeter gates to the turnstiles
   there was atremendous crush,     yes, and that spilled out
   towards the'river.  The other side of the bar that is shown
   there ...

Q. The railings?   - A. The railing, yes. The crowd had
   spilled - in fact at one stage we were that side of the bar
   and we had to negotiate our way underneath that to get in
   direct line with the turnstiles.  *

Q.   Were you not able to go back and walk roundthe end of the
     railings?  - A. No, that had become impossible.

Q. Did you get through the turnstiles?         -     A. Yes.

Q. Straight through?  -   A. Yes.  The last ten yards we were
   catapulted.    My feetdid not touch the ground and my son
   and companion were the same. We ended up in different
   turnstiles and in fact I had my son's ticket and he
   actually had to leap over the turnstile it was that bad,
                             9

                                                    F.J. ECCLESTON




         and I then handed his ticket with mine.
Q.       Yes.  - A. I had never come across thatbefore.         That last
         ten yards, as I say my feet ....

Q. The turnstile worked efficiently did it?             -   A. Yes it;
   did.

Q. You then find yourself in the yard behind the turnstile?
   A. Thats right.  As soon as we came through the turnstile
   my son actually was remonstrating with a steward and the
   Police Officer and the steward told him to shut up because
   other fans had done the same thing and had been forcibly
   ejected, so we obviously took notice of that.

q   . Where was this Police Officer and steward? Can you again
      look? - A. Immediately behind the turnstile, within two
      oc three yards.

Q. Can you say what the time was at this point? - A.
   Approximately just before twenty to three I should think.

Q.       Did you know where you were going to go? -   A. Yes because
         I had been to the previous year's game, and it was a
         totally different approach this time.  The year before I
         arrived at ten to three because oc transport problems.

Q. I will come to that later if I may, buc can you tell us
   where you had stood or sat on the previous year? - A.
   Yes.  when we came to the turnstiles the previous year
   there was a line of Police Officers and stewards that
   stopped us going through the .tunnel. ‘ They quite gently but
   forcefully s a i d ■"Look, this is full, you've got to go to
   the left or the right" and the previous year I had my
   daughter with me, we went to the right, and then it was
   still crushed because we were under the scoreboard and I
   saw the previous year to the left of the blue boards ....

Q. Would you like again to look at the plan there.  - A. I've
   actually got the picture of the ground which I've arrowed.

Q. It may help us if you turn round and see there. Can you
   see.  If you show us where you went to once you got inside
   this year.

              LORD JUSTICE     TAYLOR:   We are talking about this       year
         now are we?

q    .         MR. PHILLIPS:      Yes.   -   A. We went straight to      the
         toilet in fact.

              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       That is just to the left of the
         tunnel, we know that.
                                           F.J. ECCLESTON



     MR. PHILLIPS:   Then after that where did you go to?
- A. As we came out of the toilet my son said, "Look at
this" and one of the gates was being opened and so I said
to them, "Right, follow me" and we turned to the right.

Turned to the right.  - A. It went past the open tunnel.
In fact I have a unique recollection of looking down that
tunnel and seeing daylight as we ran past, because I knew
from my previous year's experience to go to the left which
was a better vantage point and a safer vantage point.

Look at where the pointer's going. Did you go up there
then to the right?  - A. No wewent the other way.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Through the gap in the wall?
A. Through the gap in the wall.

And round to the north side.        -   A. That is correct, and up
the stairs.

       MR. PHILLIPS:  And you went into that corner pen did
you?     - A. No we were high up on the left hand side.

High up on the terracing there?          - A. Do you mind if   I ...

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:         You   go and show us.   -
Exactly there.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Yes I see.

     MR. PHILLIPS:   Thank you very much.  Are you saying
the previous year you had been in fact on the opposite side
of the ground?  - A. No. We had first tried to go on the
opposite side o£ the ground but it was very crushed so I
had looked up to that other side and I'd taken my daughter
out of the crush and gone round the way we went this year.

So what was the situation like in that part of the
terracing where you were?  - A. Reasonably comfortable.
There were plenty of fans in there, more than the previous
year but it"was comfortable standing there, and what amazed
me at quarter to three was that tiie far side, and that is
under the scoreboard and the right hand pen were half
empty.

Yes.        A. I was astounded to see that this year.

Were you able from where you were to see the centre pens 3
and 4? - A. Yes, very easily.

What did you see there?       -   A. Absolute jam packed at
quarter to three.
                          11


                                               F.J.:. ECCLESTON



Q. Did you keep an eye on that or were you looking out to the
   field as well? - A. I was looking out to the field as
   well.

Q. Do you remember the teams coming out on to the field?          -
   A. Very distinctly.

Q. And did you take any particular notice of the terraces when
   that happened?  - A. No, not particularly.   I didn't taka
   much notice that I'd done when I first took my place.  That
   was what really astounded m e .

Q. Do you remember the kick-off?         -     A. Yes.

Q. And the game starting?        -   A. Yes.

Q. During that time again I suppose you were watching the
   field ware you?  - A. Yes, undoubtedly.

Q.   And you remember the shot which hit the goal post?   - A.
     Yes, it is the only thing I shall never Eorget.  I am
     eternally grateful that Liverpool never scored because I
     think ....

Q.   Did you notice any effect?      -   A. Yes.

Q.   Tell us about that please? -        A. Whenever a side attacks
     like that, whether it is this       game or any game, the crowd
     surge forward and they did on       this occasion.

Q. Which crowd are you talking about now? - A. I'm talking
   about the Liverpool crowd behind the goal.

Q.   In 3 and 4?   -    A. In 3 and 4 yes.

Q.   Did you notice anything particular about that, what was
     happening there? - A. I then noticed that people were
     beginning to be passed down across the heads. Now that is
     a sign that thece is problems.

Q. Did you see anything else in those pens? -    A. Yes.  This
   coincided with the teams going off. The front oE the pens
   were Elat.  Now when you're at a football match you're
   looking down on a crowd.  The heads bob all the time.
   There is movement.   On this occasion I noticed they were
   flat and I knew something was wrong.




                       /Q. You recall seeing the Police Officer ...
                                   12

                                                        F.J. ECCLESTON


Q. You recall seeing the Police Officer run on to the pitch then
   to stop the game, do you? - A. I do, indeed.

Q. And from then on did you pay particular attention to these two
   terraces? - A. Yes, you could not help but not to because the
   fans were trying to get over the fence.  Some of them were
   being pushed back.  Some managed to get over. One fan was
   arrested and was pleading not to put him back.  You could tell
   he was pleading for something.

Q. Did you see Police Officers on the perimeter track? - A. Yes,
   we did.

Q        Did you see the gates open for pens 3 and 4? -A. There was
         one    One gate was being opened.  It was at that time that I
         turned to my son and said, "Look, they're in trouble down
         there.   I am going down because they need help".

Q        Can you say which gate it was that was open? -A. I think it
         was the one behind the goal, immediately behind the goal.

Q.              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Pen 3 or A? - A. I d o n ’t which
         pen.
                MR. PHILLIPS:   I think that would be 4, in fact:

G        So when did you first realise, by reference to what wasgoing
         on on the field, when did you first realise there was
         something badly wrong? -A. As the teams went off.

 Q     As the teams went off? - A. As the teams went off.  The Police
     ' Officer ran on to get the referee to stop it, and your eyes
       then moved as to why this was happening, and you concentrated
       on the area behind the goal.  That is the thing I can remember
       to this day is this flatness of the immediate crowd in front
       of the barrier that led to the pitch.

 Q       So you I think then went down to the pitch, did you not? - A
         That is right.     I knew my way from last year’s experience, and
         I got a steward to take me, and he did not hesitate at all.     I
         said "Look, you are in trouble out there. I'm a trained
         nurse", a n d ’he took me the quickest way under the stand, and a
         Police Officer let me on the pitch.

    Q. And you went to the area behind the        goal in thefirst place?
       A. That is correct.

          And Police Officers, what were they doing at that time when
    Q.
          you went down? - A. Some seemed to be standing around, but
          some were working like beavers at the gate   The one I
          remember, I am on video with him, that is the Police
          Officer without any hair, and we were literally pulling
          neoDle by any part of their body we could grab hold or .
          ?he?r arms! thlir legs.  They seemed to be spilling down
          in a cascade towards that gateway, and there were three
          Police Officers and I was just behind them helping them
          pSll the people out.  The first people that came out they
                                13

                                                   F.J. ECCLESTON


     were just shocked.   They could hardly breathe.

Q. Were you helping them on to the pitch after they had come out?
- a . That is right, immediately on to the pitch behind the net.

Q. The first people who came out, were they badly injured? - A.
   No.

Q. You then went back. I think, and helped some more people? - A.
   By the time you got the top of the pile out you then began to
   get the really injured people out who were unconscious.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Could you help me, because the
     video does not show this very closely.  The people you were
     getting out first who you say were shocked but not badly
     injured, were they coming from behind where the people you
     eventually got out were, or were they clambering over people
     who were in a worse condition, or were they themselves right
     at the front, do you know? - A. They seemed to be just
     literally tumbling over the people who were at the front.

Q. They were really coming from behind those who had been right
   at the front? - A. Yes, I think so.

q   _ j think you took a young roan out who seemed to have some chest
      injuries?    Is that right? - A. That is right.    I worked on
      him.  I c a n ’t recall how long for any of the people I actually
      worked, but he came round quite reasonably easily and quite
      well, and it was obvious he had chest injuries.      I snouted to
      him when he tried to struggle up, I said, "Lie down and I'll
      find a stretcher".     I then asked some roiicemen around me who
      seemed rather dazed.     I noticed the only stretcher I could see
      was by the penalty s p o t , and how I saw it was that it was a
      wire mesh one and the wire stuck out, so I ran to the penalty
      spot and grabbed it.     On the way back I literally ordered
      three Police Officers to help me carry this fan away.      They
      just meekly obeyed me. and we half ran across the pitch.

Q. At this time was anybody taking control of what was happening
   behind the goal? - A. I am afraid not. Many individual Police
   Officers used their initiative, and they were magnificent,
   let's have no doubts about that.   Some were in the pens and
   pulling people up.  There was even one trying to bend the
   grills back with his own bare hands-, and there were others
   that were beginning to treat the injured at the said, but
   there were others who were just standing there.   There seemed
   to be no overall control.   I would have expected some sort of
   clearing station to be set up around the goal area, people
   using their initiative from a managerial point of view.

0. You did go I think with the stretcher you mentioned over to
   the St. J o h n ’s Ambulance room, did you not? - A. In front of
   the gymnasium behind the stand.

Q. What scene did you meet when you got there? - A. It was not
   too bad at that stage because a lot of people had not arrived.
   I had literally handed this injured fan over to the St. John's
                                   14

                                                       F.J. ECCLESTON


        Ambulance and then turned and ran back because I knew there
        were so many injured coming out to give some more help. So I
        ran across the pitch.

Q. You then took part, I think, in the resuscitation of people
   who had been brought out of the pens? - A. That is right.

Q.      And others were helping, of course, to do that, were they not?
        _ A. Yes.  I came across a surgeon.  I tried to take over from
        him, so I actually tapped him on the head and apologised.
        Then I moved on to the next person.   There were Police
        Officers giving mouth to mouth.   There were St. John's
        Ambulance people.  One of the people I worked on - it was a
        ludicrous situation, because I had to do mouth to mourn and
        chest massage on the same person., which you just cannot do,
        and then he started to vomit.

Q. Was there any equipment available at that time? - A.
   Absolutely nothing.  I turned to the St. John’s Ambulance man
   working alongside me and I said, "For God’s sake, have you got
   any swabs to clear this m a n ’s mouth?’’, and all he could hand
   me was a dry sponge.

Q. Can you say what time this was, approximately;' - A. Yes, it
   must have been quarter-past, 20--past-3.

Q       Were you conscious of ambulance and Firemen arriving at any
        sta^e? - A . An ambulance arrived, in my statement I thought it
        was°half-past-3.   In fact from subsequent knowledge it was
        about auarter-Dast, but it was only a St. John s Ambulance one
        which is not well equipped at all.   The Fire Brigade, I was
        becoming conscious they were around.   The xans at this time,
        they were magnificent.   They had used their initiative.  A lot
        of young men had decided - the aggression had gone from them -
        and they wanted to help.   They took the hoardings, they
        carried people, they were doing mouth to mouth as they thought
        they could do, and in all this chaos they were trying so hard.

 q       Did you get any equipment from the ambulance or the Fire
         people? - A. No.  I believe there was an oxygen cylinder
         around, but I did not see anything of that at all.

 Q. I think you then went, did not you, to the gymnasium where
    people were being taken? - A. That'is right.

 Q       Were you working in the gymnasium? When did you start working
         in there? - A. It must have been well after half-past-3.       When
         I sot around the back by the gymnasium it was again chaotic.
         There were people lying dead on the floor.      There were the
         injured by the St. J o h n ’s Ambulance room door.  There were
         Police Officers trying to keep control. There was only a
         small doorway to the gymnasium that was being used, and the
         dead and the living were trying to get through at the same
         time as some stage.

    G    Were there any medical staff working there in the gymnasium? -
         A. No, the St. John's Ambulance room was busy, obviously, on
                                                                        i
                                   15

                                                       F.J. ECCLESTON


        the left outside the gymnasium, and when we got in the
        gymnasium it had been divided into two.      I realised afterwards
        half was to receive the dead and half to receive the injured.
        On the injured side there appeared, I was aware there were
        three doctors eventually, and they were treating around about
        a dozen injured people.      One of the doctors turned to me and
        said, ’’For G o d ’s sake, have we got any drugs?’’. There was no
        equipment whatsoever, even in the gymnasium at that stage.

Q       Did you try to get some drugs? - A. Yes, I then ran out of the
        gymnasium and contacted some senior Police Officers who were
        in that no m a n ’s land area outside, and they immediately
        must have gone and they did find something for us within
        five minutes.     It was just three small boxes of equipment.

Q           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Do you know where they came from?
        - A. No, I d o n ’t, I am afraid.There was no Health Authority
        sign on it.

q            MR PHILLIPS:    Had you tried to get any from the St.
        John's Ambulance room? - A. Yes. When the doctor asked for
        drugs I went to the St. J o h n ’s Ambulance and they said. ’’I ’m
        sorry, we don't carry that sort of equipment. We are not
        allowed to have any drugs of any sort” .

0       What did you do after you got back to the gymnasium? - A. I
        then helped the doctors set up 10 intravenous lines.

Q. Where did you get the equipment from? - A. They were in the
   boxes.
Q       In the boxes you had received from the Police Officers? - A.
         Inthe boxes we had received.    There were some forceps, some
         scissors, some swabs, some splints and there was enough
        eauipment to set up 10 intravenous lines.   Then I went round
         with each doctor helping them set up the lines. We then co­
         opted individual Police Officers to actually hold the bottles
         or the packs up because we had no stands of any sort.

    q    How lone were you in there doing this sort of thing? - A.
         Until about half-past-4, and by then the injured that were
         there had actually been removed.  I was aware, my attention
         was drawn to the other part of the .gymnasium.   I was shocked.
         I actually, not consciously, wandered into that area, and I
         found I recognised a young girl who we had been working on at
         the side of the pitch, and stayed with her husband who was
         absolutely mortified, as you can imagine.   I could give some
         consolation, I suppose, because she was the girl that the
         surgeon was working on, so at least she had had some good
         attention from an individual point of view.

    Q    Can you cast vour mind back now, if you will, to the
         previous year and this year, and tell us some of the
         differences you noticed between the two events, because you
         went to both events.  You say you came later on the
         previous year? - A. That is right.
                               16


                                                 F.J. ECCLESTON


0. Was the journey to the turnstiles along Leppings Lane any
   different on the previous year? - A. Yes, the previous year,
   my daughter and I had not been allowed to get to the
   turnstiles without the Police made sure we had a ticket.

0. From which direction had you come? - A. We had come from the
   other direction the previous year, from down the Leppings
   Lane....

Q. From the roundabout? - A. From the roundabout, that is right,
   because we came by coach the previous year.

0. How did this happen th'at you were checked for tickets on the
   previous year? - A. The previous year there seemed to be a lot
   more Police Officers around, and there was not the same crush,
   let us be quite honest and fair about this, there was nowhere
   near the same crush at 10-to-3 when I arrived the previous
   year.

0. Were there simply groups or lines of Police Officers, or were
   there metal barriers or what? - A. There were lines of Police
   Officers the previous year.

Q. Across the pavement or the whole road? - A. You had to go
   down.  They channelled you off, so you had to go past them,
   and "Have you got a ticket?", was requested of you before you
   actually got anywhere near the turnstiles.

Q. Did you have to show your ticket? - A. Yes, I had it in my
   ha nd .

Q. Had you seen anything like that all in 1989, this year? - A.
   No.

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Mr. Eccleston, about how far up
      the road from the entrance, from the perimeter gate;s, about
      show far up the road were you challenged for your ticket in
      1983? - A. I think it was round about the perimeter gates.

Q. Near the gate?     Not further up the road? - A. Not far away,
   no.

Q          MR. PHILLIPS:   Had you had a -reasonable journey to
      Sheffield on both occasions? - A. Both occasions, for some
      reason or another, the M62 had road-works.   They were
      opened just a week or ten days before either game. This
      time we had actually avoided them by going through the
      country area and Glossop.  That is the reason why we were
      late on both occasions, in fact, because we like to be at
      the ground a good hour before.

 0.    So although you arrived at 25-past-2,that was later than you
      had hoped? - A. Yes, most definitely.

 Q.    You have already told us in 1988 when you went through the
      turnstiles you were pointed away from the tunnel? - A. Yes,
      most definitely.                      /Cross-Examined.bv....
                                      17

                                                        F. 3. ECCLESTON

                         C ross-examined by MR. HYTNER:
  Q. Mr. Eccleston, before you even think about people, the
     situation at the L e p p i n ^ Lane turnstiles is of a funnel,
     is it not?   A.    Yes.
  Q. Which funnels people who both come down Leppings Lane and,
B    of course, over the bridge from the other side?   A. Yes.
  Q. It is a bottleneck?         A.        Precisely.
  Q. By the time you got into the area between the railings
     and the turnstiles, there was no way that anybody could
     form sn orderly queue because there were too many people
     already in the area.   A.   That is correct.
           So that if you were looking for orderly queues, you
           would have really been saying, "Well, something should
           have been done before all these people got into that
           area."   A. Yes.    Yes.
  Q. And the Policemen on horses within the area, of course,
     were absolutely helpless.   A.    They tried to do a
D    valiant job in extreme difficulty.
   Q.           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    That is inside the perimeter
           gates?   A.    Inside the perimeter gates, yes, sir.
   q   .        MR. HYTNER:    Again, what I am trying really to get at
           is the impossibility, given the greatest Police Officers
           and the most docile spectators, there were simply too many
           for queues.     A.   The spectators that were there realised
           that they could not possibly get in.    They all had tickets
           in that area.    They knew -- and the frustration that builds
           up in you; you have got a ticket and you have got a right
           to be in there; you have to be part of a football crowd
           to realise that.
   Q. I was going to come on to this. There has been a lot of
      talk of hooliganism, you see.   Natural impatience to get
      into the ground is one of the things that, rightly or
      wrongly, is to be anticipated?   A.   Yes.
   Q. And that will apply to an opera or a- play just as well.
      A.   Precisely, yes.
           The next thing, of course, is this, that if you went to
           the ground today, the danger might not be apparent because
           the crush in the area between the rails and the turnstiles
           would have a safety valve down the perimeter path along
           the river?   A.   Yes.
   Q. Of course, that was blocked off by barriers?                 A.     Yes.

 H Q. So that there was a bottleneck crush.                 A.   Yes.
       Q. Did you see any Police Officers along Leppings Lane doing
          anything to try and control the crowds or filter the crowds
                                18


                                            F. J. ECCLESTON

   as they came down into the funnel?   A. Remember, I
   didn't approach from Leppings Lane, I approached across
   the river.
Q. Across the river. A.    No, because, to be fair to the
   Police, there wasn't a crush coming over the river at
   25 past 2.
Q. Did you see any Police Officers in Leppings Lane at all as
   you came over the river?   A.   Yes, I was aware of some
   Police Officers because there were coaches disembarking
   their passengers in the road, you know, because they do
   that and then they drive off to park somewhere else.
Q. So at 25 past 2, adding to the crowds that were going
   into that area were coachloads       A. Well, there
   were some coach --    I was aware of a coach.   I am not
   saying that every coach did that but I was aware of a coach.
Q. Can you help us on this?            You may not because, of course,
   it was all very confused. There is some suggestion that
   of the T u r n s t i l e s A-G which were the terrace turnstiles, two
   were not working, not in operation.            Can you help us on
   this as to whether -           A.      I was not aware of that, no.
Q. They all seemed to   be? A.  They all seemed to be working,
   yes, it was just the dificulty of getting to them.

Q. You then got into the ground --
        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Certainly those of us who
   have seen the video, though, might be under the impression
   that although they were working they were not all working
   at the same efficiency.
         MR. HYTNER:     Yes, sir, I think that is probably
    the explanation.
         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   We are possibly going to hear
    about that but it seemed to be quite noticeable that it
    took quite a long time for somebody to emerge from one
    turnstile as against the one next to it.
         MR. HYTNER:   My statements that I am putting these
    questions from, the witness may, of course, have been
    slightly confused as to whether a turnstile was permanently
    out of operation or whether it was temporarily out of
    operation.
          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Yes, quite.
          MR. HYTNER:     I thought that ought to be investigated.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Yes.
                                                                   19


                                                                                       F. J. ECCLESTON

    n                    MR
                      HYTNER:   There could not be any doubt at all,
    °-       c o u l d    that as you reached the railings, which would
                             there!
             be 2.25 - is that fair?   A. Yes.
                   Hm.hi- whatever that there was a dangerous situation
                          ino?  A   Of all the matches I have been to this
             s e a s o n ^ that   the worst situation I had co»e to - tried
B            to get to a turnstile.
             That is n o t q u i t e an answer to the q u e s t i o n because, of
             course it may be the worst situation but it may not have
             been d a n g e r o u s . What I am a s k i n g you is, was it not as
              loin « a D i k e s t a f f to anyone l o o k i n g that seeing this
             ciuth within the area and then seeing the hordes coming
             towards the area down L e p p i n g s L a n e , that a d a n g e r o u s
             situation was clearly developing?                  A.     If there were
             a lot more spectators to j o i n that crush then, yes, I
                  5 t-nfsllv aaree w i t h you because it was bad e n o u g h
             w0^, • that little area from the perimeter gate to the
             turnstile             To add to that w i t h h o r d e s of people would
             be —     well, it would be terrible.
                               j               t.nri if       v n u saw larqe numbers
                                                            of fans coining
D        ' 5s 1 Ut ^ e 0 yards o f y epp^ngs U n e towards the turnstiles?
               1 $es    t h e r e were lots of fans coming that way.
           « r e far *more coming that way than coming across the bridge
                                                                         There

           how I had entered into that area.
     n t c it fair to say that it.was over adistance                                               of about      70
     Q - !Sa ris that you saw them? A.   Yes.    Yes.
     n u ii              is the situation outside the ground 35 minutes
     Q - W e n ’before kic^-off.               AS you indicated, it took you
                m I p to oet into the ground and then at 15 minutes before
                nff and before Gate C was opened for the second
         time    y o u h a d a n o p p o r t u n i t y to l o o k d o w n o n to th. centre
                          ’            Nnw        aaain,       it w a s as p l a i n as a p i k e s t a f f t h a t
                those         p    e   n   s   were o v e r f u l l   .    A,     Host definitely.

         Q      Not just full to capacity but                     ,Ih ^  I*™
                   mmoH   crammed full at quarter to three.       It is a
                crammed -         u _e t f^ om my position, could see this
                mystery to m        P o l i ce Control Box opposite me on the
                 a nd Y et t h e r e                 .        r o u n d a n d t h e y c o u l d not s ee it a n d
                 y e t ^ h e y are equipped with « b.tt.r* of monitors from the
                 cameras that are set up by the Club.




                 ■" ::i
                  L a n “e    terraces?                   A
                                                                                                     »• v-hr.
                                                                   I wasn't really looking at the Stand,
                  no.

                                                  ;::,ur.rv.n“h;sr.; r “!srr:..
                                 20


                                              F. J. ECCLESTON

    Q. Do you go to a lot of football matches?     A.   Yes.    Yes.
    Q. It is a very common sight at football matches, is it noc,
       for stewards to be patrol li ng the perimeter of the popular
       side, the terraces --     A.    Yes.
       And seeing where there is a crowd and where there are
B      spaces and getting people to move across.   A.   Yes.         Yes.
    Q. Sometimes they are doing it by signal and sometimes
       there are messages over the tannoy.  A.   That is correct.
    Q. Saying, ’’Will spectators in such and such a section please
       move to the right, there is lots of space?1, and so forth.
       You have seen that?      A.   Nearly every game, yes.
       Nothing of that sort went on at Hillsborough?       A.  No.
       There was none of that.      There was no messages on the
       tannoy.   I was not co ns ci ou s of stewards trying to
       direct fans into safer and better positions.
  Q. You see, there may be a suggestion that there were messages
     passed over the tannoy. Did you hear any messages of any
D    sort over the tannoy telling people at the Leppings Lane
     end to move to one side or another?   A.   No, there was
     nothing of that at all.
    Q. The next thing I want to ask you about is the so-called
       pitch invasion. The term, "pitch invasion" has a very
       specific meaning in football now, has it not?   A. Yes.
       Hooligans invading the pitch either to stop the game
       or to celebrate a goal or to abuse the referee or abuse
       an opposing player, or even - a bigger pitch invasion -
       to get at the fans at the other end.   Is chat a fair
       catalogue of the reasons for pitch invasion?    A.    That
       is precisely correct.
    Q. But the prerequisite of the phrase, "pitch invasion" is
       that fans get on the pitch.    What was happening at
       Hillsborough was perfectly obviously this, was it not,
       that fans were getting over the perimeter fence but
       remaining in the area betwe en the pitch and the fence
       initially?   A.   Yes, that is correct. There was no
       attempt to rush out across the field.    They were just
       glad to get over those fences and feel some form of
       safety and unfortunately it was not read as that in the
       first place.
    3. I want to know how you read it, as a spectator, albeit
       as an experienced one.   A.   That is what I put in my
       statement.   Yes, I have got medical experience which
       gives me a unique, perhaps, view of things but also many
       years of going to football matches.   I knew there was
       something wrong within two minutes of those teams going off.
H
                                             21



                                                              F. 3. ECCLESTON

Q.          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:                  Going off?           A.      Going off,
     yes.
Q.        MR. HYTNER:   I am asking you about a little earlier
     than that when the first people began to climb the fences.
     It was fairly obvious when they were climbing the fences
     and getting over the fences that they were not up to
     mischief, they were trying to get out of some difficulty.
     A. They were indeed.     I can appreciate, though, that
     unless you -- there could be hesitancy in understanding
     that from the point of view of authority.    That I have
     got to, you know --     You could question, "Why were they
     coming over" first --
Q.   Hr. Eccleston, I think everyone is going to be fair about
     this.   As the first fans were beginning to clamber over
     there may have been some puzzlement or doubt as to what
     they were up to.    A.   Correct, yes.
Q. Once some fans got over it was clear that they were not
   getting over to invade the pitch.   A.   That's right.
Q. But to get out of trouble.                        A.      They were actually
     p l e a d i n g a n d t he L i v e r p o o l g o a l k e e p e r n o t i c e d it as w el l.

                            Cross-examined by HR. JACKSON:

Q. Just one matter, Mr. Eccleston.   1988 - the number of
   Police Officers between the turnstiles and the tunnel,
   are you absolutely certain that you and your daughter
   were prevented going down the tunnel by a line of Officers?
   A.   Combined with stewards, most definitely.
Q. And can you time your observation of 1989 that the central
   pens were too full?   A.   This was at exactly quarter to
   three because that is when I took my position on the
   terracing.
                         C r o s s - e x a m i n e d by MR. KALLIPETIS:

Q. Mr. Eccleston, you made your statement on 18th April,
   three days after the events which you describe.         In that
   statement, too, you said, "Within two minutes of the teams
   leaving the pitch I r e alised something was wrong."
   I iust want to fix a time, if.I may, for the basis of the
   q u e s - t i o n I want you to consider. Sometime before you
   left your position on the terrace to go down to the pitch
   to give assistance, you had been observing the pens behind
   the goalmouth as a result of the surge down that you
   described.           A.   That's right.
Q. When Mr. Bearsley hit the post                         at the other end.    If
   people who were u n conscious or                       injured had been passed up
    the pen to the tunnel and out,                         could you have seen that,
    if that was happening?     A.                         I could, yes.
                                    F. J. ECCLESTON

At any time from the time that you started watching the
pere behind the goalmouth to the time that you decided
to leave your position and go down to the pitch to assist,
did you see any bodies, whether unconscious or conscious,
horizontal or being carried, being passed up the terraces
through the tunnel?    A.   No, the few that were being
moved that way were going down towards the front.
                                              23
                                                       F.J. ECCLESTON



    O           From your vantage point, Mr. Eccleston, is there any wav
                that anyone who was injured or passing out could have made
                their way up against the crush of the people that you nave
                described in the pens behind the goal? - A. No way at all.

    n           Fanallv when you got on to the pitch and you went behind
                5 e g i L ne?syto L s i s t in pulling people out fron behind
8               the fence and the gate which was now open, could you have
                seen if any bodies were being passed up the terrace again
                to g o out through the tunnel and out the other side? - A.
                To be fair I could not because I was concentrating on die
                gate and the people that were cascading down on to that
                gate.
       You have described the people that were coning out n . s t ,
    Q- using your word '•cascading'' over tne bocies t,.at were in
       *roJ-   Do you think it is likely that anybocy coulc nave
       been taken from the front of that pen, up througn that
       crowd and out through the tunnel? - A. Tnere was no cn&nce
                at all.

                           MR. KALLIPETIS:   Thank you very much.

D       n                   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Well you say that. You are _
                talkincr as I understand it, about the stage when you anc
                o t h e r s ^ Police Officers were frantically getting people

                 out.
                              I              understand it from the evidence there was a
                 cradual thinning out from the pens of people w.io were^a^le
                 to leave Is that right? Some being hauled up on to une
                 ^p?tinc area and so on? - A. When I actually startec^to
                 Tori with the Police Officers I was only conscious or people
                 immediately around that gate and then they were being
                 pulled out by me and others and then I was oeginning to
                 ? , o “   o t h e / a t the side of the pitch. After tnat x am
                               n


                 n o t ' conscious of what was going on m      the pens.

           What t was really asking is this:   are you able to say one
        Q. wav or the other whether everybody wno aiec or who was
           in extremis, was brought out only in the pitch direction
           nr nav some have been taken out another way? - A. No,
           obviously from what I gleaned afterwards I realised .hat
           some had gone back out of the tunnel.

            0     Some of the injured and dead? - A. Some ofthe injured         and
                  dead had gone back out of the tunnel, sir,   yes.

                        mb  ■
                            k a t t t p s t IS:  Sir, perhaps it is my fault ror
                  not making*it clear.          I wanted to establish a particular poinc
                  and it is up till about 20-past-3.

            o            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Up to about 20-past-3,^though,
                   you were not aware of anybody going ou. tha„ way.   A.
                   That is correct, sir, yes.

                          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Thank you.   I think it is
                    you, Mr. Woodward.
’                                                      24
\
                                                                  F.J.   ECCLESTON



                                    rm.^s-Examined bv MR. WOODWARD:


            »•& ES°S; S 542.’S.£S*i?!.SrSi.& T
                     year? - A. That is correct sir, yes.

            q        And on that occasion you were able to make your way in
    B                considerable freedom along L e p p m g s Lane? A. Yes, that
                     is true.
            Q. There were hardly any people about,
               - A well there was not any crush.    It was a “O ^ a i -o.u
                  *nl h ,ii crowd going to a game on that occcsion. 0^
               course'remember everybody was hurrying at iO-to-3.     i was
               amongst the late comers on thaw day.

            Q        And you became aware of the Police near the gates, was it?
                     - A. That is right, as far as I can rememoe..

                o    When those cates are opened obviously there are fence, gate,
                     fence, gate^ one can see it on the pictures?   A. m a t -s
                      right, yes.
    D           Q. You say you were asked whether you had got a ticket? - A.
                      That is right, yes.
                                    r-ho n-ficer that asked vou? - A. i think,
                q. Whereabouts r f a s ^ n e ago and z have been to a^lot
                   as 1 Say it            . . T               was the entrance <-o
                   of football             Th      consciously wanted to make sure
                   the perimeter ga^e .       / r i c h t to be there to go through to
                   v/e had a ticket ana had a rignt to
                   the turnstile.
                q    . it was somewhere by the perimeter gates? - A. Yes.

                    Q. Mow are you just conscious of an Officer speaking to
                       you at that point? - A. Yes.
                                            nnf suaaest1’ncj there was a cordon o_
                    Q ‘ Policemen* through which every person had to pass? - A. No,
                        I could not honestly say tnat,no.

                           „».....                                 r s ”« 's.sr.
                                       tjicttceTAYLOR: Can you help me as to what
                    Q*          L ?Hv    "lines of Police Officers channelling you

                         off 11? 6        iar as   1    can r6Ca“    Ue Were         “   S°
                         as a queue.
                    Q. What, before thejperimeter j a tes^or                                  '
                         am conscious             i t       the turnstiles, whereas this
        H                year6 it Sas just a milling crowd.              As I say I go to so
                         many football matches.
                                             25
                                                      v ,T. ECCLSSTON



                          WOODWARD:       It is


 - A. Yes. My daugh                                 allowed to approach witnout
 very conscious that we were
 making sure we had our tic*e



 got . t i c k e t ? - A. That is correct.

 And you are not suggesting there                                  ^fev^ry-
 doing that to everybody.         s                      there was a conplete
  body that aPPr°ac^       down a line of Officers, no.
  line, vou nad <-o \/sj.a
     t    suggest there was nothing formal like a cordon set up
     there? — A. No*
. you would agree with that? - A. Yes.
                               „„ ™        nade your way to the turnstile but
. And then you                    Y        : A _ That is ri<.ht, although at
     y i0-to-31ther1 was“ really no queue the previous year.
                    ..H l o .-here were lines of Policemen iron
 • ihe ^ e t e S
               rU iftes bltween which people walked? - A. ,0.


         we were going m              m    o^ue-
                                                         a   Each individual turn-
Q - stile ^       0   1   You^had 6 to*3go to one’iirnstile.

Q . Where was the
         perimeterS gates *whe re I w?
                                     as first directed towards.
                         • .U-.T- 0 ^ a t vou have or the recollection
         so is this the                      saying to you:   "Got your
Q.
         that you nave, of *              ticket and he then p o m t e c
         ticket?"; you                  ^       go! - A. Well it was so
         you Off to a particular p aceuereg an(. ^          ^   ^     £
          obvious where ^n-
          crush then.
                         •              v,*. vnu see this is the problem.
          Well that is f^5 g'directed'into queues at that time?
          did not need v*o oe q       ^    trouble to provide   ^

          - A‘      ^ i i c f “ Sy°u like' to ma:te SUre y°U ,md 2
          £   5   you were going to the right place.
                         j       directed into queues.     You coulc
          You did not need o               policemen about who, -s
          see where to go and        ™ s t a n d , that those Jolice-
          this what you       * arwq did direct you, because <-ne
          men would dire^ t°staqe were obviously slowing people
          turnstiles at that stage we            ^ ^     .f there was
          down who wanted uO get
                                                  F-.T. ECCLESTON



    a knot of three or four at one you would be directed to
    another turnstile? - A. Yes.

    And is that the picture? - A. Yes.

    Can I «        to when you
    e n t r a n c ^ t o ^ th e tunnel frea ? ‘A . V h a A s c o r r e c t, yes.

    Mow those people included stewards?                   A. Yes.
                        ,n            y   un  t c a n ’t, but it was certair.lj
    Can you say how many.                         g0 down th£t tunnel,
    enougn  to m a « .u    j               nQt know H i U sborough at = U
     a n ^ t h a ^ i s the £ £      i would have gone.

     That would be at what time in 1938? - A. That is approximately
        10-minutes-to-3.
                             *+- the entrance to the tunnel. VJere
        So there were peopl         - a . A line or a group. I cannon
        they in a line or a grou^.
        really remember exactly.
               , * ■ w i - v the stewards by their tabards? - A. That
        You would ldenui-y
        is right, yellow.
      You say there were P o l i c e m e n as w e l l ?    - A. I am certain of
    ' that, y e s , there was a mixed group.
                                     to recall, but are you saying thau
    . N o w it may =e G1“ “ i ^en there than Stewards or really
      there were raore„P 0 1 ^ ® " c e m e n o>- what? - A. It is very mucn
      more Stewards than                    th;re were perhaps more Stewaras,
         fthinr     T h a t   X would not like to be entirely certain
         about.
                    -•^•^■,1+- but what you are saying is your
q   . it is very                 being raore Stewards and perhaps one
         impression is o., tne-      9              picture? - A. Yes,
         or two Policemen with tnem.   is t
         I think so.
q       . And it was Stewards really who were stopping you going in?
         - a . Yes, combined.
                               +-hori tv of a Policeman there but it was tne
    Q - stewards              w fr f'sto ^ p in g you going in? - A. Yes.
    q   . That is your best recollection? - A. That is indeed, yes.

               T -«v vou about 1989. The approach that you hac
    q. Now may 1 “® * . L d < j e 7 - a. That is right,
       was over the oriage-
                                south side and the approach over the
       bridge^was^^perfectly normal approach? - A. Yes.

     q   . in terms of crowd and volume? - A. Yes.
                              27

                                        F.J. ECCLESTON



Q. Did you encounter any people asking for tickets? - A. No,
   I did not at all.

Q. Is it your recollection not a single person asked you for
   a ticket? - A. I don't think they did no, but to be fair
   I know people turned up without tickets.  I know that.

Q. How do you know that? - A. Because that i s      Liverpool
   are the most successful club in Europe and every away match,
   whether it is an F.A. Cup or the League you have to have
   tickets.  The only place you get tickets from are actually
   in Liverpool and a lot of people turn up in the hope they
   will get spare tickets and also a lot of away games they
   actually open turnstiles when they have not sold enough
   tickets, so there may have been a thought, you know, "If
   there is room in the ground I might be able to get in and
   pay cash".

Q. But quite a lot of publicity was given before the match,
   was it not, in the Anfield Review and in the local media?
   - A. Yes.

Q . 11 Not to come if you have not got tickets"? - A. But it still
       does not follow.  I have been to grounds this season that
       they have still opened turnstiles.

Q.          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: For   people to pay over the
      counter? - A. Yes.

Q. Have you ever been to a match where they have opened the
   gates and let people in without tickets or anything? - A.
   No never sir, no.

Q. So as far as you know there is no reason for non-ticket
   holders to go to a match in the expectation or hope that
   the gates might just be thrown open? - A. No, no, they
   would expect to pay if they could not get a spare ticket,
   I am absolutely certain of that.

            h r . V700DWARD: These non-ticket holders if they
      can't get a ticket, they have invested in the journey,
      they will do their darnedest to get in? - A. That is a
      fair comment but I have not witnessed any other method
      bar fair means of trying to get in, put it that way.

 Q.   But coming along over thebridge you saw the crowd at the
      Leppings Lane entrance and you noticed a considerable amount
      q-
       c oe0pie coming along from Leppings Lane travelling in
      the opposite direction? — A. Yes, there was far more j.rom
      that side than there was from the side I had come from.

 0    Did you see anv people carrying drink? Did you see a single
      can of beer? -*A. Yes, I am sure I did. Unfortunately it
      is something you get used to going to football matches.
      It is not something I condone but yes, I am afraid there
      must have been and I am sure there were, and of course
                                                 28

                                                                    F.J. ECCLESTON



                   ,     . i-m-hi i the verv lsist moment before 5 0 1 1 1 9
        2 S the%round and then S T e y ^ v e the, outside the ground
        on the floor or anywhere.

0   . They drink it? - A- T h e y i t or just don't finish it
      and drop it on the ground I am afraid.

                         TCRD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  If it is any help to you,^those
                    n <5 that went to the ground the day afterwards saw oeer
        c   a   n   s   on the ground, on th. ground side of the turnstUes.

                            MR. WOODWARD:    Thank you sir.

    -   nu.n ,.on came to the crowd outside the gate was it, as you
        S e been asked bv Mr. Hytner, quite obvious to you tr.ere
        w   a  g r e a t crush* inside? - A . Inside the grouno?
                s       a




          • - .          — A Oh inside the gates, yes, 1 ^as
    °* sSlp^sed.   I "knew I ‘had to join in but I was not anticipating
       the enjoyment of having to join that throng.

                      u                       pc i suppose could everybody else that
            was^approaching i «             - A. Oh yes, there was no doubt about
            that.
    ^            r*ir anvbodv hold back? - A. Well at 25-past-2, nal^-
            past-2~it was still quite a jovial crowd._ You coulcj/it.i
            some reasonable assumption t h m x you^cou.c ge, i..uC —
            ground at that stage with your ucxeu.




                                                      /Q. And get in through that ...•
%                                            29


                                                                    F.J. ECCLESTON




                      Q. And get in through that crowd with reasonable safety and
                         with reasonable convenience? - A. That is right.

                      Q. Given that it's a football match.    -   A. Yes.

                B     Q. So it would be wrong to have the impression from your
                         evidence that at the time that you came to the gates you
                         shouldn't have joined the crowd? - A. Well, I mean I had
                         a tic<ec and I wanted to get in the game so I would join
                         that ccowd because I knew that was the only way to get in.

                      ;. But you see it has been out to you it was plain as a
                         oi'cestaiff that the situation was such.  Now let us look at
                         that caretully.     You were going to the match. You had got
                         your ticket.    You saw the crowd.  It was quite crowded.


                          ftaverthe!ess according to your experience and judgment and,
                          if I may say so, sir, your responsible attitude, you
                          decided it was reasonable to advance and to go in. - A.
                          That is right.
                 D
                          and you didn't have any qualms about going on,             No I
                          d i d n ’t .

                          We must go in and go to the turnstiles.    -   A.   That is
                          right.

                          This would be at about what time?       A. I would say around
                  E       about Hal? past two.

                          So you were maxing your way through to the turnstiles when
                          you say you were catapulted forward? - A. The last ten
                          yards only.
                      -
                      s\'• So
                      '      something must have happened behind you did it? - A.
                          Kow that I couldn't say, but I can't imagine an enormous
                          crowd joining in five minutes.  I don't know but I'm just
                          using my imagination because I didn't look behind me.

                          You wouldn't have expected anything like that.      -   A. No.

                               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Have you ever watched the bath
                          water going cut?  It accelerates as it gets nearer the plug
                          hole doesn't it? - .A. That is right.

                               MR. WOODWARD:   May I ask you about the plug hole?
                          Did suddenly the turnstiles allow more people to go
                          through?  - A.   No.

                          It wasn't as i£ there was a great relief ahead of you into
                          which people ran?  - A. No.
                  H


    I I   U   | tr>
                                 30

                                                        F.J. ECCLESTON




            This w a s pressure from behind?     -   A. It must have been
            pressure from behind, yes.

                   MR. WOODWARD:      I*m not sure, sir, how full one's bath
            is at the end:
 B
            There was a lot of people came in behind you?         -    A. Yes.
            Oh undoubtedly must nave done.

            And vou h a d not been expecting that.          - A. No. I have     .
            never e x p e r i e n c e d being actually catapulted tnrougn cne ^en
            yards.
             Did you see people barging into the crowd, getting in the
             *ida thrustina"themselves in? - A. I wasn'c aware o t
             o^-ole barging'in.     It was very much a jostling crowa.
             There was no fora of order at all, some people getting
             a u -•>a irat®, but there was still, as I pointed out m my
             owi*ex?erience, there was still a little bit of humour
             around ac that stage.

 D             Did v 'vj see Pol icemen about? - A. There were thcee
               mountid Officers who actually we knew by face because they
               are from i.iverpocl and experienced in handling at
               Liv°roool.    There were also some Otticers on foot v.00 at
               the side by the river.

               Tliev were making valianu efforts were tne/.           A. -•
      Q.
               To control the crowd?  - A. Because if it became worse
      Q
               the river must have been a danger I presume, I don t Know.

               So havina aot to the crowd at two thirty, you got through
      Q.
               the' t u r n s t i l e s at about what time? - A. I think 3 use
               0 3 co c3  twenty to^ncse.

      r>        >id you hear anything on the public address system, that is
      •-£•      he tannoy, not a landrover, round about twenty to Jirae. -
                   Nothing at all sir, no

      r*.      Telling oeoole to not push, tailing the crowds to hcld^            ^
           *
               back, nothing to that effect? - A. I »asn t          o>           1 -,


               put it that way.
               Has there much noise?     -   A. Oh yes, there was a lot o£
      Q.
               noise in this ....
                                                                                 rr ft




                Chanting, shouting ....   - A. Oh no, not so much.     The
                was somp chanting behind us in the Lappings tane end, on
                vSu concentrated on your efforts to get tnrougn toose _ ^
                turnstiles.  People were, you know, they were o e m g pus,ne~
                and jostled.
  H


1+A
                               31


                                                     F.J. ’ ECCLESTON



     Q. If there was a message at that time it didn't appear to
        have any effect? - A. No I was concentrating too much.

     Q. You went into the ground and decided to take up the
        position, and took up the position which you aimed for?
B       A. That is right, which is the same as last year.

     Q. That would be about two forty five would it?              -   A. Yes.

     Q. Are you sure about that?       -   A. I am yas.

     Q. Now what you cold the Inquiry is that at cwo forty five ths
        state of the pans 3 and 4 was jammed packed.  - A. Yes.

     Q. No room for anybody in there.        -   A. I wouldn't have
        thought so.

     Q. And you had a good view of it did you?         -       A. Yes.

     Q. Would you hava a look pleasa at the composite bundle of
T)      photographs, aloum 2. The first photographs in that bundle
         ace timed, and the corrected time for the first one is two
         forty six.  Do you hava the photograph in front of you?
         A. Yes.

          Sow that shows gate 4, pen 4, a little to the left of it
          one can see the fence dividing pen 4 from pen 3. Do you
          see the Scottish flag in the foreground? - A. Yes I do.
E
     q   . And then one can see into pen 3, down at the front there
           behind the goal.  Would you look at those pictures.  You
           see one can see room round the fence, one can see
           suoporters standing and turning and looking in different
           directions.  There would appear to be quite a lot of free­
           dom down at the front there, certainly in that area at that
           time, would you agree.  - A. There is some space, yes, I
           would agree.

     Q. Ic is not jam packed there is it?        -   A. It would appear
         not.

     Q. And anybody looking at tht might have the impression that
        there was room to come into the terrace.  - A. If you were
        standing in front of it as the photographer was, yes.

     Q. Of course it depends on your viewpoint.            -     A. That is
        right.

     Q.     And it d e p e n d s what you are looking at, but looking at the
            first, the second and the third photographs in that bundle
            showing that area - it d o e s n ’t show the whole area, but it
            shows the area down by the corner of the goal between pens
H         4  and 3 and that foreground, so the photographs are
                             32

                                                         F.J. ECCLESTON



    numbered DB1629, D81S30, D81631.                 Now that is at two forty
    3 iX •• • •
         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I'm sorry, I ’m trying to relate
    this to the schedule of times but I think the schedule of
    times put in before me only relate to album 1. Is there a
    schedule 2? •

           MR. WOODWARD:          Thera     is sir, yes..

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     It is a couple                of   sheetsis it
    in all, or is there an extra one?

           MR. WOODWARD:       There is a schedule for 1, sir, and a
    schedule for 2, and they are both a couple          of   sheetslong.'
    (Produced)        I have handed  you two in case either of your
    M s s 0 s s c r •••*

           LORD JUSTICE           TAYLOR: Hava you got one more?

         MR. GLASGOW:               Sir      the bundle 2 that Ihandedupto
    you on Thursday of             last week w-a too’
                                                    <  thelibertyof writing
    the correct time on             the opposite page, if you’ve still got
    it.
           LORD JUSTICE           TAYLOR: Yes indeed.

         MR. GLASGOW:      Youcan take it from msthat those are
    rioht, >'3 wrote them on ourselvas, so you can aoandon
    those.
         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you, so I can dispense
    with those.  I think the others have not got them. (Copy
    produced to Mr. Johnson)

           MR.   WOODWARD:I               understand, sir,you will hava on
    the left hand sida ....

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:              Yes I've got it now, two forty
     six
          MR. WOODWARD:   That relates-to the photograph on the
     right and not to the back of the picture.  It relates to
     the facing page.

            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:              Yes.

0         m r . WOODWARD: D81629, that condition, that state,
     c^rtainlv in that area, is one where you were going to want
     to stand"and you would have no doubts about going to stand
     there, according to the state of the crowd there.  - A.
     From the ooint of view of the photograph yes, but if ---
                               33

                                                      F.J. ECCLESTON




    Q. Well you seem to hava some reservations. What ara they? -
       A. To aet to there you couldn't get from the behind to
       there." It is well packed behind.  I would never attempt to
       get anybody else into that situation just because there's a
       little" bit of room at the front. It is well packed in my
B      opinion.

    Q. It vou look at the next photograph, DS163G, that is a view
       taken, you can see at the top of the back there the
       entrance to the tunnel and then a further view along tha
       front of those paople facing the perimeter fence.   - A.
       And chat is 31 is it?

    0.    That-, DS1630.   -   A. 30 yes.

    r
    V>• And then D31631, all taken at about the same time,          two
        ifortv six. - A. There is enough people in there,           bearing
        in mind that as soon as the gate starts the crush,          people
        oush to the front, for people's comfort to last an          hour and
        a half.
D              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Presumably, looking at 31, the
          man whose head you can't see, and whosa hands are cm* the
          underside of the seating stands, is standing on the
          dividing fence at the entrance to the tunnel, or the exit
          from the tunnel.  Must be mustn't it?

               MS. WOODWARD:        That seems to be the only foothold
          there sir.

               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   And the man to the left we can
          see on the other photograph as well must be sitting on
          something.

               MR. WOODWARD:        That is the wall I think sir.

               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:         Oh yes, that is the ’
                                                                pit of
          brick wall that projects.

               MR.   WOODWARD:   Yes, there are two buttresses that
          come out   either side of the tunnel', and one can see those
          in 31 on   the right, either side. I think they remain a
          constant   feature on most of the pictures.

               THE WITNESS:   From  what the previousgentleman said I
          would expect on 29 that a steward would encourage people to
          move into that space.

     0.        MR. WOODWARD: ■   Yes, you would expect stewards to be
          encouraging people to come down. — A. That is rigot.
          And that does happen in other games.
                     34

                                              F.J. ECCLESTON




So the impression on those photographs, that sort of
situation that you see on those photographs, is one which
if it's going to be interfered with or directed by anybody,
would be by saying to the people at the back, "Come down a
bit, come forward."   - A.     Yes but more likely, the
easiest to communicate with are the people in the front.
If they fill the front in properly those automatically will
come from the back.   You w o n ’t get communications through
to those at the back.

Sc the packing would be done by saying to the people at the
front, "Come on, pack up a bit closer, there's more room."
- A. Yes.

"Let those at the back have more room".       -   A. That is
correct yes.

And we know that shortly after this the cry ran up "Go
back.  Go back" because the situation changed.  You, in
your statement, describe surprise at seeing the lack of
occupation at the wings.  - A. Yes.

Did vou know there were gates at the back of: the terrace,
at the too of the terrace, to give access to the wings?
A. Yes.  Weil I gleaned that information later, after the
event.

You didn't know then?     -   A. I didn't know at the time, no.

According to your statement if one reads it through, would
it be right to say that once you were in the ground and in
your p o s i t i o n you really observed no problems or difficulty
until' the game had been in progress for about five minutes?
   A. The game stopped at six minutes past three.         One
became aware at approximately four minutes past three that
the crowd were in trouble because they were trying to get
over the fences.

Your attention, and you were in a position to see all that
was happening ___   - A. Thats correct.

....was not really upon the state o£ the terraces until
about five minutes, four minutes past three? -• A. That
is right yes.

When people started to come over.       -   A. Yes.

And you in fairness said that at that time the perception
that this wasn't a pitch invasion might take some time to
dawn on people.  ~ A. Oh yes.

 And it would be understandable that some might construe it
                   35

                                            F.J. ECCLESTON




as that.  - A. Yas, but having said that, why should I be
tha first, to dawn on me whan ....

No reason at all.   The evidence that you gave relates your
attention to the problems in the terrace to a surge and
something haopening. on tne oitcn. ~ A. That is rignt.

That was the time that the goal was nearly scored.     -     A.
Yes.
Can I ask you nov; about the gates? Is it your impression
that whilst there were these crowds in the pans that the
real disaster, the substantial problem, occurred really
around   about and close to the gates? - A. Yes, but this
is, ic   I may express a personal opinion ....

Yes.   - A. I think if there is a way      tha crowd couldhave
soread   to the left and to the right -    in other words,it^ is
the~side partitions that cause the trouble.     They make them
into pens".  If you have got a fencing in front of you you
can live with that, and I can understand that, but I don't
understand why we have to be penned in from the side
because when the crush    came youcould have moved to the
left or right.   That would, have saved life.

It wao your impression of where there were people trapped
and cauaht as opposed to people being squashed, if I can
make that distinction, down by the gates ---   - A. That
is right.

     thece were oeoole     who wereall entangled andthen .
meshed.  - A. That*is      corcect,yes.

And is really your impression this: that that enmeshing,
that entangling, that confusion, was in and around the area
of the gates?




                           /A. I think it was spread
                                         36

                                                               F.J. ECCLESTON


            - A. I think it was spread out all the way along, but then I
            would think the place people would try to go to is the gates.
            If they could find any room, it is the place we all try to go
            through a door, is it not, to get out? So, yes, there may
            have been more than there was in the outer parts away from
            the gates.

®   Q. If I can put it this way, the concentration of disaster seemed
       •£q get greater- towards the gate? - A. I think that is correct,
            yes.
    Q. And the gates were so narrow? - A. That is correct, yes.

    Q        And there were steps up to them? - A.Yes, so I         gather.

    Q        The Police, you had paid tribute to many of the Officers.            You
            described their conduct and quick thinking and presence of
            mind as m a g n i f i c e n t ? - A. That is right, certain individuals,
            they used their common sense and initiative.

    0        Would it be right also to note that as with spectators and
             others there were people who were dumbstruck? - A. Yes.

D   Q        They were perplexed and bewildered?        - A. Yes.

    q        And reallv did not know what to do? -  A. It was as though it
             had not come into their book of rules.   They really naa never
             seen anything like this.

    o             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Who are you talking about now? -
             A I am talking about Police Officers.   I think, quite
             honestly, some did not know. They had not Deen orders about
             this sort of situation, whereas others they seemed to over­
             ride their orders and use their caring humanity side to
             realise what was happening.

     Q            MR. W O O D W A R D : So the picture is not really one of
             Policemen just standing around wilfully not doing things, but
             many Officers oerplexed? - A. Yes.        I have made the statement,
             just lacked leadership in my person opinion.

        o    Lacked direction, something to galvanise them and go? - A.
             Yes.  We needed the old Sergeant with his stick walking up and
             down to as you say galvanise people into some sort of order.

        a    when they got it there were those who responded? - A. Yes.
             We l l , s o m e responded without it.

        a     Oh ves    But there was a time, was there not, when there were
              Police Officers along the perimeter fence trying to help
              people come over? - A. Some were.

              Which because of their presence just could not let any more
        Q.
              Officers up, so numerous were they? -A. Yes.
H
              And there were Officers who went inside to try and help? - A.
        Q.
              Yes.
                                  37


                                                        F.J. ECCLESTON



    Q.   They entered into it? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Almost regardless of the risk to themselves?    - A. Yes,   that is
         a fair comment.

    Q. Did you see any Officers come in from the back, from the
B      tunnel? - A. No, I did not.

    Q. Would it be right, just as there may have been people looking
       from the front who did not appreciate what was happening,
       there were numbers in the terrace itself further back who
       plainly did not appreciate what was happening? - A. That is
       quite possible, but I think the crush was such everybody in
       those two pens knew.  But that is a general observation.

    Q. Did you see any response - whether it could have been
       responded to may be a matter to be looked at - did you see any
       response to those Officers’ cries on the fence to get back,
       to get back? - A. No, I was too engrossed in what I was trying
       to do with individuals to note that.

D   Q. Thank you.

                       Cross-Examined bv MR. GLASGOW:

    Q. Mr. Eccleston, could you just help us as to timing.  When you
       came into the ground the first thing you did was to go to the
       toilet, I think? - A. That is correct.

    Q. And as you came out and turned round you could see the
       gate behind you just being opened? - A. That is right.
       My son remarked on this and he drew my attention to it.

    Q. And anticipating what would happen when that gate was opened,
       you made your way quickly back towards it, in fact? - A. No.

    Q. Well, just turn round to get this accurately.  I know you did
       not intend to go towards it but you would have had to go.... -
       A. It is that gap we came through.

    Q. So you have had to take a number of steps towards the gate? -
       A. I suppose so.

    Q. Before going through the wall? - A.' Yes.

    Q. But you were concentrating on making your way as quickly as
       you could to a place of safety in what we know as pens 5 and
       6? - A. Yes.

    0. Did you see for yourself what did happen when the gates
       opened? - A. No, I did not.  I didn’t hang around.

    Q. You simply saw them being opened? - A. Yes.
H
    Q. By the time you got round and up into the high area where you
       have indicated it was obvious to you that the people who were
                                 38

                                                        F.J. ECCLESTON


     coming in through the gate as you turned the corner would have
     been in the ground by then? - A. Yes, because they would go
     straight down the tunnel.

Q. It was just your help with this, Mr. Eccleston.   When you
   first came out on to the high terrace and got your bearings
   and looked down into pens 3 and 4 in the centre, the scene you
   saw there had already been joined by whoever had come down the
   tunnel from the opening gate? - A. Yes, I would imagine so.

Q.   I wonder if we could look....

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        The first wave?

          MR. GLASGOW:   For the first time, my Lord:

Q.   I didn't want to criticise you at all. Mr. Eccleston. because
     you are doing admirably well, but I think I could fairly tell
     you we know probably as a certainty that the gate was
     actually opened at 2.47.  If I were to tell you that I ara
     sure you would accept therefore you must have in fact been
     making your way on to the terraces probably at 2.48 or 2.49?
     - A. Yes.

Q. And that was not a criticism.  Perhaps you could help us with
   the photographs.  The bundle 2 you were looking at, could we
   look at the timing of those.  You have been perfectly properly
   and helpfully asked about the scene that is shown in the
   first three photographs.  Could we look at the second
   together, which we know was taken   at 2.46. Just to help
   you, that is taken probably very shortly before you are
   coming out of the toilet, because it is taken not less
   than 60 seconds before the gate is opened. - A. Right.

Q. And it would be fair to say, would it not, despite the
   climbing on the walls at the back there isroom at the front
   quite evidently for people to be turning round and free space
   to move? - A. Yes.

Q; There is nothing you could properly call a crush against the
   fencing? - A. No.

Q. And indeed, these first three photographs, all taken at
   approximately the same time, if we go back to photograph No. 1
   there is the young man with the Scottish flag with really
   quite a lot of space all round him by gate 4? - A. That is
   correct.

G. That is the situation at 2.46.  Would you go on to the fourth
   photograph, just 4 minutes later.   It is DB 17/14. Again, you
   can take it from me that is taken   at 15.00.  In  other words,
   precisely 3 o ’clock. It is right   to say, is it  not, thatwe
   there do see the solid density, the mass of people crushed
   together at the front, which is what you were describing as
   the solid, unmoving, with no bobbing heads? - A. That is
   correct.
                                39

                                                    F.J. ECCLESTON


Q. And the situation as you first saw it must have been, although
   from a different angle, that which is illustrated in this
   photograph which is taken at 3 o ’clock? - A. I imagine so.

Q.    Or within a minute or so of that? - A. Yes.

Q.    And it is also fair to say that by 3 o ’clock, whether or not
      you were conscious of the precise time, at least one fan was
      climbing over the front fence - we see him in the picture -
      and the gate is open, and I accept wholly docilely and
      properly fans are being allowed our, and as we see on
      the video are being filtered along the front to be taken into
      the pens 1 and 2 at the far end.   But what I wanted your help
      with. Mr. Eccleston, is, were you conscious of that scene
      going on at about 3 o ’clock? - A. No, I would be concentrating
      very hard on the game at that stage.

Q. You were not aware of it until some moments later? - A. It was
   moments later, yes, undoubtedly.

Q. But it is now clear you never had a sight of pens 3 and 4
   before they had been hit by the impact of the first opening of
   the gate? - A. I suppose I had not, no, if your....

Q. Assume, please, my timing is right. - A. Yes, I will, indeed.

Q. Thank you.

Q          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   By the time you got to your seat
      were zhe teams out? - A. No, they were not, sir.

Q     Can you give any idea how soon after you got to your seat they
      came out? - A. i thought I reached my standing position at
      quarter-to-3. Obviously it was a couple of minutes later than
      that.  The Liverpool side must have come at about 7-minutes-
      to-3.

Q. You had been in position at any rate for a minute.‘-or two? - A.
   O h , yes.

 Q. Before the teams came out? - A. Yes, that is correct, sir.

 Q.         MR. GLASGOW:   The other matter, Mr. Eccleston, I would
      lij^e your help on please, is the question of the presence of
      stewards. Did you see the yellow tops you have described down
      on the pitch perimeter mingled with the Police? - A. I think I
      saw some, yes.

 Q. I simply wanted to know this.  Did you - perfectly fairly -
    assume because you saw the yellow jackets, that they were
    stewards? - A. Yes.

 Q. Just to clarify the point, if we look together at any of the
    later photographs, if you like, in the last section, flip
    through at your liberty, but ^  112/A,^ ^ 2 1 is perhaps the
    clearest, do you see that situation?   A. Yes.
                                                       40

                                                                          F.J. ECCLESTON


                          Q. Those are the sort of men you saw wearing those yellow
                             jerkins? — A. That is right, yes.

                          Q. Did you or do you now appreciate they are in fact press men? -
                             A. I do now, yes.

                      B   Q. And not stewards? - A. That is right.

                          Q. And you would have fairly got the impression those particular
                             men wearing yellow jerkins did not do anything to help because
                             they were too busy taking photographs of people? - A. Yes, I
                             could easily have mistaken that, yes, but I must admit I was
                             not aware both sets were wearing yellow jerkins, no.

                          Q.   The only other matter about the stewards I would like your
                               help on, Mr. Eccleston, is you told us about the line of
                               stewards and police whom you had seen on the previous year
                               across the tunnel entrance.   I remind you of the way in which
                               you wrote your own statement. The statement we have been very
                               helpfully given now, did you in fact write this for yourself?
                               Are those your own words? ~ A. It i s . X wrote it on the
                               Tuesday after the event as much to help myself as well as to
                      D        put down the facts and my observations.

                          Q    Butit is actually your own work rather than somebody else’s?
                               - A. It is entirely my own work.   My secretary typed it up
                               the    same day for me, in fact.

                          Q. If I may say so, with respect, itjust shows lawyers ought to
                             leave people to write their own statements, it is so good.   If
                             we look at your personal observations, in your own words you
                             had said as ' your third personal observation:

                                    "When we came through the turnstiles for the 1988 game we
                                    were met  by a line of stewards and Police Officers".

                               You were asked by my learned friend, Mr. Woodward, on my left,
                               whether or not what you meant to say was you saw a line of
                               stewards with two or three Policemen?    Is that-in fact what
                               you meant to say when you wrote the words, "a line of stewards
                               and Police Officers"? - A. If you were to put me on the line I
                               would say there were more stewards than Police Officers. That
                               is   as much as I could honestly say.

                           q   You have very fairly said you have some difficulty in
                               recollecting precisely what the situation was, but you are
                               certain, are you, that the tunnel was closed? - A. Absolutely
                               certain, because I would have been down that tunnel, because
                               that is'the nearest approach to getting on to the terracing.

                           Q    I should make clear. Mr. Eccleston, I am accepting that as
                                being both accurate and truthful, of course.   The only
                                criticism I have, if ’•criticism” is not too strong a word is
                                that in fact it was substantially Policemen.   Almost the
                      H         entire line was Policemen.   But with that difference between
                                mv friend on my left and myself, can you help the Inquiry as
                                to which of us is right, or are you saying it is really just a
I !   H a r n h a m Ltd
                                               F.J. ECCLESTON


matter of impression? - A. It is a matter of impression,
because perhaps the yellow sticks more in my mind.  I could
not really, hand on heart, say there was more of one group
than the other.

I w o n ’t press you in that case.   Thank you for your patience
with me.




                             /LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     I am.
                         42


                                       F. J. ECCLESTON

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am very grateful to you
for coming twice, Hr. Eccleston, and not only for your
evidence but obviously for the enormous help you gave
that day.
     THE WITNESS:   Thank you.
