                                                                                       M IR .15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                          lMd<a3l [°\0
                                             Date and time raised                         MIS'    Number   D fF i
Title   V lH ju C te      jjf/L f-   df A ^ l LKOjpS CL0 IA q m L O J t. € v L x l n rs
(Include tource and any document number if relevant)

Receiver's instructions — urgent action —




Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                           Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions



Indexed       iicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken
                                                                                                            O/M      SIO




Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                                 JMJ/FR

                                                                 21st November,   1990



Managing Director,
Geographers’ A-Z Map Company Ltd,.
Vestry Road,
Sevonoaks,
Kent,
TN14 5 F P .

Dear Madam,

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER INQUESTS
USE OF GEOGRAPHERS» A-Z OF SHEFFIELD

I refer to a telephone discussion of today between my Detective Inspector PERKINS
and your             in respect of the use of Page 86 of your A-Z of Sheffield.
This page depicts the area around the Hillsborough Football Stadium, reference A1
on the map page.

During the morning, a witness was interviewed who was describing some events
related to the area of the Stadium.     Because of the immediacy of w i t n e s s ’s
evidence in the Coro ne r ’s Court, I used page 86 for the purposes of exposition.
In so doing, the Coroner acknowledged your production in his Court, and the fact
was recorded in the transcripts.

A total of 50 copies was produced and distributed within the Court for the
benefit of the Coroner, his Jury, and the Legal Representatives.

I would be grateful if you would confirm your agreement to use the page and
advise me of any royalties due.

You will recall that Detective Inspector PERKINS also mentioned that we would
like to use other pages of your A-Z to produce a map of the wider areas
surrounding the Hillsborough Stadium.  I will write to you in due course to
advise you what we would like to do and how many copies we would like to
reproduce by photocopying.

As the Inquests progress, there may be need to refer to your A-Z again.  Should
that occur, I wonder if I could have your permission to reproduce copies of your
maps (with the appropriate acknowledgement), in Court advising you later what has
been done and how many copies have been reproduced.  Any royalties due we will of
course accept liability for.

Thank you on behalf of myself and the Coroner for all your assistance in this
matter.

Yours faithfully,
