OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                            Date and time raised   Q?g/<Q f^?(                       Number


Title             |t d m      HS,£. Or (a £                      l/if o                                 *icc c^jaqjp
(Include source and any document number if relevant)
                                                                                  ~+0 Ua^JJUOAC^S0l£kA^i.
Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                     Receiver




Document                                                                                                             Indexer
       it j e y sfered/ii
                   red/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                 Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                     Indexer
Indexec        cated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined     further action to be taken                                               F;.i ; a    Epi
                                                                                                                  0/M      sio

                                                                                      U     S i
                                                                                                  fea
                                                                                                  %              c|S£>(
                                                                                                                  P"
                                                                                  1   a

Further action No(s)                                                                                                 Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                        HSE
                               Health & Safety Executive
                         Research and Laboratory Services Division



Mr J M Jones
Deputy Chief Constable
Coroner's Officer
Furnival House
Furnival Gate                                                        SMR/343/23 5/01
Eyre Street
SHEFFIELD      SI 4QN                                                14 December 1990



Dear Mr Jones
Thank you for your letter of 11 December. The attached draft has
been prepared for insertion into your letter to Hammond Suddards.
I hope that this is satisfactory.

Yours sincerely




C E NICHOLSON
Deputy Director - Safety Engineering Laboratory 1


cc   Dr A Jones




                                  Broad Lane, Sheffield S3 7HQ
                  Tel: 0742 768141 Fax: 0742 755792 Telex: 54556 (HSE RLS G)
         DRAFT FOR INSERTION INTO LETTER TO HAMMOND SUDDARDS

There are several points where the opinion expressed within the
reports differ from the findings contained within HSEreports and
the two major areas are as follows:

1.   Number of people in Pen 3

The Elrond report concludes that 'the balance of probability is
that the real number of occupants was nearer to 1200 .... than the
preferred estimate of the HSE at 15767. This conclusion appears to
be based on the analysis of a photograph that was of significantly
inferior definition to those analysed by HSE.

The HSE estimate is not a maximum and no allowance was made in the
estimate for any 'missed7 or 'obscured7 heads. HSE made the
assumption that the density in the front row (the pitch side of
Barrier 124A) was 10/sq metre, but the remaining three rows were
actual counts of observed heads from photographs.   Even if the
assumption had been made that the density in the front row was the
same as the HSE counted density of the second row, then an estimate
of 1478 for the total in Pen 3 is obtained, again with no allowance
for any obscured heads.   It is worth noting that the Elrond report
indicates that densities as high as 12.5/sq metre are possible.

2.   Collapse load of Barrier 124A

In the Elrond report there is much technical argument on the merits
of the 'Eastwood Rig7 and on the measured plastic deformations, at
loads less than 6 kN/m, that occurred on several barriers tested
both before and after the disaster.  It is HSE7s opinion, based on
analysis, that the Eastwood Rig was a reasonably practical solution
to the provision of a uniformly distributed load, and analysis
shows that the rig produces bending moments on the top rail that
are more severe than those from a uniformly distributed load.

HSE7s analysis shows that yielding of the support legs and the top
rail of a typical 'old type7 barrier will occur at loads less than
6 kN/m and the analysis is in broad agreement with the Elrond
report. However, there appears to be a lack of clarity in the
Elrond criteria for failure. There is a significant difference
between the load to collapse a barrier and the load that causes
sufficient yielding so that the barrier fails the Green Guide
criteria.
However, in the incident, for the top rail to have become bent to
the shape in which it was found would require the support legs to
have provided sufficient reaction to support the rail during the
time during which the rail was bending. Hence, HSE are of the
opinion that the collapse sequence for Barrier 124A was that the
top rail deformed to its present shape before the collapse of the
support legs. The maximum load that the barrier sustained is
therefore the load to deform the top rail and not the load to
collapse a support leg. HSE therefore disagree with the conclusion
in the Elrond report that Barrier 124A collapsed at a load of
5.25 kN/m (page 6 para 6), this being the test load that caused
yielding, but did not collapse the centre support of Barrier 131.
HSE7s estimate of the collapse load, based on a test of a similar

                                     1
top rail, was 8.1 kN/m, and the details are given in HSE report
IR/L/ME/89/36.

The Elrond report states that the 'HSE study concludes that the
6 kN/m test load is not adequate7 but does not qualify the
statement. The HSE report actually stated 'Given that the gap in
the row of barriers behind 124A was greater than that recommended
in the Green Guide, the test load of 6 kN/m was inadequate.7




                                  2
