                                                                                        M IR .15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                            Date and time raised   IJ A W        j 9 0 — jO v M       Number



Title
(Include source and any document number i f relevant!


Receiver's instructions - urgent action - Ves/^kf
                                                    Pocx
                                                                                                                      Receiver


                                                                                                                   3133
                                                                                                                      Indexer
Document registefed/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                  Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions


                                                                                                                         Indexer
 Indexed a>irfdicated

 No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                  O /M         SIO
 Examined - further action to be taken




 Further action No(s)

                                                                               M.         C n - i ' ’"
NEWS RELEASE                     50 Queen Anne's Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                 (Night line 01 -2 7 3 4595)
                                 Contact N um ber:




   29 January 1990                                            01 273 4640

     HOME SECRETARY RESPONDS TO LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S FINAL REPORT
                  ON THE HTT.TjSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER


   The Home Secretary, the Rt Hon David Waddington QC MP, today
   gave the Government's initial response to Lord Justice Taylor s
   final report on the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster by means of a
   Statement in the House.
   The full text of the Home Secretary's statement is attached.
                HOME S E CR E T A RY ’S STATEMENT ON
              LORD JUSTICE T A Y L O R ’S FINAL REPORT
                     OF HIS INQUIRY INTO THE
                HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER
                         29 JANUARY 1990


With   permission,   Mr Speaker,     I should     like to make   a
statement about the final report of Lord Justice T a y l o r ’s
Inquiry into the tragedy at the Hillsborough stadium on
15 April 1989, which is published today.          Some months have
passed since that terrible event but not long enough I know
to dull the pain suffered by the bereaved, and I wish to
place on record my sympathy for them and for those who
sustained injury.




I am most grateful to Lord Justice Taylor for the Report,
which sets out clearly why we have had so many major
tragedies at football grounds over the years and why we have
had disorder and hooliganism.        As the House familiarises
itself with the Report, it will become clear that it is
addressed as much to the football industry as it is to the
Government.   Lord Justice Taylor explains how in his interim
report he concentrated on overcrowding because that was the
cause of the Hillsborough disaster, but now he goes on to
talk of a game, the image of which has been much
tarnished, and of a blight over the game due to old grounds,
poor facilities, hooliganism, excessive drinking and poor
leadership.


Lord Justice Taylor does not spare those who run the
industry.     He says indeed that the provision they make for
their customers is often not merely basic but squalid,       and
he says that squalid conditions can have an impact on safety
and that in his view they also lead to lower standards of
behaviour.


Lord   Justice    Taylor   Taylor   says   that   the   Football
Association and Football League have not seen it as any part
of their duty to offer guidance to clubs on safety matters,
and he questions whether the directors of many clubs are
genuinely interested in the welfare of their own supporters
or their good behaviour.     Players too are criticised, with
Lord Justice Taylor pointing out that incitement from the
pitch or bad behaviour by players, which is not confined to
soccer, has a major influence on the crowd.       I acknowledge
that some clubs have made an effort to an effort to improve
standards, but Lord Justice T a y l o r ’s clear conclusion was
that the majority had not and that the game only has a
future if the directors and the players can change their own
priorities and give a leadership which is plainly lacking at
present.


He agrees with the Government that there must be a move
towards all-seater stadia and points out that section 11 of
the   Football    Spectators   Act   specifically   provides   the
machinery for this.     The change will improve safety and will
improve behaviour, and we intend to bring it about.            Lord
Justice Taylor makes clear that the bulk of the finances for
ground improvements will have to be raised by the clubs
themselves.      He says there are ways of raising the money if
the clubs' management is enterprising and resourceful and he
points to the opportunities presented by sponsorship.            He
also points to the revenue that flows to the football
authorities for television rights and says that the football
authorities should ensure that this valuable source of
revenue i £ directed towards improving stadia.       He canvasses
the possibility of a levy on transfer fees which he says
have reached a level which many regard as grotesque.


There are a whole series of detailed recommendations set out
in Chapters 3, 4 and 5 on matters relating to
spectator safety such as gates and gangways.         Indeed, of the
76 recommendations, 43 in substance appeared in the Interim
Report.     The Government accepts these proposals,             some of
which     can be implemented immediately.           Some will      need
further work.       For convenience I have placed in the Vote
Office a schedule setting out the Government's response to
each.


Hon Members will recall that section 13 of the Football
Spectators Act provides for the Football Licensing Authority
to      supervise   the     safety   responsibilities      of     local
authorities in respect of designated football grounds.               We
intend to implement that provision.          Lord Justice Taylor
welcomes     the    establishment    of   the   Football    Licensing
Authority but would like us to go further and extend its
remit to cover other than football grounds.                This would
require primary legislation and we will have to consider
whether it is justified.


Part III the Report contains a number of proposals relating
to crowd control          and hooliganism.      It acknowledges the
crucial role of the police in crowd control.            Lord Justice
Taylor rightly reminds us that, without the work of the
police, many sporting events would be chaotic and could not
be permitted to take place.        Something like 5000 police
officers are engaged on football duties each Saturday during
the season,    largely at the expense of the taxpayer and
ratepayer.    He pays tribute to them for their service.     I
want to add my thanks to the police for the way they carry
out the difficult, thankless and often unthanked tasks which
are thrust upon them.


The Report recognises the advances made in the last couple
of years in the effectiveness of the policing of football,
particularly inside grounds, and to the major impact of
closed circuit television on the hooligan problem.    It also
mentions other measures taken by the Government such as the
restriction on the sale of alcohol and the power given to
the courts to make orders excluding convicted hooligans from
grounds.


Lord Justice Taylor also recognises the great potential
value of the police National Football Intelligence Unit in
dealing with    football-related    crime and with   hooligans
travelling to matches abroad.
As I have said, Lord Justice Taylor takes the view that
better facilities and better treatment of fans will bring
better behaviour.      Beyond that, the Report recommends the
creation of three new specific three new specific offences
to apply at designated sports grounds:, throwing a missile;
chanting obscene or racialist abuse;             and going onto the
pitch without reasonable excuse:           and it also asks for
consideration to be given to extending the courts' powers to
impose   attendance     centre    orders   and    for   the   use    of
electronic tagging in the case of offenders convicted of
football-related      offences.     The    specific     new   offences
suggested do to some extent seem to duplicate offences which
are already available in the Public Order Act.            But I shall
look carefully and quickly at all these suggestions.


 I now come to the proposed Football Membership Scheme.             Lord
 Justice Taylor examined the Invitation to Tender for a
 scheme which was issued by the consultants employed by the
 football authorities.       He came to the conclusion that he
 could not support a scheme of that kind because he did not
 believe the technology would work well enough to avoid the
 danger of congestion and disorder.          He was also concerned
 about the call on police resources.        Instead he proposes the
 measures to which I have referred.
In the light of this advice, the Government have decided not
to proceed with the establishment of a Football Membership
Authority, but Part I of the Act will remain on the Statute
Book.      Work will       continue      to see     how the    shortcomings
identified by Lord Justice Taylor could be overcome in case
we have to return to the matter again, should the problem of
hooliganism not be defeated by the alternative strategy
alternative strategy proposed in the report.


Let no-one imagine that this means there will be any let up
in   the    fight    against       hooliganism.        Those who,      unlike
Government,         have     for    so     long     shrugged     off    their
responsibilities will now have to face up to them.                        The
Government intends to proceed as quickly as possible to the
establishment of a Football Licensing Authority and, subject
to consultation.           Section 11 of the Football Spectators Act
will be used to direct the to direct the Licensing Authority
to require all seater stadia - with standing being reduced
by stages      and entirely eliminated               in First and Second
Division grounds           by August      1994 and     in all     designated
Football League grounds by 1999.                  The necessary steps will
be taken to ensure improved arrangements for crowd control
and better training for police and stewards.                   There will be
urgent consideration of the case for new offences and for
new powers to deal with those excluded from grounds by the
Courts.        The Clubs will be compelled will be compelled to
get rid of the terraces.        But Lord Justice Taylor indicates
how much more they can do to create a better atmosphere by
improving the now often squalid conditions to which they
subject their supporters - squalid conditions which can
encourage squalid behaviour.          Those clubs which have not
faced     up     to   their   responsibility   now   have   a   final
opportunity to do so: and if they don't now act, the public
will not forgive them.
