                                                                     ACC(DtC)

                                                                   28 March 1991


Brigadier J Pownall OBE
Deputy Chairman (Discipline)
Police Complaint* Authority
10 Great George Street
London
SW1P 3AB


Dear
You will recall at our aeeting in London on 18 October 1990, when you, Gerry
Gillaan. Jane Helllcar and Colin Daulby were present we discussed the progress
of the Hillsborough file. Again, you will recall it was agreed that a very
early decision, within 48 hours, would be made following the submission by
«yself of the relevant papers.
Despite the loss to the Authority of Gerry Gillman, I m pleased that you were
able to confix*, in our telephone conversation on Monday 25 March, that you
will endeavour to reach a decision with regard to the possibility of
 disciplinary offences at the earliest possible time. Indeed, your intention
 to aim for Friday 5 April is wash welcomed and If you can cone to a decision
 prior to that date this would be even more helpful.

 I can inform you that the Inquest came to an end today at 12.15 P*» when the
 Jury returned verdicts of accidental death in respect of each deceased. I
 conclude fro* that decision that no further evidence was forthcoming which
 merits a referral back to Mr Leslie Sharp, the Investigating officer, for the
 collection of additional material, statements etc, to support criminal
 proceedings.
 The memoranda I enclose with this letter are based solely upon the evidence
 presented to me in the report of the supervised investigation undertaken by
 Mr Leslie Sharp, the Chief Constable of Cumbria. You will see that I have
 concluded that no disciplinary action is appropriate in respect of any of the
 complaints agalnat the six officers.
 I suspect that both the result of the Inquest and any decision that the PCA
 make will attract media attention, but, in accordance with your statement on
 18 October 1990, I understand that you will not take part in any television
 programs or press conference. You said you will only write to the complainants
 and prepare a statement for the media, sending us copies for our perusal prior
 to release. An embargo will be placed on your press statement so that there
 will be time for the officers to be informed before it becomes available to
 the media. These arrangements are very much appreciated and I thank you for
 them.

 Yours
   ,        ✓
NOTES CW MEETING AT PCA ON 18.10.90

Present

PCA            Brigadier Pownall
               Gerry Giliman
               Jane Hellicar
               Colin Daulby

SYP            ACC Mr Anderson
               A/Chief Supt Fell
               A/Supt Drabble


 1. After discussing at length     it was agreed that no decision could
    properly be made until the     conclusion of theinquests as  fresh
    evidence may come out.

 2.   It is intended that the decision on discipline should quickly
      follow the result unless substantial new evidence is given
      revealing possible criminal or discipline matters which have not
      already been encompassed by the investigation to date.

 3. If that does happen the way forward will be for the investigating
    officer to consult with Noel Taylor as to whether further
     investigation is necessary in which case the decision would have
     to be delayed until any further report had been considered.

 4. If no further investigation is required, we will do the necessary
    memos to the PCA immediately the result is known to enable them
     to swiftly reach their decision.

5.    To this end we and the PCA will read the file   so as to be prepared
       to react quickly as at (4).

6.    Consultation between us and the PCA will continue whilst the file
      is being read in the hope that the positions both adopt eventually
      are not too uncomfortable for each other.

 7. When the PCA have reached a decision they will do a full press
     release, write to the complainants, inform us and send us a copy
    prior to the release so the officers can be informed but with
    details embargoed until their statement is made.

 8. PCA indicate that they will not hold a press conference or take
     part in television discussion programmes.

 9. In the event of the decision being made that disciplinary action
     would ensue we would probably go for a tribunal because of the
     outstanding public interest.

10.   In the event of discipline the PCA will say virtually nothing
       to the press until the proceedings are complete.
 11. The Brigadier expressed concern that the Coroner may request an
      early decision to free the officers from jeopardy so that they
      could be called to give evidence.

 12.    Meeting concluded that even if such a decision was made it was
        unlikely that the officers' legal advisers would allow them to
        give evidence as they would still be in jeopardy from
        (a) a private prosecution or (b) a verdict of unlawful killing.

 13.    ACC informed meeting that the 'Jackson' file could cause problems
        if the Police Authority members, when they receive the report,
        were to disclose its contents to the media or other interested
        parties and that this could create difficulties when considering
        action against the other 6 officers.

 14.   It was suggested that Mr Gillman might like to discuss this
       problem with Stephen Walker. PCA felt they could not do so and
       ACC indicated he would.

 15.   ACC emphasised that SYP wished that all our actions should
       indicate and demonstrate to the public our desire to ensure that
       a proper decision had been reached on the question of either
       criminal or disciplinary process and that we would do all in our
       power to facilitate such decision making.




Copy to:    Chief Constable
            Deputy Chief Constable




 (iff


 /Ice
c tf
                              Tiuj ^         A
                                                 y
                                                 cyJW /jkM
                                                  ^> 6l dy



fir C tsisJSH to                                                   9/Y£


 ‘   d M M ? t J t L c i cjyuu-.



                                     - 2 -
merits of complaint

Mr Hicks, his wife and two daughters attended at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
on 15 April 1989 for the match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest and the
two girls were tragically killed in the crushing in area 3-

Mr Hicks has made a number of allegations against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield

1)    That he failed to prevent a dangerous build up of supporters
     outside the gates.

2)   That he failed to control the movement of supporters subsequent
     to the opening of Gate C.

3)   That he failed to respond to the developing tragedy and was slow
     to effect a rescue operation.

4)    That he was deceitful and intentionally misled senior police officers
     and members of the public regarding his command and control of officers
     on that day.

                               0R

5)   That he colluded with the Assistant Chief Constable to mislead the
     public over the opening of Gate C.

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield acting on the advice of his legal representatives
declined to be interviewed during the course of this Enquiry. The Investigating
Officer has, therefore, relied on the evidence that he gave, whilst not under oath
to the Taylor enquiry, and other evidence resulting from his enquiries.

In respect of allegation 1) the Investigating Officer points out that the police
had taken various steps to prevent such an occurrence, perhaps the most important
being to request the fans to arrive early, the evidence indicating that the
Nottingham Forest fans heeded the request and did so. It is a fact that Liverpool
fans did arrive later in large numbers, resulting in a situation very different
from the previous year. As far as the allegation that he failed to control the
movement of supporters is concerned, the report makes the point that the opening
of the actual gate was presented to Mr Duckenfield as a life or death decision
and that, although it is correct that he did not make any arrangements for such
control the Investigating Officer considers it doubtful if it could be "proved
that he should have done." In respect of his response to the tragedy, once the
reality of what was happening had been identified, the report indicates "that it
was done to the best of the officer's ability given the information available and
the circumstances prevailing at the time." As far as complaint 4 is concerned,
the Investigating Officer is of the opinion that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
did mislead people but that the evidence indicates that it was not deliberate or
deceitful. It is, however, a fact that two gates were forced by the Liverpool fans
In respect of the suggestion of collusion with the Assistant Chief Constable, it
is apparent from the evidence that there was no such collusion.
re B s o n s f o r n o d i s c i p l i n e


The file has been considered by the Director of Public Prosecutions in respect
of the possible criminal offences of manslaughter and culpable malfeasance and
he has indicated that there is insufficient evidence to warrant criminal
proceedings. The same evidence which has been considered for culpable malfeasance
applies to the disciplinary offences of neglect of duty and the Assistant Chief
Constable (Complaints & Discipline) considers that there is similarly insufficient
evidence to warrant disciplinary actions for neglect of duty (allegations 1-3-)

In respect of the allegation that he intentionally misled people, the Investigating
Officer considers the complaint to be unsubstantiated and, for the final
allegation, that there is no evidence to support it. The Assistant Chief Constable
(Complaints & Discipline) agrees with the Investigating Officer in these matters.
MERITS OF COMPLAINT         (278/F3V89)

Mr Hicks, his wife and their two daughters attended at Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club on 15 April 1989 for the match between Liverpool and Nottingham
Forest. The two girls were in standing area 3 and were tragically killed.

Mr Hicks makes three complaints of neglect of duty against Superintendent Murray:-

1)   That he failed to prevent a dangerous build up of supporters outside the
     gates.

2)   That he failed to control the movement of supporters subsequent to the opening
     of Gate C.

3)   That he failed to respond to the developing tragedy and was slow to effect
     a rescue operation.

Superintendent Murray denies that he neglected his duty. In respect of the build
up he says that there was no way of foreseeing the large number of late arrivals,
that the control room was unable to see the extent of the build up and was reliant
on Superintendent Marshall and that they provided him with what he requested in
the way of reinforcements. In respect of the movement of supporters subsequent
to the opening of the gate, such was the enormity of the life or death situation
outside, he admits that he gave no thought to the consequences, other than to
think that the fans would be absorbed and that the crowd would find its own level.
On this point the Investigating Officer considers that the direct responsibility
rests with Chief Superintendent Duckenfield. Superintendent Murray contends that
his response to the tragedy was effective, and the Investigating Officer says
in the report that it is clear that he made every effort to deal with the
situation.

REASONS FOR NO DISCIPLINE

The file has been considered by the Director of Public Prosecutions in respect
of the possible criminal offences of manslaughter and culpable malfeasance and
he has indicated that there is insufficient evidence to warrant criminal
proceedings. The same evidence as considered for culpable malfeasance applies
to the disciplinary offence of neglect of duty and the Assistant Chief Constable
(Complaints & Discipline) therefore considers that there is similarly insufficient
evidence to warrant disciplinary action for neglect of duty.
f        •
    MERITS OF COMPLAINT            (3^5/F44/89)

    Mr Jones' son attended at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club on 15 April
    1989 for the match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest and was
    tragically killed in the crush.

    Mr Jones has made a number of allegations against Chief Superintendent
    Duckenfield:-

    1)   That he failed to acquaint himself with the planning and problems
         related to the control of the semi-final.

    2)   That he failed   to monitor crowd numbers packing into pens 3 and 4.

    3) That he failed     to act when it became obvious that pens 3 & 4 were
         over full when   he had an excellent viewpoint from the police box above
         the pens.

    4.   That he failed to make provision for the fans coming through Gate      C
         after he had given the order for the gate to be opened.

    5-   That he failed   to act when it was obvious that people were in distress.

    6.   That he attempted to mislead the Assistant Chief Constable and others,
         namely representatives of the clubs, the FA and the fans themselves,
         regarding the origin of the order for Gate C to be opened by inferring
         that supporters had forced open the gate when he had, in fact, given
         the order to open the g a t e .

    Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, acting on the advice of his legal
    representatives, declined to be interviewed during the course of this
    Enquiry.  The Investigating Officer has therefore relied on the unsworn
    evidence which he gave to the Taylor Enquiry and other evidence gleaned
    during his enquiries.

    In respect of the first allegation that he failed to acquaint himself with
    the planning, Mr Duckenfield took over a plan based on the experiences of
    the successfully run semi-final involving the same teams the previous year
    and acquainted himself with it.  As to failing to monitor areas 3 & 4, no
    one, either police officer or club employee, realised that they were
    seriously overcrowded until it was too late.  The same applies to the
    allegation that he failed to act when it became obvious that the areas were
    over-full.  The fourth allegation about failing to make arrangements to
    receive the crowd following the opening of Gate C is undoubtedly correct.
    However, the report indicates that he was dealing with a life or death
    situation outside and whilst he made no arrangements the Investigating
    Officer doubts if it could be "proved that he should have done."  In respect
    of the allegation that he failed to act when it was obvious people were
    in distress, the fact is that the Control Box were aware that something
    was happening and that senior officers were at the location but there is
    no evidence that they knew what the nature of the incident was or that
    people were in distress.  Once they did realise the Major Incident Plan
    was implemented.  The final allegation that he attempted to mislead people
    about the opening of Gate C, the Investigating Officer feels that Mr
    Duckenfield did mislead people but that the evidence indicates it was not
    deliberate nor deceitful and it is a fact that two gates were forced open
    by the Liverpool fans.
REASONS FOR NO DISCIPLINE
The file has been considered by the Director of Public Prosecutions in
respect of the possible criminal offences of manslaughter and culpable
malfeasance and he has indicated that there is insufficient evidence to
warrant criminal proceedings. The same evidence which has been considered
for culpable malfeasance equally applies to the disciplinary allegations
of neglect of duty and the Assistant Chief Constable (Complaints &
Discipline) considers that there is similarly insufficient evidence to
warrant disciplinary action in respect of allegations 1 - 5 .

As far as the allegation that he deliberately tried to mislead people, the
Investigating Officer is of the opinion that the complaint is not
substantiated and the Assistant Chief Constable (Complaints & Discipline)
MERITS OF COMPLAINT         (410/F59/89)


Mrs McBrien's son attended at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club on 15 April
1989 for the match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest and was
tragically killed in the crush.

She has complained that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield should not have
opened the gates under any circumstances giving unlimited and uncontrolled
access into the ground by supporters.

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield has asserted that he had no option but
to open the gates, a position with which Lord Justice Taylor agreed.



REASONS FOR NO DISCIPLINE

The Investigating Officer considers the allegation to be unsubstantiated
a decision with which the Assistant Chief Constable (Complaints &
Discipline) agrees.
