                     TREASURY SOLICITORS LETTER HE. 'GENERAL CRITICISMS MH1CH NAY BE
                      LEVELLED AGAINST THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AT THE FORTHCOMING
                                          COMHTTEE OF ENQUIRY*


(a)   Failure to take adequate steps to                  .   (a)   POLICING BY CONSENT - Crowds of sport
      control supporters outside Lepplngs                          enthusiasts endeavouring to gain access
      Lane Turnstiles, as the crush built                          to a sports event. The task of the
      from 2.20 to 2.30 pm.                                        police on this occasion was to assist and
                                                                   marshal.


                                                                   There are further steps that the police
                                                                   could have taken at 2.20/2.30 pm - the
                                                                   ultimate being dispersal of the
                                                                   increasing crowd - but this is
                                                                   unprecedented in South Yorkshire and
                                                                   would clearly have been unacceptable to
                                                                   the public.


                                                                   The suggestion of 'greater control' is
                                                                   tantamount to a call for public order
                                                                   tactics similar to those used in hostile
                                                                   situations. The police were not faced
                                                                   with a hostile crowd (at that stage).


                                                                   Much encouragement (often unheeded) to
                                                                   supporters to enter the ground.  (See
                                                                   statement of PC Scott who dispossesses
                                                                   men of beer cans and insists that they
                                                                   move towards stadium.)



(b)   No proper arrangements to check                    .   (b)   ENABLING SUPPORTERS TO REACH THEIR
      (block?) supporters at a distance from                       DESTINATION - The urban area around
       the ground.                                                 Hillsborough does not lend itself to a
                                                                   perimeter cordon tactic. By 'checking'
                                                                   the approaching fans (who were,
                                                                   incidentally, approaching from two
                                                                   directions) the build up of crowd, and
                                                                   resultant problems, would have been
                                                                   transferred to residential areas.


                                                                   By pushing back the 'check' as far as
                                                                   Penistone Road North, one would
                                                                   compromise the segregation arrangements.
                                                                   Herries Road was the point of arrival for
                                                                   Nottingham supporters.


                                                                   Several attempts were made to establish a
                                                                   cordon at the perimeter gates to the
                                                         ground, by closing the gates and placing
                                                         a row of horses behind. The crowd
                                                         rejected this control and determinedly
                                                         forced through the cordon (graphic
                                                         accounts in mounted officers statements).
                                                         Again, dispersal tactics were the only
                                                         realistic alternatives which were quite
                                                         inappropriate for dealing with football
                                                         supporters.


                                                         There was an unprecedented and unexpected
                                                         urgency about this crowd.



(c)   Insufficient officers available for     1.   (c)   DEPLOYMENT
      control outside the turnstiles.
                                                         1 C/Insp., 2 Insp.     )
                                                         4 Sgts and 40 PC's     ) in situ throughout
                                                         5 mounted officers     ) matches 1988
                                                                                  figures


                                                         1 Insp., 2 Sgts and ) accompanied
                                                         16 PC's             ) Liverpool train
                                                         + 8 mounted            ) contingent at
                                                         officers               ) 2.08 and stayed
                                                                                  at Leppings Lane
                                                                                  Turnstiles.


                                                         D/Supt, 6 Detective    ) Roving
                                                         Officers               ) commission in
                                                         2 dog handlers         ) Leppings Lane


                                                         1 Inspector            ) Desptached or
                                                         3 Sgts and 16 PC's     ) deviated from
                                                         4 mounted officers     ) other duties to
                                                                                  assist with
                                                                                  control.


(d)   Deployment of mounted police officers
      may have been ineffective and                (d)   THE EFFICACY OF MOUNTED DEPLOYMENT - The
      positively dangerous.                              deployment of mounted officers is a
                                                         matter for experienced supervisors such
                                                         as Inspector Hand-Davis who will comment
                                                         upon the expediency and risks of using
                                                         horses in this situation. See Paragraph
                                                         1.43 of ACPO     guide to policing football.


                                                         An affidavit has been previously prepared
                                                         by the South Yorkshire Police justifying
                                                         the need for, and use of, police horses
                                                         in crowd situations.    This is appended.
                                          •    <•>   DEALING WITH NON-TICKET HOLDERS - Supt.
(e)   Steps should have been taken to                McKay appeals on BBC Radio Merseyside
      prevent non ticket holders adding              14.4.89 - for non-ticket holders to stay
      to the congestion near the                     away.
      ground.
                                                     Similar request published in Liverpool
                                                     football programme at football match
                                                     prior to 15.4.89.


                                                     Checkpoints were installed at
                                                     Oughtibridge and Tankersley, miles from
                                                     the Stadium, whose duties include
                                                     checking for non-ticket holding groups.


                                                     However, where individual non ticket
                                                     holders are intent on pursuing their
                                                     right to pass and repass along the
                                                     highway, then there are few sanctions
                                                     available to the police. See comments of
                                                     NOCL, quoted in 'Star' of 9.5.89 which
                                                     defend the rights of non-ticket holding
                                                     football supporters to go where they
                                                     please.


                                                     Nevertheless, there is a great deal of
                                                     evidence of police officers constantly
                                                     moving non-ticket holders away from the
                                                     turnstile area.     (For example statements
                                                     of mounted police officers).


                                          !.   (a)   LIAISON BETWEEN GROUND CONTROL AND SECTOR
(a)   Lack of liaison/communication                  COMMANDERS - Significant that all
      between internal and external                  requests have been passed through ground
      Commanders.                                    control. Copy of PC Bichard's Log
                                                     appended. Therefore, Sector Commander _is
                                                     providing information to Ground Control
                                                     on which decisions are later based.
                                                     Problems at Leppings Lane turnstiles
                                                     monitored throughout on CCTV being viewed
                                                     by Ground Commander.

                                                     Talk through facility enabled all
                                                     commanders (indeed all personnel) to
                                                     monitor all messages.



(b)   General difficulties with                (b)   COMMUNICATIONS PROBLEMS - There were,
      radio communication.                           undoubtedly, communication problems and
                                                      these are fully documented in Part VII of
                                                      the main document.
Ineffective tannoy announcements.   (c)   PUBLIC ADDRESS ANNOUNCEMENTS - The police
                                          had previously insisted that the present
                                          public address system be installed at
                                          Leppings Lane turnstiles.


                                          PC Ryan (see statement) made several
                                          requests over the system for calm and for
                                          people to stop pushing.


                                          To supplement these announcements, Supt.
                                          Marshall requested that similar messages
                                          be passed via a mobile public address
                                          system. Inspector Ellis (see statement)
                                          took control of the equipment which was
                                          positioned to face supporters trying to
                                          enter the turnstiles. He claims to have
                                          shouted through the loudspeaker,
                                          demanding that people stop pushing.


                                          Given the limitations of the equipment
                                          and the cacophony of noise from the
                                          crowd, the police made every effort to
                                          communicate with the crowd.


No steps taken to steward those     (d)   STEPS TAKEN TO STEWARD THOSE ENTERING THE
entering the ground away from             GROUND AWAY FROM CENTRE ENCLOSURES -
the already over-crowded centre           Spontaneous decision to take action by
enclosures.                               opening gates based on urgency of need.


                                          Superintendent Murray attempts, in vain,
                                          to contact S.W.F.C. safety and security
                                          officer by the club radio system.


                                          At gate 'A', a serial of officers, on
                                          their own initiative, formed a 'funnel'
                                          to prevent a stampede.


                                          Gates 'A' and 'B' did not lead directly
                                          into 'overcrowded central enclosures'.


                                          Chief Supt. Duckenfield reasoned that the
                                          large area of the concourse inside the
                                          ground would enable the pressure, caused
                                          by the crowd, to be dissipated.


                                          Police action simply compounded a problem
                                          that was already caused by bad
                                          steward ing.
(a)   No monitoring of the filling of      3.    (a)      THE FILLING OF PENS 3 AND 4 - Stewards
      pens 3 and 4.                                       responsibility
                                                          i)    Legally supported - arguments in
                                                                nain report see para. 3.37
                                                          ii)   Advice of ACPO - see para 1.49
                                                                of 'Guide to Policing Football'
                                                          iii) Policy of South Yorkshire Police
                                                                see main report para 2.26
                                                          iv)   Stewards on the day advised by Insp.
                                                                White - see statement.


                                                          Whilst BBC footage and others'
                                                          perceptions indicate that pens are
                                                          overcrowded, officers on the spot did not
                                                          perceive that. (E.G. see statements of
                                                          PC’s Smith & Helliwell).


                                                          No means of counting into pens.


(b)   No attempts to evenly distribute           (b)      DISTRIBUTION OF SPECTATORS THROUGHOUT
      spectators in all the pens.                         PENS - Gates between pens locked in the
                                                          'open' position by Inspector White.


                                                          Allow supporters to 'find their own
                                                          level'.

                                                          Again stewards responsibility - if police
                                                          are responsible for routes, turnstiles,
                                                          concourse, searching, lost property etc.
                                                          What is a steward's responsibility?


                                                          [Point of interest: ex Superintendent
                                                          Locke of 'F ' Division and previously
                                                          responsible for policing Hillsborough,
                                                          who is now employed as security chief at
                                                          the Club, may claim precedent. There
                                                          have been occasions when the police have
                                                          supervised filling the pens at League
                                                          matches which have, unlike this match,
                                                          begun with locked and fully enclosed
                                                          pens.

                                                          N.B. Locke's experience of policing
                                                          Hillsborough is pre-Popplewell and pre-
                                                          Green Guide.]


(a)   Officers took too long to react to   4.     (a)
      the crushing in the centre pens.          and (b)   INITIAL REACTION TO INCIDENT - Mindframe
                                                          of police officers may well have been
                                                          atuned to crowd disorder, they have much

(b)   They seemed to be thinking in
      terms of prevention of disorder
      rather than safety.
experience of such incidents.   Fellow
spectators were even slower to realise
the nature of the incident.


As soon as the situation was appreciated,
the officers took immediate and positive
action, disregarding instructions to
obtain authorisation of Ground Control
before evacuating pens.


Officers were then faced with an
impregnable enclosure which was
surrounded by fences, railings and packed
supporters who were reluctant to
surrender their position on the terraces.
The emergency gates are only wide enough
to accommodate one person at a time and
quickly became blocked. The gate only
opens to 90° thereby giving access to one
officer from one sife of the gate.


Police officers were, like other members
of the public, making futile attempts to
knock down the fencing which formed a
barrier to their assistance - Many
officers refer to a sense of helplessness
and vain rescue attempts.


There was a great deal of action, hidden
from view, at the rear of the enclosure -
officers having entered via the tunnel at
3.02 pm (see statements of Insp. Bullas,
PC Martin and PC Aitken) Supt. Murray led
the resue efforts at this location.


Also police activity via both sides of
the railings (see statements of PS
Gutcher and PS Payne) was quickly in
progress.


The police quickly formed a chain of
officers leading onto the pitch from the
emergency gate, under the direction of
the senior officer present at that
location - Chief Supt. Nesbit. The chain
rescued and passed on the dead and
injured who were treated accordingly by
the officers who happened to be on the
end of the chain.
                                                                   Supt. Greenwood was directing efforts
                                                                   within the terracing by addressing the
                                                                   crowd, and police officers inside the pen
                                                                   via a loud hailer.

                                                                   The emergency plan was almost immediately
                                                                   invoked.


     (c)   No proper guidance had been given                 (c)   HO GUIDANCE. NOR PLANS FOR DEALING WITH
           to individual officers regarding                        OVERCROWDING - Police do have an
           overcrowding in the pens and no plan                    evacuation procedure for fire and
           has been prepared for such a                            emergencies in general.
           contingency.
                                                                   Overcrowding was not an expected
                                                                   phenomenon.   Prevention of overcrowding
                                                                   through effective stewarding has
                                                                   generally been sufficient.


5.   (a)   There were inadequate contingency            5.   (a)   CONTINGENCY PLANS FOR AN EMERGENCY - See
           plans to deal with the emergency                        Appendix 44 which minutes a meeting,
           which arose.                                            chaired by Superintendent Murray, with
                                                                   fire and ambulance authorities.
     *

                                                                   An ambulance officer was on standby, the
                                                                   fire brigade declined to be represented.
                                                                   In normal circumstances, together with
                                                                   St. Johns Ambulance Brigade, this would
                                                                   be adequate for any situation which might
                                                                   arise.

                                                                   The Force major incident procedure was
                                                                   initiated at 3.06 pm by calling for
                                                                   Operation Support.


     (b)   The emergency services were not                   (b)   CONTACT WITH EMERGENCY SERVICES -
           called as expeditiously as they                         Ambulance called at 3.07 pm (although
           should have been.                                       ambulance officers were on standby at the
                                                                   ground and had responsibility - see
                                                                   appendix 44 - for co-ordinating
                                                                   response.)


                                                                   Fire Brigade called at 3.13 pm.


                                                                   ENABLING ACCESS TO EMERGENCY VEHICLES -
     (c)   Insufficient arrangements had been
                                                                   Access to Hillsborough Stadium was clear.
           made for access by the emergency services.
                                                                   At 3.12 pm roads around the Leppings Lane
                                                                   area were closed to all but emergency
                                                                   vehicles. Motorcycle wing were mobilised
                                                                   at 3.17 pm to assist the free passage of
                                                                   emergency vehicles.
     (d)   Help for the injured was not           (<j)   CO-ORDINATING HELP FOR INJURED - There
           co-ordinated.                                 was a period of chaos which, arguably, is
                                                         to be expected in the aftermath of such
                                                         an unprecedented and unclear incident.
                                                         During this period the police, like
                                                         everyone else, did not know what they had
                                                         to co-ordinate.


                                                         When the extent of the tragedy was known
                                                         the police assisted medical staff to
                                                         prioritise the injured for treatment.
                                                         (See PC Turner).

     (e)   No use was made of the tannoy system   (e)    ADDRESSING THE PUBLIC TO MARSHAL
           to explain the incident to other              ASSISTANCE - Chief Superintendent
           spectators or to organise their               Duckenfield made the decision not to
           assistance.                                   evacuate the ground, and not to report
                                                         the abandonment of the match, to ensure
                                                         that spectators stayed in the stadium and
                                                         kept the access roads clear for emergency
                                                         vehicles. Relating the full extent of
     *                                                   the tragedy might have compromised this
                                                         plan.


                                                         Nevertheless, Supt. Greenwood went around
                                                         the ground addressing sections of the
                                                         crowd by loudhailer.   He asked for their
                                                         patience and calm whilst the emergency
                                                         services dealt with a serious incident.
                                                         Any doctors who made themselves     known
                                                         were accompanied to Leppings Lane
                                                         terraces to assist (see statement of
                                                         Chief Inspector Price).


                                                         Furthermore, the Liverpool manager was
                                                         later invited, by Chief Superintendent
                                                         Duckenfield, to address the Liverpool
                                                         supporters by tannoy, on the nature of
                                                         the incident.


6.         Consideration should have been                CONSIDERATION OF DEFERRING KICK - OFF -
           given to deferring the kick off
           at a much earlier stage than it               2.30 pm - Considerd and rejected (see
           was.                                          Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's
                                                         statement)


                                                         2.55 pm - Considered again but decided
                                                         that the opportunity had passed.
