GEOEFR|£‘STOKES                                                                !■

POLICE CONSTABLE 892

Woodseats Police Station,

Sheffield.

D Group

At 8-45am on Saturday 15th April 19&9 I reported on duty at Woodseats Police Station

for transport to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground Hillsborough.

At 10 am a briefing was held in the North stand after which the serials covering the

Penis tone Road Turnstiles and the Spion Kop went on to the Spion Kop to a further

briefing by Superintendent Greenwood.

At 11-30am I took up my allotted position at the turnstiles in Penistone Road monitoring

the Nottingham fans entering the ground.

The sergeant in charge of my serial was Sergeant 1080 Hoyland and he was issued with

J^adio.

Nottingham fans attending for entry via the turnstiles onto the Kop came in a steady

stream and were generally well behaved and good humoured and at about 3-O0pm there were

very few fans waiting to enter.

At about     5-10pm Sergeant Hoyland came across the front of the turnstiles and said that

there was trouble in the ground so all the turnstiles were closed and,together with

my serial,we entered the ground via the Kop gate and saw that the Liverpool fans were

milling about on the pitch at the Leppings Lane End of the ground.I went across the

pitch through the fans to the perimeter fence and saw that officers were on the

l^^ndary wall assisting fans over the fence and that there was >a large number of fans

crushed against the perimeter fence some of whom were obviousley dead and many fans

were walking over the crush to climb over the fence.

I climbed onto the perimeter wall and assisted with getting the fans over the fence

in an attempt to alleviate the crush as quickly as passible.

the fans climbing the fence were obviously shocked and did not seem to know what they

were doing.

When the     worst of the crush had been cleared I saw that Chief Superintendent Nesbit

and other officers had entered the enclosure     andwere separating the crushed bodies

and passing them out of the gate in the front of the enclosure so I climbed off the

wall and joind the line of officers outside the enclosure takink the injured and dead
onto the pitch.

At this time I saw that Superintendent Greenwood was at the side of the gate giving

directions through a bullhorn.

puring the clearing of the bodies I saw that some of the fans inside the enclosure

were getting in the way of the officers and I was aware of walking fans getting in

the way of myself and other officers on the perimeter track and pitch.These fans were

elbowed aside and generally ignored.

I was aware of the St Johns ambulance near the goal posts and gathered that they had

at least one serious casualty aboard and when the major crush victims had been cleared

the ambulance attempted to leave.I escorted the ambulance around the perimeter track

clearing the way by shoving the fans who were standing onto the pitch and assisting

people'to lift the fans who were lying down out of the way .The ambulance then drove

J^ obb   the pitch from the halfway line to the exit in front of the Kop.

As I walked back towards the     Leppings Lane End a large group of Liverpool Fans started

to run towards the Kop and it seemed likely that     there would be trouble so,with other

officers,the fans were herded back to the Leppings Lane End and I joined other officers

in forming a cordon across the halfway line to separate the fans .The Liverpool fans

approached the cordon in various groups and were in various degrees tearful^abusive and

sometimes supportive all of which were in keeping with the seriousness of the

situation which,for obvious reasons,was fairly chaotic*

We were standing in the cordon for some time and I saw several’ instances of the

I^pprpool fans turning on the press cameramen.I also saw Chief Superintendent Nesbit

with a TV newsman from the BBC.

When the order came to clear the Kop My serial were taken out of the cordon to

supervise the loading of the buses on Penistone Hoad and when this was completed we

were directed to the junction of Penistone Hoad and Leppings Lane to make sure that the

Liverpool fans did not come down Penistone Road towards the ground.

We were then directed to the North Stand in the ground for de briefing.

Whilst I was assisting at the Leppings Lane End of the Ground I was aware of tne smeli

of intdxicants and would say     that a large number of the fansat that end of the ground

had been drinking,althoughin     fairness,so had the Nottingham fans.

I can say that although all the Police Officers working near me were in obvious shock
they carried out their tasks in an efficient manner and 1 feel that this stopped

even more fatalities occurring.

I did not get involved in firet aid or rescusitation procedures merely in carrying

the dead and injured to   tue pitch.

On completion of the de   brief with other officers I taenwalked   to theClaywheeis

Lane Traffic Office for   transport to    Woodseats.

As we walked down claywheeis Lane we passed several LiverpoolCoacheswhich      were waiting

with their load of fans.These fans shouted abuse at the police as we walked past but

none of the police officers reacted to the abuse and all continued walking to the traffic

office.

Whilst I was assisting fans over the fence A section of the crush barrier struck the top

of the perimeter fence about three feet to my right having beenthrown by someone in the

e^^Losure although I did not see who threw it and only became aware of it as it passed

me pver the fence.
