                                                                                      M I R . 15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                           Date and time raised   /A/fr          or/s-                 Number



Title   A                                          J?cc-

(Include source and any document number i f relevant)
                                                                                     * frjW
                                                                                     OylfcyLat ^
                                                                                                       S U e/ W f / Y f     ^     ________
                                                                                                                                       &

Receiver's instructions — urgent action                                                                                         Receiver




                                                                                                                                Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated
                                                                                                                          9 < fe 3 £ ,
No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                      Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions


   ISA                                                                                                                          Indexer
Indexed
  dexec as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

                                                                                                               n
Examined - further action to be taken
                                                                                        |   Ty
                                                                                         I *a
                                                                                             ,iw§
                                                                                             ’A
                                                                                             j m


                                                                                                B
                                                                                                   k
                                                                                                                      8
                                                                                              h” a-
                                                                                        .1 . 1 U a
                                                                                                                                 Indexer
 Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                                          and at:
                                     <4 Highfield Road                    S t James C o u rt C ham bers
                                     Edgbaston                            Buckingham Gate
                                     Birmingham, B15 3ED                  London, SW1E BAF

                                     Tel:               7936              lei: 071- 8 3 4 2010



Your Ref                             ELROND Engineering Limited
Our Ref                              Engineering Consultancy in Disputes and Arbitration
            RJR/JH/3026              Eur Ing NJBurne BScCEng) ACGI FICE F IS tructE FCIOB FFB A C IA rb FBAE
□ a te
            25th January      1991




Detective Inspector C Perkins
Coroners Sheffield Office
Furnival House
Sheff ieId




Dear Madam

Hill sborough

Please find enclosed 1 copy of the minutes of the meeting held on 18th
January 1991.




ELROND Engineering Limited



Enc.




Telex: 3 3 B 0 2 4 Burne   Fax: CD21-.45.4 11~73    Cables Firebrand         R egistered in England
MINUTES OF MEETING HELD AT THE HEALTH & SAFETY EXECUTIVE

OFFICES IN SHEFFIELD TO DISCUSS THE PEN 3 HEAD COUNT AND

COLLAPSE LOAD OF BARRIER 124A

HELD ON 18TH JANUARY 1991 AT 2 . 0 0 p. m.




PRESENT:

Deputy Chief Constable Mervyn Jones
Detective Inspector Perkins

Dr. C.E. Nicholson                                   Health   &    Safety   Executive
                                                     Health   &    Safety   Executive
                                                     Health   &    Safety   Executive
                                                     Health   &    Safety   Executive
                                                     Health   &    Safety   Executive

Mr. N.J. Burne                                       EIrond Engineering Ltd.
                                                     EIrond Engineering Ltd.
                                                     EIrond Engineering Ltd.




1.0    INTRODUCTION                                                             A c t io n




1.1   DCC Mervyn Jones gave a brief       introduction describing the

      Coroners Court and the reasons for holding the meeting.

      The Coroners Acts and Rules dictate that only the coroner

      can call   people to give evidence, persons acting for the

      bereaved can only cross examine the witnesses.              The

      Coroner will call      the Health & Safety Executive [ H S E ] to

      give expert evidence probably towards the end of the

       inquest   in March.



                                  I
                                                                     A c t f on

      The reason why the meeting was called was to identify the

      differences between the figures that Elrond Engineering

      [EE] had obtained and those the HSE had obtained.




      The Coroners primary    interest was how 95 people died at

      the Hillsborough football    disaster and this meeting was

      intended to clarify two points;

      a)    the number of people in Pen 3

            and

      b)    the collapse    load of barrier   I24A




      The meeting was also intended as a forum to discuss any

      other points which may be pertinent to the case.




1.2   NJ8 related how he was appointed by Hammond &

      Suddard to prepare a technical    report on the Hillsborough

      football    disaster for a Third Party Litigation action.

      Despite being employed by Hammond & Suddard NJB

      emphasised that he was eager to obtain the truth and that

      from previous    investigations he had found this was the

      only way to practise.




                               2
                                                                             A c t i on

     NJB described how he had founded EE           17 years ago

     and how he had been in the business of accident

     investigations for the past 40 years.            Investigations had

     been undertaken by EE, a firm of Chartered Engineers,

     together with)________________________ |and Ha Icrow &

     Partners.    This Third Party Civi I Action had resulted          in

     a huge amount of primary research work          including the

     removal   of barrier    I24A to laboratories      in West Bromwich

     where   it had undergone extensive testing by SGS.            Similar

     barriers to I24A had been tested       in the field and the

     laboratory and field results had shown a remarkably good

     correlation.     Regrettably, some of the testing undertaken

     by Eastwood & Partners [ EP ] was performed        in a

     questionable manner which cast doubt upon the validity of

     their results.    Finally, NJB described the vast

     amount of photographic and video evidence which EE has,

     alI of which   is avai lable to the HSE with costs being met

     by Municipal   Mutual   Insurance [ MM I ].




,3   Dr. Nicholson outlined that the HSE were also             interested

     in obtaining the truth and undertake extensive and

     regular   investigations    into all kinds of accidents and




                                3
                                                                      A c t i on

       research work.




2 .0   NUMBER OF PEOPLE IN PEN 3




2.1    Dr. Nicholson outlined how the HSE had reached their

       count of the number of people in Pen 3.     The HSE's head

       count was based on a photograph taken at 15.03     (15.02

       real   time).   This was an AI enlargement of a police

       photograph which clearly showed the heads and faces of

       people   in Pen 3, however, one corner of the Pen was

       missing.    They had used a computer drafting system to

       digitise all the faces that could be clearly seen.

       New photographs had then been taken of the area,    to

       superimpose the missing space,    by applying the same crowd

       density as that near to the missing area a total estimate

       had been produced.




       The site had then been divided    into four strips based on

       the three rows of fencing.    Crowd densities had then been

       calculated for the four strips, these were from the back

       of the stadium 7.5, 7.6 and 8.1 people per square metre,

       the front row had proved more difficult to count because




                                4
                                                                         A c t i on

      of the angle of the photograph.       However,   from tests

      undertaken by the HSE an assumed density of        10 people per

      m z had been taken   in this area, this gave their preferred

      figure of 1576 people.       However, their minimum figure

      would have been 1408, purely based on the number of

      counted heads.     If the assumed density had been altered

      to 8.1   in the front row this would have given a total

      f igure of 1478.




2.2   Mr Burne showed the 14:59 [real     time] photograph taken

      from Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry which had formed the

      basis of EE's head count.      Clearly,   this photograph did

      not show people in as much detail     and could not hope to

      offer the same accuracy      in obtaining numbers as the HSE.

      NJB thought the HSE method of obtaining the number

      of heads was commendable but questioned why the HSE

      photograph had not been made available to EE.




2.3   The HSE then showed another photograph taken from the

      North stand at 14:52, this was of similar angle to the

      14:59 photograph used by EE.       The HSE felt the angle

      made   it difficult to apply their criterion of counting




                               5
                                                                            A c t i on

      actual   heads because of the numbers obscured.         However,

      based on this criterion the HSE had obtained figures of

      678 people   in Pen 3 and 821   in Pen 4.    However,    the HSE

      felt this was unrealistic because the number of people

      obscured seemed excessive.




2.4   NJB asked whether more people were moving to the

      right as a natural   preference.   However, the HSE produced

      a photograph taken at pitch     level to show that the

      density was approximately the same     in each pen and thus

      showing the head count for Pen 3 was perhaps too          low.




2.5   NJB questioned the time that the pitch       level

      photograph was taken and concluded with the HSE that             it

      was some time before the barrier collapsed.          Discussion

      then followed about when the barrier actually collapsed.

      NJB had worked back from videos taken and concluded

      that the barrier collapsed between     15.05 and     15.06.

      However, Dr. Nicholson had found that       it was very

      difficult to estimate an exact time particularly with the

      number of crowd surges that appeared to indicate

      collapse.    DCC Mervyn Jones stated that the police could




                              6
                                                                            A c t i on

      only estimate that the barrier had collapsed between

      15.00 and    15.06.




2.6   A further discussion followed about the density

      immediately    in front of barrier    124A, which the HSE had

      taken at 10 people per square metre.        NJB described

      an anthropometric booklet by Weaver from the BSI         which

      suggested     12.5 people per square metre for robust men

      and    16.1 people per square metre for women, or small       men.

      NJB agreed to supply Dr. Nicholson with a copy.                          EE




2.7   Dr. Nicholson concluded that the density could then be

      between    12.5 and   16.1 because of the number of children

      and women    in the crowd.     He further concluded that a

      fi-gure of   10 would perhaps be on the    low side.    Dr.

      Nicholson asked whether NJB agreed with the figure

      1576 based on    10 people per square metre in the front

      row.




2.8   NJB felt that the figure was in the high       I400's

      instead of the high     I500's but could not give a more

      definite answer.      This was   largely because the density     in




                                 7
                                                                         A c t i on

       front of barrier    I24A was not significant    in the

       calculations that EE had undertaken for the Third Party

       Litigation and that    is perhaps why the differences had

       ar is e n .




2.9    The HSE raised one point on page 26 of Elrond's report

       describing the ellipse of occupancy and asked EIrond to

       check that the density of 6.75 people per square metre

       was in fact correct.     The HSE felt that purely based upon

       a rectangle as opposed to an ellipse the figure should

       have been 8 people per square metre.      Elrond to check the

       number and to revise report     if necessary.                        EE




3 .0   ESCAPE ROUTES FROM THE GROUND




3.1    NJB showed the HSE Appendix M from      the EE report

       and asked whether they agreed    with   the 12m escape   routes

       that   it showed.   NJB highlighted that the exits

       were significant to the maximum allowable capacity of Pen

       3 and related pages 28 & 29 of the EE report.        The basis

       of the 12m escape route, seen in the Green Guide, was

       from a Structural Engineer who used the figures given        in




                                8
                                                                          A c t i on

      BS 5588 "Means of Escape from Offices".      The criterion

      for the number of people within the ground     is either 5.4

      per square metre for those that can     leave within 8

      minutes or those that can   leave within 2| minutes       in the

      case of an emergency.




3.2   The HSE said that they had also calculated the maximum

      figures for Pen 3 from the Green Guide but had not worked

      out escape routes.   From their calculations they had

      concluded that the maximum allowable figure for Pen 3 and

      Pen 4 was 1693.




3.3   NJB highlighted clause 220 and the three

      alternative safe capacity evaluations and the use of the

      lovest figure for estimating safe ground capacity.         The

      escape through the tunnel   was   limited to 417 people     in 2g

      minutes.   In addition only 300 people could escape to Pen

      2 giving a total   maximum allowable occupancy for Pen 3 of

      770.




3.4   The HSE did not dispute this figure and agreed that         it

      would be important evidence.      DCC Mervyn Jones took




                              9
                                                                              A c t i on

       special   note.




4 .0   BARRIER 1Z4A




4.1    NJB outlined the extensive testing performed on

       barrier   124A and the vast number of corroborative field

       tests,    information that had not been available to the HSE

       at the time of their      investigation.        NJB described

       page 60 of the EE report which showed the stress strain

       curve for wrought     iron under       load.   NJB took time

       to explain the behaviour of wrought            iron and to explain

       the concept of elasticity and plasticity.




4.2    NJB then explained the SGS laboratory report which

       gave a detailed analysis of the barriers and measured the

       amount of corrosion found.         In addition,     the tensile test

       which SGS had obtained      indicated that the stresses found

       by the HSE were slightly        low.    The tensile strength

       results obtained by SGS were;

       Rail   1- 2   -   low carbon steel 499 N/mm2

       Rail   2- 3   - wrought   iron 375 N/mm 2

       Rail   3- 4   - wrought   iron 405 N/mm2




                                  10
                                                                                 A c t i on

        This was    in comparison with the HSE figure for rail           3 - 4

        of 365 N /m m2 .




 4.3    NJB stated that the figures obtained by the HSE had

        been used   in all calculations undertaken by EE, to avoid

        any confusion over the results.




4.4     The HSE highlighted the difficulties        in obtaining tensile

        stress figures for wrought      iron, because of the degree of

        work hardening.      They stated that their sample had been

       taken from the neutral      axis to minimise,    as far as

       possible, work hardening effects,




4.5    NJB then highlighted a minor error        in the HSE

       drawing of barrier      124A.   Support 3 had been drawn with

       the angles facing      in the wrong direction,   they did    in

       fact face the other way.




4.6    NJB described the analysis performed on barrier

       124A, which had been ratified by

       and Hal crow's.     This consisted of an elastic analysis of

       the rail   which    indicated that   it would deflect 34.8mm




                                  1i
                                                                             A c t i on

      under a load of 6        kN/m, however, this would exceed        the

      elastic    limit      for the rail. Consequently NJB felt

      that failure of the rail occurred under the clip at

      support 3 at some load        less than 6 kN/m.     This would mean

      that the rail      between supports 3 & 4 was simply supported

      and   it would undergo a large deflection.          This could

      resuit    in the rail    pulling out of   its retaining clip at

      support 4.     This    inturn would increase the     loading

      instantaneously on support 3 by a factor of           1.5, causing

      failure.     Testing of a similar barrier      128A by SG had

      indicated rail      failure at a load of    less than 6 kN/m.

      The cracked rail       was seen   in the photographs attached as

      Appendix G in       the EE report.




4.7   The HSE asked         how many times the barrier   128A had been

      tested prior to failure.          NJB confirmed the barrier

      had previously been tested twice by EP with further tests

      in July, making three tests before failure.




4.8   The HSE asked what the failure         load of Barrier    128A

      actually was, because the results showed that            it had

      carried a load of 7.24 kN/m run.          NJB pointed out




                                   12
                                                                           A c t i on

      that although    it had carried this     load, under a ioad of 6

      kN/m, the deflection was still       increasing and failure

      would have occurred had the loading been continued.




4.9   NJB stated that there was a further minor

      discrepancy    in the proving ring of the SGS's test rig

      which meant that there would be a few percentage

      differences with the actual       load applied to the rail     and

      those shown    in the results.    NJB felt that failure

      was   in fact at something under 6 kN/m but without a

      calibration certificate from SGS could not confirm this.

      NJB continued to discuss the field testing of the

      various barriers and how the results        incorrectly

      indicated the barriers could carry a load of 7.2 kN/m.

      This was    in fact merely a reflection of the method of

      testing which only applied       loads for 5 minutes whilst not

      accounting for continuing deflection that would           lead to

      failure.    NJB then described how rail     fracture   in

      barrier    128A had been found, because whilst     loading was

      being applied there was a large bang, the        load was

      released and    the clip over the rail     was removed to take

      photographs of the failure.        The   loading was then




                               13
                                                                           A c t i on

       continued to see how the barrier would fail.         It would

       appear from these tests and      later analysis that failure

       of the back   leg occurred simultaneously with failure of

       the rail,   followed by buckling of the front    leg at 6 kN/m

       which causes collapse.




4.10   NJB said that this was borne out by EP testing         in

       which several    rails actually failed under testing and

       were cut out and replaced.       In addition, EP had

       misinterpreted how to undertake the tests and        in

       particular how the total deflection of the barriers

       should have been measured.




       Of the Experts called to the Third Party Litigation Dr.

       Eastwoods Expert, Mr                had failed to address

       barrier failure    loads entirely   in his report.     Halcrows

       who were the only other Expert asked to consider barrier

       failure had     concluded   in agreement with EE that failure

       would occur at or about 6 kN/m.




4.11   Further discussion followed about failure and yield of

       the barrier     The HSE noted the deflection of barrier      128A




                                   14
                                                                           A c t i on

       under 6 kN/m was only 51mm which does not        indicate the

       permanent set of 120mm found at the failure of barrier

       124A.   NJB stated that    if the load    is applied for

       long enough,   i.e. a very     long ram, then failure would

       occur at 6 kN/m and the limited deflection           is only a

       reflection of a poor test procedure.        Further discussion

       followed on the calibration effects caused by SGS not

       having produced a calibration certificate, this NJB

       felt would have tended to reduce the actual           load of the

       barrier by a few percent,        but this he did not consider to

       be particularly   important.




4.12   NJB then described EP's test rig and        in particular

       the arrangement of nuts and bolts which were tightened to

       a M o w easy erection.    This    in fact allowed the frame of

       the rig to span over the support carrying some of the

       load.   The HSE had carried out a computer simulation of

       Eastwood's rig and they were happy with        it.    However,

       they were not aware of the on site problems and were

       prepared to review their assessment.        The tightening of

       bolts by operatives was apparently carried out without

       Dr. Eastwoods knowledge.         Although this could not be




                                 15
                                                                             A c t i on

       confirmed because he had not written any operating

       instruct io n s .




       DCC Mervyn Jones asked where the discussion was            leading.

       Would a Jury return a verdict of misadventure,            an open

       verdict or would the accident be attributed to unlawful

       killing.    Due to the discussions and      differences between

       the Expert Witnesses, DCC Mervyn Jones thought            it was

       unlikely that a verdict of unlawful       killing would be

       returned by a Jury.       NJB went back to the Halcrow

       report which stated that failure occurred at or about 6

       kN/m run which was       in agreement with the Elrond report.




4.13   Some discussion followed as to interpretation of the

       Green Guide NJB felt that the statement, "a record

       of any deformation"       indicated that EP had not carried out

       the tests correctly.       The HSE felt the wording was too

       loose and that the interpretation drawn by EP was one

       that could have been reasonably made although the HSE's

       interpretation would have been       identical   to EE.    DCC

       Mervyn Jones concluded that the issue was not clear and

       that criminal       proceedings would be unlikely to succeed.




                                   16
                                                                           A c t i on

       Further discussions followed as to how barrer         124A had

       failed, the HSE    insisted that failure occurred

       plastically   in the rail at a load of 8.1    kN/m.     However,

       NJB highlighted that failure must have occurred         in

       the   leg as well, otherwise it would not have collpased to

       the ground.   NJB reiterated his mode of failure,

       characterised by the rail     fracturing at the clip at

       around 6 kN/m, thus    increasing   instantaneously the      load

       on the central    support causing   it to fail and the rail

       bowing rather than forming a 'V' which       would be

       necessary for plastic failure of the rail.




4.14   The HSE then asked where the figure quoted      in the EE

       report of failure at 5.25 kN/m had come from.         NJB

       agreed to supply calculations for the failure         load

       together with the appropriate computer printouts.            Some      EE

       discussion followed as to whether      it was appropriate to

       use an elastic analysis on the failure of essentially a

       plastic structure.     NJB stated that there was no

       evidence that plastic joints had formed      in the     barrier,

       consequently an elastic analysis would be appropriate.

       In addition, an elastic analysis of the structure would




                                17
                                                                       A c t i on

       offer a 'iower bound' solution.




4.15   There appeared to be some confusion as to the words yield

       and fracture and whether the loads at yield referred to

       in the EE report were actually yield or whether they were

       fracture   loads.   Again this would be clarified     in the

       calculation and     printouts to be produced by EE.                 EE




       NJB agreed to obtain copies of the Halcrow and SGS

       reports for use     by the HSE.                                     EE




       The HSE agreed to carry out further analysis of the

       barrier failure in light of these reports.      The HSE

       requested that EE obtain a calibration certificate for

       the SGS proving ring and update or modify the results as

       necessary.                                                     EE




RJR/JH/3026
25.1.90.


                                 18
