                                                                  ^ 0^ 55*7
                            Barry Bough

                            Police Sergeant 795

                            South Yorkshire Police

                            Wes t Bar

                            Sheffield




At 8.00 am Saturday 15 April 1989, I commenced duty at West Bar Police

Station, to be delegated duties in respect of the F.A. Cup Semi-Final.

This football match being played between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest

at Hillsborough.



I was delegated to Serial 9 consisting of PS993 Green, PC's 101 Barlow,

1399 Thompson, 3158 Gill, 2632 Hayes, 3329 Segerius and 3068 Sowerby.

The allocation of personal radios was one between two and the serial was

so divided.   I worked with PC3068 Sowerby.



Phase 1 of our duties was to supervise Nottingham Forest supporters who

were arriving by train at the Sheffield Midland Railway Station.      These

supporters were then to be placed onto buses and transported to Hillsborough

escorted by police officers.    In turn PC Sowerby and myself also escorted

fans on one of the buses.    The fans in general were boisterous and there

were obvious signs that drink had been consumed so much so that arrests

for drunkenness had earlier been made by several officers.       On depositing

the supporters at the Penistone Road end of the Hillsborough ground, PC

Sowerby and myself returned on the empty bus, ready for a further collection

of fans from the railway station.



We were returning at 1.20 pm when we had occasion to leave the bus at the

junction of Shalesmoor and Shepherd Street.       This was because there had
                                       2                                          Qpr'iWf

been a road accident and a young child had been injured.        Traffic was very

heavy at this time and at a standstill.    Assistance was rendered to the

child and the road was cleared and traffic allowed to move.        When further

assistance arrived PC Sowerby and myself continued our return journey to

the railway station.



At 1.45 pm this same day whilst in Sheaf Street outside the Midland Railway

Station PC Sowerby had occasion to arrest a                         for being

drunk and disorderly.    As a result of this I also had to arrest a

       for the same.    A further arrest was made by PC2273 Hepplethwaite

of a                   ]again for being drunk and disorderly.



Arrangements were then made for all these men to be transported by transit

van to the Central Charge Office at Bridge Street.     Due to the volume of

traffic it took time for the transit van to arrive and also to get to the

Charge Office.   During this time my personal radio had become faulty,

believed through a poorly charged battery.     At the Charge Office the

prisoners were processed and I in turn contacted PS Hitchborne at West Bar

Control Room to arrange transport when available to transport myself, PC

Sowerby and other officers to Hillsborough to take up further duties.           Whilst

at the Charge Office we were made aware that an incident had occurred at

Hillsborough but exactly what no-one seemed to know at this time.



It became apparent that urgent assistance was being requested at Hillsborough

and together with PC Sowerby I joined up with Detective Sergeant Varey and

DC Ellis.    DS Varey drove us to the Penistone Road end of the Hillsborough

stadium.    On entering into this part of the ground to make my way to the

gymnasium, to receive instructions from a senior officer, I could only at

this time see there was chaos and also loss of life.     Supporters and police
                                      3


officers were bringing dead and injured to this part of the ground.    Many

being carried on advertising boards converted to makeshift stretchers.



A number of officers informed me what had occurred and I immediately with

PC Sowerby went onto the ground making my way to the Leppings Lane end of

the ground.   Whilst making my way across the ground I was confronted by

numerous Liverpool supporters, sane obviously hysterical and in grief.

Many adverse comments were made to me and I avoided them not wishing to

add to problems to what I could see was a tragic incident.   I assisted people

who were lying on the floor either through slight injuries or shock.     During

this time I was spat at, kicked and swore at with ccranents like "Its your

fucking fault'.   Again appreciating that many of these people were in total

shock I tried with others to console than and prevent further trouble.

It was also at this time that many supporters fran Liverpool were becoming

very agitated and starting to vent their feelings towards the Nottingham

Forest end of the ground.   This problem had obviously been recognised and

a cordon of police officers was formed across the width of the pitch.



There was a large group of supporters who had made their way to the entrance

to the players tunnel and many heated words were being exchanged.     With

other officers I stepped in to try and help resolve the problem.     I remained

at this post for the rest of the afternoon.   During this time many supporters

approached me and other people who were members of the F.A. and the two

football clubs.   Sane were wishing to make genuine enquiries, others to

complain, but a vast majority were caning just to offer abuse, violence

or accuse.    It was apparent that many of these people were much the worse

for drink.



Eventually as the pitch and the ground cleared I had becane detached fran

my serial, I went to the gymnasium at the rear of the South Stand.     I there
                                      4                                    © , 0 ( t   iff

located officers fran my serial who had taken bodies fran the crowd and

were staying with them for identification purposes.     When I had accounted

for my serial I then returned into Penistone Road and alighted a bus that

was taking Liverpool supporters back to the Midland Railway Station.

This journey was very slow obviously due to the heavy volume of traffic.



At 5.30 pm I returned to the Midland Station and resumed duties of

supervising supporters.   I also tried to see to the needs of several officers

who by now had becane very distressed as regards their involvement in this

incident.   I arranged for them to be relieved and returned to West Bar Police

Station.




at 6.45 pm I returned to West Bar Police Station.     After a conference and

de-brief I retired from duty at 8.00 pm.
