                                r ‘ ; — £
Statement of Police Constable 1910 Michael William Hulley. Over 21
Based at Hammerton Road Police Station. Date. 7th June 19.89>

Semi Final at Hillsborough on 15th April 1989.

On Saturday 15th April 1989 at 9am I paraded for duty at Hillsborough
football ground for the F.A. Cup serai final between Liverpool and
Nottingham Forest. My duties at the event were to be confined in the
Police room which is situated beneath the North Stand, The Ofxicer in
charge of the Police Room for the event was Inspector Barker. My personal
duty was the searching of persons who had been arrested in and around the
ground who were brought to the Police room for process.
                                                        In the period prior
to the natch it was busy in the Police room and before the disaster we
dealt with about 30 prisoners. The prisoners were mainly Liverpool fans
and in the main for drink related offences although I remember one lad
who had been arrested for obstruction ( ticket tout )• He was only about
twenty years old and he had about 20 tickets on him and about £7 0 0 in cash.
I recall at one point hearing on the Police room radio a Police Officer
who was obviously on duty outside the ground asking ground control if they
knew where a group of Liverpool fans that were with him could get a drink
and I was amazed when directions were given to local pubs. I remember thinking
 that at one time they would have been directed to the ground and kept there
until the gates opened.
                        At about 1.30pm I went for a meal, chicken and chips.
 I returned to the Police room atabout 2.15Pm where it continued to be busy.
From this point I can’t be sure about times so I'll not bother quoting any
 but I remember hearing radio traffic to the effect that a serious situation
 was developing, I don't know who said it or to what part of the ground they      |
 were referring to although now I realize it was obviously Leppings Lane. I       J
 assumed, not unreasonably, having past experience of Liverpool matches where     J
 trouble is expected that fighting had broken out. I didn't realize what was
 in store. A short while later I heard a commotion outside the Police room
 and thought that it was probably a load of prisoners coming through. I went
 to the door which gave me a view of the area between the North Stand and the
 gymnasium,there was just mayhem with people being carried on makeshift
 stretchers and laid on the ground. I remember seeing Officers carrying these
 casualties together with supporters and I remember seeing injured people
 not on stretchers but being helped by others because they were unable to stand
 on their own. I went out and started to help with the injured. I still didi't
 know what had happened. I remember helping to get an air way into somebody's
 mouth after getting him into a recovery position. I recall at on point whilst
 I was helping with an in jured lad that I looked up and saw someone who I
 thin£ was a doctor put a blanket or something over a young boy's face ana I
 realized he was dead, I couldn't believe it. I think I was then working in. a Exx
  daze* I recall teaming up with Roy Green,the Officer I work normal shifts with
 and together we helped carry people from the area of the gangway that runs betwe
  the North Stand and the Kop. We sat people up against a wall beneath the North
 Stand and I recall looking up and seeing Liverpool fans on the upper level of ±k
 North Stand urinating against a wall, it.was then raining down onto the CaficerB
  and injured below. By this time a cordon of Police Officers were strung accross
  from the groundsman's hut to the point of the Notth Stand and in front of them v
  were groups of aggressive supporters. I think at this point I believed that
  supporters were trying to invade the area at the rear of the North Stand to
  have a go at the Bolice and I felt frightened and threatened,xhere were so many
  dead and dying and I just couldn't believe it. At on point I helped to carry
  a dead lad into th gym and when I went inside the gym the scenes and the uOdies
  lined up was beyond belief. I felt terrible. I remember helping PC Pete Smith
  to an ambulance where he was given oxygen. Ee was in a very distressed state
  and I sat in the ambulance with him for a short time. Other than this al_ I can
  say is that I helped generally with the injured and the ones who had died. At^ ^
                 Page 2                                         <Qof< ifi
After things had calmed down I went back into the Police room and sat down
I felt drained and my stomach was in turmoil* As I was sitting there Ch. Supt*
Brian Kole came in and asked ne if I was ok I remember feeling better for
seeing him. I stayed in the Police room for a while and then somebody asked
me if I8d go into the gym and record and label property that was being brought
from the pitch* I felt sick when I went in the gym to see all those people
lined up and dead all for a football match* 1 was relieved from this duty
after about an hour but I remained at the ground and spent some time at one
of the gates on Penistone Road where the Press had gathered* Later in the
night as the relatives started to arrive at the ground I worked together with
PC Bob Simons outside the door which led to the initial photo I.D. area. It was
one of the most depressing duties that I ever have or ever yant to perform. I
eventually went off duty at 5*30am Sunday morning*
