■STEPHEN-CH ARLES MARSHALL                                                            ■Q Q R .   ,221



Police Constable 2864

Friday 2nd June 1989



I sun a police constable station at Road Traffic Division, Main Street Police

Station, Rotherham.

On Saturday 15th May 1989 I commenced duty at 8.00 a.m. from Main Street Police

Station, Rotherham.

At 8.20 a.m. I left Main Street Police Station, Rotherham and drove a Range Rover

Police Mobile registered number C153 HET to Woodall Police Post, Ml northbound

carriageway, Sheffield, arriving there at 8.35 a.m. that day.

It was there that a number of officers including myself were briefed regarding

duties to be performed for that day. I was there informed that PC 3047 Oxley was

to be crewed with me for the tour of duty and that we were to remain on a static

point at Junction 30 of the Ml motorway and monitor traffic in particular in

relation    to     northbound      traffic   travelling   to   Sheffield   carrying      football

supporters for the FA cup semi final to be held at Sheffield Wednesday Football

Ground, Hillsborough, Sheffield, between Nottingham Forest and Liverpool FC.

At 8.55 a.m. we took up our position and remained there continually without

noticable incidents. At approximately 3-05 p.m. that day I learned that the game

had been stopped due to a             ’pitch invasion'    at the Leppings Lane end. A few

minutes    later    ground      control   contacted XS on Force Channel      1 and requested

operation support.

We went immediately to Woodall Police Post and from radio messages received it

was ascertained that a barrier had to be removed.

 I contacted operations and asked if I could travel to Main Street Police Station

 and collect further cutting equipment.             I was instructed to do this arriving

 there at 3-25 p.m.




                         0 +-
        -   ■*
*   ^




                                                                               PAGE 2
-------STEPHEN CHARLES MARSHALL----------------------------------------------- Q0 R -2 2 4 --

             It was discovered that both spare motors for the cutting equipment were away for

             repair.

             At 3.35 p.m. I left Main Street Police Station and was directed to Claywheels

             Lane Traffic Garage, Sheffield to stand by for further duties.

             At 4.00 p.m. I was directed to Tinsley traffic island at its junction with the Ml

             motorway junction 34 and directed traffic leaving the city.

             At     5-30 p.m.   all traffic other than normal    traffic had been cleared and I

                 returned to Claywheels Lane, Sheffield.

                 At 5-40 p.m. I was instructed to return two beat officers from Claywheels Lane to

                 Wombwell Police Station, Barnsley.

                 At 6.35 p.m. I returned to Main Street Police Station and took no further part in

                 the days events.
