H35vO)\s
                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                               Ref:
       From:   Police Constable 1882 Rimmer                   Station/Dept:   A1

       To:     Chief Superintendent Thompson                  Date:           26.5.89



               SUBJECT:   FOOTBALL MATCH DUTIES AT HILLSBOROUGH, SATURDAY, 15 APRIL 1989,
                          LIVERPOOL v NOTTINGHAM FOREST


0830 hrs       On duty Doncaster Police Station, liaise with Ps 2620 Cropley, Serial 26.
               Other officers included in this serial: Pc's 1442 Charters, 1431 Jackson,
               1734 Foster, 1789 Flatman, 184 Geeson, 2872 Harratt and 2354 Plumridge.

0940           To Hillsborough for briefing.

1115           On duty Catchbar Lane/Parkside Road, together with Pc 1442 Charters; regular
               patrolling from Catchbar Lane, junction with Middlewood Road, down to
               Parkside Road junction with Penistone Road. Constant flow of fans, mostly


•
               Liverpool, all reasonably well behaved.  It was quite evident that many of
               the younger Liverpool fans had arrived at the ground without tickets, we
               were constantly approached by youths enquiring as to how tickets could be
               obtained.

1400           Paid particular attention to the 'Price Wise' supermarket in Catchbar Lane,
               junction with Middlewood Road. The manager had been experiencing problems
               with youths purchasing alcohol and now wanted to prevent fans from entering
               the store for this purpose.  Many Liverpool fans sat outside the store
               drinking lager and beer from cans, but none represented any real problem.

1430           Resume from 'Price Wise' and walk down to Police Box Parkside Road, where it
               was necessary to remove young Liverpool fans constantly from roof of Police
               Box and adjacent gas sub-station.    These fans were attempting by their
               actions to gain a view of the pitch and all were without tickets.
               Altogether approximately 20 - 30 youths were moved off during a half hour
               period; our presence being required right up until 1500 hours.

1508           Still on duty outside Police Boir, Parkside Road, when we were informed by
               the civilian driver of the force coach, who was parked nearby, that he had
               heard via VHF Police radio, channel 1, a request for assistance at the
               ground. Both Pc Charters and myself were without personal radios, but went
               immediately to the Leppings Lane entrance to the ground.

1512           Arrival at the ground, I saw many Police Officers outside the main gates and
               some just inside.  There appeared to be much confusion as to just what was
               happening, but it was soon apparent that some major incident had occurred
               inside the ground. Many young Liverpool fans were still, however,
               attempting to gain entry to the ground, but were prevented from doing so by
               the Police.  It was quite evident that many of these fans had been drinking,
               some quite heavily, by their behaviour and general demeanour.

1518           Fans begin to leave the ground via the Leppings Lane end. Both myself and
               Pc Charters were requested, together with other officers, to form a cordon
               behind the West Stand in order to assist in ushering fans from the ground.




               Cont/d


Gen/2
                                                                           US'

2.


Following full evacuation of the West Stand, Pc Charters and myself again met
up with other members of our serial (Serial 26) and then followed Liverpool
supporters along Leppings Lane towards the coach parks. On completion of
this, we were then instructed to go to the Clay Wheels Lane Police Depot,
where we effectively 'stood down'. Following meal, we then returned to
Doncaster Police Station, arriving 1930 hours where I retired from duty.




Pc 1882
