                                                                                           M I R . 15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                            Date and tim e raised             JL(                    Number


T itle

(Include source and any document number i f relevant)                  T
Receiver's instructions — urgent action —                                         0 *v 1

                                                                                                                     Receiver


                                                                                                                     ^          7,
Docum ent registered/m d a) « 4 as indicated   & i frog                                                              Indexer


No(s) o f actions raised                                                                                          I M r*? M r
Statement reader's instructions            C                                                                     Statement Reader




                                                                                                                     Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised

Examined - fu rth e r action to be taken                                                                                   SIO




Further action No(s)                                                                                                 Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master Number Form
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER STATEMENT




I arrived at the ground vicinity at 2.30, but one of my
friends I travelled with discovered he had lost his
ticket.


We spent some time asking if people had any spare tickets
but we had no luck.


At approximately 2.40 p.m., my friend suggested I should
make my way into the ground while he went back to the car


I approached the turnstile area looking for entrance to
the North Stand which was at entrance   'A'.


There was a mass of people in front of the turnstile and
it was obvious there were no specific queues or lines to
particular entrance gate.


It was a case of adding yourself to the mass and hoping
that people in front   moved forward and eventually there
would be a turnstile   to aim for.


I passed through the   turnstile a few minutes before   3.00
p.m. and made my way   round to the Stand.


My concern at the time was that there was no attempt of
the police to form queues to eleviate the congestion that
was building up.
Page 2




The forming of queues for the turnstile when a large
number of people are present or expected has been done at
all the big games I have attended over the past 35 years,
all the major grounds except,   regretfully, Hillsborough
this year or last year.


When I arrived at my seat, I was amazed to see that the
wing section in the Lapping Lane terrace was half empty
and the centre section was very tightly packed .


There is no doubt in my mind that if there had been
adequate crowd control at the turnstile, there would not
have been any deaths.
