                                        £        ; Je!d A rch iv esR ef;l^ -.n n ft£ S 1    m ir .



 OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                                      a                                       T)^S!
                                                 Date and time raised                       £ •10      Number

 ™. ~TVP£Q S7?mSM4vJTS                                                  5 .V .H A . 5 V ^ ^ T X T
 (Include^ u rc e and any document humber if relevant)


 Recetgjpr's instructions - urgent actibn - Ye(/No                 0HL                      S t e e - t 32/ v T O ^ t 3
                    to       C J Y f                             A rS >                                               Receiver

                                                                                                                 an 20
Document registered/indexed as indicated                                                                              Indexer

No(s) of actions raised                                                                                               1 w vj
Statem ent reader's instructions                                                                                Statement Reader



Indexed as indicated                                                                                                  Indexer

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                      \o4-4-
Examined - further action to be taken                                                                           O/M         SIO




Further action No(s)                                                                                             g*-1rjd<0<er gsa*
                                                                                                                 II I I I
When s a t i s f y all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                                                                                 fe   € Isas %sm
CLARKE Raymond   £ h C.   k jx )   la£2&+..   euu-JiChXCj   O




EDWARDS Anthony James




FLACK John
HOPKINS Alan




JONES David




               £u*0Y(a / A 70Z S   S ’. 3 * 2. 9 .

NORLEY Roger



PAGE Albert
SMITH Albert Edward




HADE Noel Joseph




YOXALL Lawrence
                       states:-


1.   I was born on
2.   I am a qualified ambulance woman and I am based at Longley.
     I joined SYMAS on                  1980, as a cadet and remained
     a cadet for two years.       During this time I gained experience
     in basic first aid training.       After two years, I attended a
     six     week   residential    training course      at Markfield,
     Leicester, and thereafter I attended a two week driving
     course,    also at Markfield.      Subsequently,   I have attended
     various other courses.         Following my driving course at
     Markfield,     I spent a one year probationary period on the
     road.     Thereafter I took the Miller examination and passed
     to become a qualified ambulance woman.        I became qualified
     in 1983, and I have no paramedic training. ^


3.   I have been based at Longley for just over 12 months.        I was
     not on duty on Saturday 15th April 1989.       I was actually in
     the middle of a fortnight's holiday, and was at home when I
     became aware of the incident.       I was cutting the lawn, when
     my husband telephoned and informed me that he had heard on
     the radio that an incident was taking place at Hillsborough
     and a lot of people had been crushed.       He had heard that an
     appeal had been made on the radio for all ambulance staff,
     not on duty, to help out with the incident.        I received this
     telephone call from my husband shortly after 1500.
I immediately telephoned Control but there was no answer at
first.    I eventually got through to control,          and was
requested to go to my own station.        I drove straight to
Longley Station, and when I arrived, I noticed an ambulance
man from Rotherham speaking on the emergency telephone
situate outside the station.     I drove behind the station in
my car and used my staff key to allow the Rotherham
ambulance man into the station.     We both tried to contact
control but with no success at first.        Eventually, after a
number of attempts, we managed to contact control.      We were
requested to take an ambulance vehicle down to Leppings
Lane.    During this time, Leading Ambulance man
         and Ambulance man             had arrived at Longley.
          has paramedic training.


            collected his paramedic equipment as quickly as
possible and put the same onto an ambulance vehicle.           I
called control on channel 1, and was advised to go to gate 0
on Penistone Road, where I was to report to the duty officer
on the scene.   I advised control that I had a paramedic on
board.


I approached Penistone Road via Herries Drive turning left
onto Penistone Road.         Just opposite    to the gates on
Penistone Road, I stopped the vehicle and allowed Leading
Ambulance man           to get out.     He asked me      for my
assistance and I left the vehicle and followed Leading
Ambulance man into the gymnasium area.    I was then advised
on the instructions of Superintendent Dale to return to my
vehicle and remove it because it was blocking access along
Penistone Road into the ground.    I travelled a short way
down Penistone Road and then was directed over the central
reservation by police officers and joined the back of a
queue of ambulances waiting to gain entry to Hillsborough.


When I got to the top of the queue of ambulances I was
advised by Station Officer Eason that my vehicle was not
required as it was a Renault and had no emergency warning
lights.   I was told to park the vehicle on Penistone Road a
little further up, which I did, and then I made my way into
the area in front of the gym.     I was then advised by Mr
Eason to return to my vehicle, where I remained for a short
while.    Mr Eason then advised me to go to Herries Road Bus
Depot where I was to remain on standby with a number of
other vehicles.


After remaining at Herries Road bus depot for some time the
other ambulance crews and I were advised by Leading
Ambulance man          to proceed back to the gymnasium area
inside Hillsborough.   At this point in time I teamed up with
                   who had his own vehicle,      and on the
instructions of Mr Eason, the keys to my vehicle were handed
over to the chief mechanic at the bus depot.
9.    When                     had parked his vehicle in front of the
      gymnasium we were asked by the officer in charge whether we
      had on board some body bags and rubber gloves.


10.   Mr Jones then gave a briefing meeting,            stating that the
      gymnasium was the official morgue and there were 94 dead
      bodies inside.       Mr Jones sorted out who was on emergency
      duty, day duties and who were volunteers.             Some crews were
      sent back to their own stations, and                       and I were
      asked whether we were prepared to remove the bodies from the
      gymnasium.    We both volunteered.


11.   After a short break, Mr Jones began to organise which staff
      were to go with each ambulance vehicle.         I was not required
      for this task.     I got into a mini bus and took ambulance man
                    back to Parkway Station.      I then drove the mini
      bus back to Longley Station.       I had been asked to look after
      Leading Ambulance man             's paramedic equipment, which
      had been loaded onto the mini bus.         When I arrived back at
      Longley I informed Leading Ambulance man                  , (who was
      then on duty) of my knowledge of the events, and he took
      charge of Leading Ambulance man                  's   equipment.    I
      refuelled the mini bus and for a short while I was left on
      my own at Longley Station.        Some time later, an ambulance
      man, who I believe is called               arrived at Longley.      I
      would say that the time was approximately 1930 and he
      advised      me   that    s t retchers   were   required     down at
     Hillsborough.       I assisted           bo load some stretchers on
     to his vehicle, and at approximately 1940 I signed off duty
     and went home.

                 £
Dated this   1       day of           1989.




                                                                  %
                         date of birth                  states

1.   I joined the Ambulance Service as a driver in 19 68 and
     became a Station Officer in 1972.   I have always worked in
     South Yorkshire and became a Control               SYMAS in
     1974.   I now work as Control Officer from Headquarters at
     Heather Close.

2.   I hold a Miller Certificate and am an Associate of the
     Institute of Certified Ambulance Personnel. I also have a
     certificate from the National Examination Board and
     Supervisory Studies.

3.   My duties involve controlling Ambulances by telephone and
     radio.   Some shifts I work on emergency work only and on
     others I deal with out patients. Shifts are organised on a
     12 week rota and I was not scheduled to be on duty at all on
     Saturday the 15th April. I had been on n ......
     Friday the 14th April on a shift running
     I went home as usual after this shift and had not expected
     to return until 2200 on Saturday night.       There were no
     special arrangements affecting the Saturday night duty
     because of the match, although I expected it was likely to
     be a busy night, depending on the result of the game.

4.   I got up at about 1330 on Saturday and had been in the
     garden.   When I came in the television was on and I saw
     that something was clearly wrong.      It was about 1510 or
     1515.   At the same time the telephone rang and my wife
     answered it. She said - "Its work. Will you go in straight
     away". I spoke briefly to Control and was asked to come in
     early.   No explanation was given and I did not ask for one
     because I put two and two together and knew there was an
     incident at Hillsborough. I simply agreed. Knowing that I
     was due to work the night shift and would be likely to have
     to stay through, I changed into my uniform and then made my
way to control on my motorbike, arriving at about 1545.

The control room was full of staff and I looked   through the
hatch into the Major Incident Room and realised   that it was
also crowded.   I looked for the Senior Officer   on duty and
found            . I asked him for instructions   and he said
everything seemed to be covered.   I decided to   stand by to
keep an eye on the control assistants and stand   in for them
if they needed to go out.

About 10 minutes after I arrived I answered a phone call
from the press.   I do not know which newspaper it was.    A
man asked "is there any news - I understand there are
fatalities”. I replied I had no information and he should
ring back in half an hour.      At that time I had not yet
enquired as to the casualty position and did not know there
were any fatalities at all. As soon as the press man rang
off I asked at the centre desk and someone said there were
53 fatalities at that stage.      This was the first time I
realised fully the extent of the incident although I had a
good idea on arriving because of the number of people in
control and the use for the first time of the Major Incident
Room.   No one specifically informed me they had gone onto
ERC channel but I assumed this was the case because this was
the whole purpose of the incident room.

By the time I arrived the operation was already being run
from the Major Incident Room. However this only had radio
links and all the telephone contact in relation to
assistance for Hillsborough came into the normal control
room.   Also the ERC channel was overloaded and crews who
could not get through occasionally came through on the
ordinary channels.   There are three ordinary channels for
Barnsley and Rotherham, Sheffield and Doncaster and
emergency use for the whole of the SYMAS region.    ERC is
      the emergency channel available nationwide.

8.    It was then about 1600 and every position in the control
      room was filled.   I simply stood by to supervise the less
      experienced staff. I took two further calls from the press
      asking for information on similar lines to the first call,
      but I did not tell them anything nor refer them through to
      the incident room.

9.    At about 1630 I noticed that            had left the control
      room and asked the assistant next to him. Control Assistant
                where he had gone.                said he had gone
      into the incident room to deal with press calls.      I then
      heard the girls in the control room had been told to put all
      press calls through to                  However I did not
      personally receive any further calls from the press after
      this.

10.   Next Control Officer           isked me to contact the duty
      fitter to attend a vehicle that had broken down in
      Sheffield.    This was an out-patient vehicle which had
      stopped on Glossop Road near the Hallamshire Hospital and
      would not restart.       I telephoned the fitter and he
      confirmed he would attend.      Shortly after
      informed me that the vehicle had restarted after all and
      did not require attention.   However the fitter would still
      be required to deal with vehicles from outside the SYMAS
      area which had overheated in coming in to assist at
      Hillsborough and had broken down at Herries Road bus
      station.  I did not speak to the fitter myself.   I believe
                 redirected him.

11.   After this I sat down in                    place on the
      Rotherham/Barnsley domestic control. There was not much to
      do and I did not in fact take any calls.
                                 3
12.   At about 1800 I relieved             on the emergency board
      which he had been manning since 1400.      This channel was
      busy with ordinary domestic calls and the operation of this
      part of the service was particularly demanding because so
      many ambulances were tied up at Hillsborough.

13.   By 1900 when            returned things had calmed down and
      everything was fairly well organised.  I therefore reported
      to Mr Smith, Assistant Chief Metropolitan Officer in charge
      of Control, and said I intended to take my own break before
      starting my usual shift.   He agreed and told me to take a
      good break.

14.   I went out and had a meal and watched television returning
      to control at approximately 2115.      I took over from Mr
              ^or the 22.00 shift at about 21.50 and remained
      until 0600 the next morning.    By 2115 the major incident
      room had closed down, although it had still been in
      operation when I left for my break.

15.   I worked a normal night shift dealing with domestic
      emergency calls. In addition I controlled the operation of
      vehicles detailed to move bodies from the gymnasium to the
      Medico Legal Centre.  This operation went on until 0530  I
      was in radio contact all the time with officer's at the
      ground on the ordinary channel and had no difficulty
      receiving them.

16.   I normally have 20 vehicles under my control and on that
      evening there were an extra 3 which had been detailed to
      assist with the transfer of bodies.    Every time a vehicle
      left the ground one of the duty officers at the gym radioed
      in to confirm and to notify how many bodies had been moved.
      At 0530 a final total of 94 was radioed to me.
                                4
►




    17.   At about 0100 Mr Hopkins came into the control room before
          leaving for the ground and instructed me to arrange for 3
          crews who had been on the domestic evening shift (from 1800
          to 0200) to stay on to relieve the 3 crews handling the
          transfers of bodies who had been working all day.      I had
          anticipated this and radioed               at the ground to
          tell him that his 3 crews would be relieved at 0200. One of
          my control Assistants telephoned three separate stations and
          asked the evening crews to stay on. They agreed to do so.

    18.   I was relieved by the day officer at 0600 by which time the
          Hillsborough operation was complete.

    19.   I am aware of a major incident plan, but this only affects
          me in so far as I am required to come into work whether or
          not scheduled for duty.



    Signed..



    Dated this   (o   day of 7/ M yc )       1989




                                         5
             states:-


1.   I am employed as a Control Officer for SYMAS.


2.   My date of birth is


3.   I began work as an ambulance man with West Riding County
     Council Ambulance Service in April 1965.        The ambulance
     service was taken over by SYMAS in, I believe, 1974.       In
     1975 I was appointed a Control Officer.


4.   On Saturday 15th April I had been on duty during the morning
     and came off duty at 0200 and went home.


5.   At about 1515 I received a telephone call from             at
     home.    She is a Control Assistant.   She asked me to report
     back to control because there was an incident at the
     Hillsborough football ground.


6.   I arrived at control at 1550 and assisted                  On
     the emergency desk.   A lot of vehicles had been deployed to
     Hillsborough but, of course, the other "normal" emergencies
     were happening in the SYMAS area and I assisted            in
     providing ambulances      for these emergencies.      We also
     received some calls which related to the Hillsborough
     incident and we passed messages to the separate incident
     room which had been set up and was operating prior to my
*'.«*• w




                arrival at control.


           7.   I went off duty at 2000.




           Dated this   & ^   day of       1989.
                           states:

1.   I am a Control Assistant and have been with SYMAS for 11
     months.     I have always been based at Fairfield as a Control
     Assistant.
2.   On the Thursday and Friday I was at work from 0900 to 1730.
     Saturday was my day off.
3.   I was driving home from town when I heard on the radio that
     something was happening at Hillsborough but I didn't know
     what.     I got home at about 1515.      Control called me at
     about 1530. and                 asked me to come to Control as
     there had been a major incident.      I arrived at Control at
     about 1600.     There wasn't anyone there to designate where I
     was to go so I just found a vacant phone and started taking
     calls.     There were about 12 people in Control room by this
     time and others in the Major Incident room.
4.   I was mainly handling calls from the press and emergency
     calls to do with the Hillsborough incident.      We would take
     calls, fill out a ticket which had the location explanation,
     name of patient, name of caller, telephone number and time
     that the call was received.     I would then pass the ticket to
     the Control Officer and he would allocate it to a crew.
5.   I worked until 2110 when everything seemed to be calming
     down.     Up to then I worked solidly except for making a drink
     for everyone at around 2015.         There were mostly calls
     coming in from the press and we had to open a switchboard to
     deal with them.     I made no statement to them but simply put
     them through the Public Relations Officer.
    opened the switchboard at about 1630.




Dated this        day of    M   */          1989
DATE OF BIRTH
QUALIFIED AMBULANCEMAN (SYMAS)

1.   I have been with the service for about 14 years.    I attended
     the Markfield Training College at Leicester in about 1977.
     I obtained the Miller certificate which enables me to cover
     all aspects of ambulance work including outpatients and
     emergency.    I am stationed at Barnsley ambulance station.   I
     work a fifteen week rota system and the duties vary
     according to which rota we are on.     The duties are normally
     for emergency vehicles though occasionally outpatient work
     is covered.


2.   We are all aware of the major incident plan.    The procedure
     is on the rear or the ID cards.      In addition to this there
     is a manual on station covering procedures in more details.


3.   On the week leading up to the Hillsborough incident I was on
     rota one which is nights.         This was from Wednesday to
     Tuesday inclusive 2200 to 0600.


4.   On the afternoon of Saturday the 15th I returned home and
     was watching the football on the TV.     At about 1510 the TV
     went live to Hillsborough and covered the incident.           I
     realised that there was an emergency situation developing at
     the ground and therefore telephoned Symas control.     I spoke
     to someone on duty and asked if they needed help.         They
     replied yes and asked me to go to my station as soon as
     possible.I changed into uniform and drove to Barnsley
     station which is about 3 miles from my home.


5.   On arrival   at the station I reported to the leading
     ambulance on duty,              I told him briefly about the
     situation at Sheffield Football Ground and that control had
     asked me to come in.             informed control that I had
     arrived and control requested I take a vehicle to Barnsley
     General Hospital to pick up an emergency medical team and
     their equipment and transport them to Hillsborough.


6.   I took vehicle 1104 which is an emergency vehicle and went
     single handed to Barnsley General to collect the team and
     their equipment.       I informed control on my arrival at
     Barnsley General and met the team.   I assisted them to load
     the equipment and then the one doctor and two nursing staff
     boarded the vehicle.      At Barnsley General there was a
     Hoyland vehicle with ambulancemen          and          . We
     agreed to go in convoy to the ground having regard to the
     emergency.


7.   We set off at speed using lights and sirens.     We came down
     the Ml turning off at Birdwell and then approached Sheffield
     through Grenoside.     We were contacted by control en route
     who requested we approach the incident by Leppings Lane
     entrance to the ground.     We came down from Grenoside, the
Halifax road to the roundabout with Penistone Road.       There
were police on duty who directed us to Leppings Lane.


Leppings Lane was packed solid with supporters on foot.
With the sirens of both our vehicles the crowd parted and we
made our way through with the Hoyland Vehicle in front.       I
was concentrating on avoiding colliding with any of the
pedestrians.


We entered the ground at Leppings Lane and were directed by
police.     We drove round the rear of the south stand access
road to join Penistone Road.      I turned left and could see
that there were three ambulances parked up on Penistone Road
by the ground.     We parked to the rear of them.   Mr D Jones
who appeared to be the incident officer came up to our
vehicles.     He asked me who I was and what I had got with the
vehicle.      I told him I had brought a medical team from
Barnsley general Casualty together with their equipment.     He
directed me to take the team and their equipment to the
gymnasium.


Leaving the ambulance secured we took what equipment we
could carry between us and I got a traffic warden to help us
carry it.     I went into the Gymnasium entrance to the ground.
It was busy with supporters milling around.     Ambulances were
reversing in and loading casualties.            We got to the
gymnasium entrance with the team and equipment.     We were met
      by Alan Hopkins who asked me who we were and what equipment
      we had.   I informed him that it was Barnsley General Medical
      team and their equipment.    He suggested that at that time we
      were not required.    We returned to the vehicle and loaded
      the equipment back on.           On return to the vehicle the
      ambulances in front had gone and we were effectively at the
      front with vehicles to the rear of us.


11.   I was preparing to leave the incident and drove up a few
      yards to Mr D Jones.        I informed him that we were not
      required.    Jones said that as we had a Doctor he should go
      to the gymnasium.    I asked about their equipment and he said
      to leave it on the vehicle.         the team then left for the
      gymnasium.


12.   D Jones then asked me to go to the parked ambulance vehicles
      and collect blankets and body bags.     The blankets were to be
      left at the gate and the body bags had          to go into the
      gymnasium.     I went to the parked ambulances and as far as I
      can recall there were three.      I collected their blankets and
      body bags.I left the blankets        at the gate and took the
      body bags     tothe gymnasium.     As I went to the gymnasium I
      guided an ambulance driven by                             up to
      the loading point near the gymnasium.


13.   I took the body bags into the gymnasium and laid them out by
      the deceased. Together with a police officer I moved two or
      three bodies a distance of a few feet in order to make
      access.


14.   I then left the gymnasium and reported to D Jones at the
      gate.     He directed me to take my vehicle and park up at the
      Herries Road Bus Depot.      I drove to the depot directed by
      police.    There was an ambulance officer on site directing us
      where to park.    I waited there   for   about one and a quarter
      hours..


15.   I was then requested by the duty officer to park up on the
      Penistone Road duel carriage way.        I was on the opposite
      side of Penistone Road to the ground.          As far as I can
      recall there were about three vehicles at the same point.
      The scene appeared to have calmed down.


16.   We were asked to go into the rear of the gymnasium car park
      leaving our vehicles on Penistone Road.     Mr D Jones asked us
      to wait as Mr Page was wanting to speak to us.         We got a
      drink from the police canteen.     After a short while Mr Page
      went into the gymnasium.


17.   I asked Mr Jones if I could be excused at about 1815
      because I was on night duty at 2200.       He said that I could
      leave and I took the vehicle back to Barnsley General and
      off loaded the medical teams equipment. I made my way back
                                            /*?c©
      to Barnsley station and signed off at MOO.
Dated this   (o   day of   1989.
STATEMENT OF      :-

DATE OF BIRTH
OCCUPATION                     CONTROL OFFICER       SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                               METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE.


1.   I have been a driver and leading ambulance man with over 21
     years service originally with West Riding County Council and
     then    from      about   1974   on   with   the   South Yorkshire
     Metropolitan Ambulance Service.


2.   In about 1974 I became a Control Officer, a post which I
     have held until the present date.


3.   I received the Miller Award (Ambulance Aid).          This followed
     a six week course at Cleckheaton Training College in 1968.
     We did all aspects of ambulance work and aid including first
     aid etc.


4.   At Leicester about four years ago I attended a fortnights
     course on control procedures which was an up date.


5.   I am currently a controller.             There are two sections to
     this.     The outpatients service is one section and the other
     is the emergency section.             The control room is one unit
     comprising the two sections.           If you are on the emergency
     desk the hours are 06.00 to 14.00, 14.00 to 22.00, 22.00 to
     06.00. The outpatients desk is 07.30 to 16.00 and 08.30 to
I ordinarily work a rota system which will be both emergency
and outpatient desk.   In addition to the set rotas there is
also a relief shift for the change overs and lunch breaks.


I work on a twelve week rota with eleven others.   There is a
superintendent in overall charge.   There are also control
assistants who cover the phones making emergency calls,
passing on messages to the stations and messages        from
Doctors.


The outpatient work is planning use of vehicles for patients
to and from home and hospital, hospital transfers and the
like.


The emergency section of the job is the demand of the public
on 999 service,    requests from Doctors      and hospitals.
Ordinarily I would have about 26 or 27 vehicles from 10.00
a.m. onwards to control.


Regarding "major incidents" there is a booklet which is
circulated called Major Incident Procedure.


There is also a booklet entitled "Control Procedures 1 to 8"
which is effectively the instructions for the control job
and also has a portion which deals with emergencies and
major incidents.
In addition to these booklets I have taken part in a "dry
run" for a major incident.       This was in Rotherham on a
demolition site of an old hospital and the scenario was that
a large building had collapsed on a lot of people.    That was
about two years ago as far as I can recall.     Following the
"dry run" there is a de-brief when any problems that may
have arisen can be ironed out and lessons learnt can be
added to the major incident book.


At the time of the Hillsborough incident I was on duty
eight. This was:-
Monday:              Rota off.   In fact I went into work to
                     planning shift 07.00 to 15.30.
Tuesday to Friday:   08.30 to 17.00
Tuesday              I was "spare control" - covering people
                     who were off and organising control.
Wednesday,
Thursday,Friday      I was Rotherham, Barnsley day control.


Saturday 15th:       09.00 to 16.30
I was outpatient control for the whole of South Yorkshire.
This is a busy day for outpatients because of discharges,
transfers and admissions which have usually been booked.
The hospitals ring up to see if we can organise any
transport for patients returning home and the like.
Saturday is ordinarily quieter than week days and so we can
         usually accommodate extra work of that type.
         One vehicle went from Sheffield to Stockport returning at
         about 1400.


         Another vehicle had gone to London from Wath.      He departed
         at about 08.00 returning at approximately 19.00.


  14.    I was controlling outpatients in the control room at about
/C o £   Je&ZrGO when I heard Supt. Clarke talking to the Police by our

         direct   line.   The police were requesting a fleet of
         ambulances to the football ground.


  15.    He said word to the effect of        "you want a fleet of
         ambulances to the Leppings Lane end of the Hillsborough
         ground" and he asked the nature of the incident.       At the
         time I did not know the type of incident which had occurred.


  16.    Superintendent Clarke then asked me what vehicles I had
         available in outpatients for emergency.


  17.    I told him that I had some vehicles empty, but that more
         would become available as time went on.


  18.    He requested the vehicles I had and accordingly I radioed to
         them to proceed to the incident.


  19.    I instructed my vehicles that there was an incident at the
      Hillsborough ground and for them to make their way there on
      red to the Leppings Lane end.


20.   This is a code for emergency indicating they should proceed
      at speed.


21.   All ambulances have a crew of two as far as I can recall
      apart from 607 from Rotherham.


22.   At that time,       about 15.08 hours,         I had the following
      vehicles available:-
      1206 Barnsley Hoyland Station - he was mobile between
            Mexbrough      and     Hoyland.   He     went   str a i g h t   to
            Hillsborough.


      407   Sheffield -    was doing outpatient work in Sheffield and
            as soon as he had finished he went to the scene.


      906   Doncaster -    he was green (empty) in Sheffield and went
            straight to the scene.


      805   Both are Doncaster vehicles who were at base, and both
            went to the ground 801       together.


      601   Maltby   -    had arrived back at base and went straight
            to the       ground.
505   Rotherham        -    was doing a transfer between Rotherham
      Hospital    and Barnsley Moor Lane and as soon as empty
      he went straight to the scene.


203   Sheffield    -        as far as I can recall he was working
      and when clear went straight to the scene.


607   Maltby -     this was a volunteer off duty who came into
      work and kept on my channel, he went straight to the
      scene and reported in saying he was a single handed
      volunteer i.e. driver only.


308   Sheffield    -       was working in Sheffield on outpatients
      and went to the scene as soon as clear.


105   Volunteer crew came on too late to assist at the scene,
      but did 999 calls and emergency transfers.


1101 Barnsley Station         -   as far as I can recall he was at
      the station and went straight to the scene.


All these vehicles were kept on the outpatients channel
because of the pressure on the emergency reserve channel:
channel 1.


805   Doncaster made a certain number of journeys to and from
      the scene, but then broke down.         At 16.35 I mobilised
           our duty fitter to attend and repair the vehicle.


23.   Upon reaching the scene the ambulances reported to the
      senior officer on site who deployed them where required.


24.   I kept on receiving calls from vehicles passing messages on
      to hospitals and gathering and relaying information to crews
      as and when it became available.


25.   It was from the messages that I began to realise that it was
      a major incident.   Crews would report back in some cases
      stating that they had a D1 (this is the code for a body i.e.
      a death).   In other cases they would report that they were
      treating bad crush injuries and asked me to contact the
      hospital to prepare them for admission.


26.   Initially we did so, but it soon became clear that because
      of the volume the hospitals were too busy to be logging
      calls, we used a special hot line to the Royal   Hallamshire
      Casualty and to Northern General Casualty.


27.   Throughout the course of the incident I had no problems with
      communications with my vehicles.


28.   Radio contact was direct to the vehicle.


29.   Initially I directed vehicles to the Leppings Lane end where
      the incident was thought to be taking place.


30. Soon afterwards, about 10 to 15 minutes approximately the
      location was changed to the gym entrance off Penistone Road.


31.   It is only a short journey from the Penistone Road entrance
      to the Northern General and further on, the Royal Halamshire
      Hospital.


32.   Communication from my control was solely between me and the
      ambulances I have referred to.      No one else can use that
      frequency.


33.   In the course of the incident I needed to use our phone
      line.   An example would be to telephone the Royal Halamshire
      and Northern General Hospitals.         This was virtually
      impossible to do.    The lines were ringing, but were not
      answered presumably because of pressure from outside calls
      and work during the incident.


34.   Another problem was that the press and media effectively
      blocked our phone lines asking for information about the
      incident.    I dealt with ITN twice, the Manchester Guardian,
      BBC Leeds and the Times on the phone.     They would not get
      off the line and so I spoke to them telling them that we
      were attending an incident, but nothing more.
35.   At about 1730 there were no longer any casualties to remove
      from the ground and I was asked by              In charge If I
      could get vehicles to transfer people from the Halamshire to
      the King Edward VII in Sheffield.




      I sent him vehicles:-
      505
      607
      1101

      203
      403
      805
      801
      308 to transfer patients.


36.   I would liaise with the ambulances to inform the King Edward
      Hospital of their arrival.    Reception was organised by
              in control and              at the Hallamshire.


37.   I co-ordinated this between the Halamshire and my crews.
      This continued from approximately 17.30 to 19.00.


38.   In the meantime I also dealt with transfers from Northern
      General incoming casualty unit to the Royal Halamshire CAT
      SCAN (bodyscanner).
39.   These were seriously ill crush victims from the incident.
      The scan was required prior to surgery.


40.   By this time it was approaching evening and as the vehicles
      under my control became clear or empty I sent them back to
      their bases.   I then checked that all of my vehicles were
      off the air and finished and accordingly I closed my control
      at 20.30.


Dated this        day of               1989
                        states:-


1    I was born on


2.   I joined the Sheffield Ambulance Service at Corporation
     Street Sheffield in 1972.     I completed basic training and
     obtained the Miller certificate whilst at Corporation
     Street.


3.   I moved to Parkway Ambulance Station in 1975 and upon
     promotion to Leading Ambulance man moved to Rotherham
     Ambulance Station in 1982 and upon promotion to Control
     Officer I moved to the control room at Rotherham.


4.   I am a Control Officer and I am responsible for co­
     ordinating the movement of vehicles and monitoring emergency
     cover.


5.   Saturday 15th April was my day off.     I was decorating in a
     neighbour's     house   and listening   to   the    radio.   At
     approximately 1515 or 1520 I heard on the radio a report of
     a spillage onto the pitch at Hillsborough.         I listened to
     the radio coverage and had rather an uneasy feeling about
     the incident.    I heard the telephone ringing in my bungalow
     and on the second occasion the telephone rang I answered it.
     Control were requesting my attendance at the control unit as
     a major incident had developed.
I persuaded a neighbour to drive me to the headquarters and
I arrived at approximately 1545 or 1530.


I reported to Mr Smith the Chief Control Officer and asked
for his instructions.   He ordered me to man extension number
206 in the control room.      I manned extension 206 and the
vast majority of calls were from the press.        These calls
were taking a considerable amount of time.          The press
officer was extremely busy trying to get through all the
calls.     I also dealt with passing domestic messages
regarding urgent admissions to hospital and transfers.


I did this for approximately 30 minutes when Superintendent
Clarke asked me to move to the major incident room.        The
press were taking up so much time I assisted
Control Officer          was taking the controls on ERC.
         and I manned the telephone lines.   These lines were
mainly occupied by press reporters.   The control room needed
those lines and many others to run the incident.


The press men were persistent in their request for details
of the deaths, the number of children who had died, how many
had died, the casualties and these details were given to the
press as information came in about the rising death toll.    I
spent all my time on Saturday dealing with telephone
enquiries.
10.   I had no contact at all with the vehicles involved in the
      incident.


11.   Control Officer                 was running the incident on the
      ERC frequency.


12.   Control Officer                   was running the domestic and
      emergency channel.


13.               was running control of the day vehicles.


14.   I spent the day answering calls from the press who wanted
      constant up dates on the information they had been given.
      The information was updated on a white board in the office
      and the press would be given details as they were available.


15.   I am not    aware of any particular incident plan for
      Hillsborough.     I am aware of the major incident plan which
      is always being updated and I have been involved on
      exercises for a major incident.


16.   I had no problems with my journey to the control rooms.


Dated this             day of   H&H
                      states:
1.   I was born on the
2.   I am an unqualified ambulance man.   I have not attended the
     residential course leading to the Miller Certificate
     qualifaction.
3.   I joined the ambulance service       in February 1986, at
     Rotherham Ambulance Station and until August 1988, I was a
     dedicated day transport ambulance man.       I moved to Maltby
     Ambulance Station in August 1988, where I am now based as a
     full-time ambulance man.
4.   My previous experience includes two years experience as a
     Trainee Technical Pathology Technician at Sheffield's
     Childrens Hospital.
5.   I was not on duty on Saturday 15th April.
6.   I was travelling from Sheffield towards Wickersly when I saw
     police cars speeding along the road          in the opposite
     direction.      I was driving along the Parkway when I saw a
     Maltby police car followed by an ambulance Range Rover and I
     recognised the driver as Alan Hopkins.      The Range Rover was
     travelling at high speed and I also heard on the radio that
     there was crowd trouble at the Hillsborough Football Ground.
     The radio report cited advertising hoardings being used as
     stretchers to transfer casualties off the pitch.       I saw a
     Maltby day crew travelling in the opposite direction on red.
     I decided that the incident at Hillsborough Football Ground
     must be something serious.     I drove home and telephoned
     Control.   Control told me to report to Maltby Station.    When
I arrived at the Station it was deserted.        I telephoned
Control from the Station and Control instructed me to take a
vehicle to the Hillsborough Football Ground as soon as
possible.     I took an Emergency vehicle and drove to the
Penistone Road entrance to the Hillsborough Football Ground.
I met an ambulance liaison officer there.   I was using radio
channel 3 and the call sign of the ambulance was Romeo 607.
On arrival I joined a queue of ambulances waiting to gain
access to the ground.        I enlisted the assistance of a
traffic warden and requested him to sit in the vehicle for
safekeeping whilst I entered the ground and spoke to Station
Officer Paul Eason who told me to wait until I was called
into the ground.   I recall seeing David Jones in the area at
that time.     I returned to my vehicle relieved the traffic
warden and shortly after that an ambulance man asked me for
the vehicle's body bags and blankets. He took the blankets
and body bags out of the vehicle.   I waited in the queue for
approximately ten minutes.    David Jones waved me out of the
line.   I drove to where David Jones was standing and he told
me that he had a doctor, nurses and a matron who had to be
transported to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.                I
contacted Control and informed them I was driving to the
Royal Hallamshire Hospital.       Control instructed me to
contact the liaison officer                   when I arrived.
I arrived at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital,     the doctor,
nurses and matron left the vehicle, entered the Hospital, I
reported to                      that I was a single handed
     crew.      She gave me instructions to tranfer two stretcher
     cases from Ward F at the Royal Hallamshire to Ward D at the
     King Edwards Hospital.    I carried out the transfer, returned
     to the Royal Hallamshire,     where                    told me
     there were no more cases to transfer.           I reported to
     Control.     I was stood down at 1800.   I returned to base and
     arrived at 1830.       I informed Control that I was clear at
     base.   Control thanked me for my assistance.       I returned
     home.


Dated this   fn    day of                     1989
              born on                       am 29 years old.
1 am a Control Assistant with SYMAS stationed at Rotherham.
1 live at                                Rotherham.   1 live
with my wife and son aged 3 years.


I have been employed with SYMAS on shifts for about two
years; prior to that I served 10 years in the H.M.Navy.


On Saturday 15th April 1989 I was at my home; it was my day
off, 1 think it would be about 1520 and 1525, when 1 look a
telephone call from Rotherham Control.   I was told there had
been a major incident and was requested to go in to work.


I went at once arriving at about 1550.      I took a taxi to
get there.   Upon arrival I noticed that there were a lot of
off duty personnel present.      1 also noted that it was
obvious that a serious incident had happened,         by the
expression on some faces.    Everything was busy and seemed
to be running efficiently.


1 took telephone extension 205 and began to take calls.     To
begin with it was mainly press, and 1 redirected as many as
1 could to extension 236 which was the Public Relations
Officer’s extension.


1 can recall soon after 1 took the telephone that 1 had a
call from Nottingham Ambulance Service, offering transport
      if required, either from the scene to hospital or if
      required later, from the hospitals to home addresses.       1
      relayed this message to Mr.Albert Smith.        The call was
      acknowledged.


7.    I was told to put Barnsley and District casualty on notice
      that they might have 40 casualties or perhaps 50 plus.      1
      was told to do this by               .   I got the impression
      that they were expecting this and were in fact ready.


8.    About an hour later, on              instruction, I contacted
      Rotherham District Casualty to tell them that no further
      patients would be sent to them.      It was a fact that none
      were sent to Rotherham at all.


9.    I think it would be between 1800 and 1830 that things began
      to ease off and we began to wind down.     I finally left the
      unit at about 9.10pm.


10.   All the important calls were recorded on a log, but the
      number of less important calls, which made the bulk of those
      I took, were not.


11.   I thought the way in which the incident was handled in
      control was excellent.    I was most impressed by the way
everyone got involved and did the job.
Dated the   /   day of   N^| Psts~f f \   1989
             states: -



1.   I am employed as a Control Assistant for SYMAS.


2.   My date of birth is


3.   I have been with SYMAS since May 1988.       Prior to that I was
     employed as a switchboard operator for British Telecom.


4.   I was off duty on 15th April 1989.       I received a telephone
     call from                 ane of the Control Assistants at about
     1545.   She said that there was a major incident and asked if
     I could come into work.      This was the first that I had heard
     of an incident at Hillsborough.


5.   As a result of various delays I did not arrive at work until
     1720, when I went on duty at Control.          I stayed on duty
     until   2130    and was   fairly busy most    of   the   time.   1
     principally dealt with the arrangements         for transferring
     patients from the Northern General to the Royal Hallamshire
     Hospital for scans as well as the "routine" emergencies.


Dated this   ^      day of M.Cuj^ 1989.
DATE OF BIRTH

CONTROL ASSISTANT (SYMAS)


1.   I started with Symas in October 1987 working in control.
     Initially there is in-service training and I would sit in
     with people and observe.


2.   After a few days of observing I then took some domestic
     calls.     These would be listened into in order to evaluate
     and assess me.


3.   After about four weeks of in-service training I then began
     to work the shift system.      In control   we work a 14 week
     rota and each week is different.


4.   I am based    at Symas   HQ   in Rotherham and   there   are   14
     control-iSE- ayceomgh and two who work outpatient bookings.     I
     work in the control room and one week of my rota is advance
     bookings for outpatients.      While on control my duties are
     answering phone calls which can be:-
          Doctors requests
          999 calls
          Enquiries from the public
          Hospitals etc
     If it is an emergency call I will fill in the call form and
     this is passed to the emergency controller.       He will then
organise    the vehicles   in    response   to   it.     If control
officers require telephone contact with an ambulance station
or hospitals we also do this.       Control officers simply use
radio contact.


On Saturday the 15th I arrived for work and signed in for my
shift ie 0930 to 1800.     I was manning the phones from 0930
onwards.     There was also                            who was 0600
to 1400 shift.      It was a normal Saturday with the usual
volume of work.


As far as 1 can recall the first calls relating to the
Hillsborough incident came through at about 1506.         They were
from force control.      This is police control with whom we
have a direct line.      The call was taken by                     and
she said that he was asking for our duty superintendent.           He
was Ray Clarke who was sitting at the centre console with
     and I.    He took the call from Police control.            As far
as 1 can recall Ray Clarke said to police control that he
would be getting vehicles down to them and that we had duty
officers at the Hillsborough ground.


Shortly    after   that call    we received   another    from    force
control.    I can not recall who took the call, but I remember
that after the call it was mentioned they had said that
there are bodies all over at the Hillsborough Ground or
words to that effect.
Ray     Clarke    then    told            to    start      emergency      log to
separate this from the everyday log book.                         1 was taking
calls of the usual type not relating to the Hillsborough
incident.        As far as 1 can recall Ray Clarke asked me to
contact                      who is our P.R. Officer.             I got her and
passed her to Clarke.             Ray Clarke was opening the major
incident room.           He took all vehicles on to the emergency
channel.                      went in to assist to log calls.                 At
this time Mr Hartley had arrived with


I    received     a   lot    of   calls    many     from    off    duty    staff
volunteering their services.              I asked                   what to do
with them and he said to ask them to report to their own
station for duty as soon as possible.                  1 also answered a lot
of    calls   from     the   press   asking       what     was    happening   at
Hillsborough.         I told them that there was no coment at that
time.


I only received a few calls in relation to the Hillsborough
incident which I passed through to the major incident room.
I would estimate that within half an hour of the start of
the calls other staff began to arrive and sat down to help.
The     phones   were     so busy    that       they    immediately       started
answering.       After about three quarters of an hour to an hour
one of the assistant suggested opening switchboard so that
we could store press calls.                    This relieved some of the
      pressure on the line for more important calls.


12.   My shift usually finished      at 1800 but I volunteered to stay
      on if required.      Superintendent Ray Clarke said that they
      had plenty of staff, there was enough cover and I therefore
      signed off at 1810.


13.   1 would say that the job at that time was made much more
      difficult by the volume of calls from the press.           Calls are
      dealt with on a first come first served basis and there was
      therefore   a   considerable    back    log   some   of   which   were
      important calls.


Dated this    ^   day of    rnctu)    1989.
                           will say 1 was born on                 I am a
Control Assistant.         I have been with SYMAS for 20 months.
Prior to that I was a shop assistant.            The training consists
of two to three weeks on site basically watching the other
assistants and seeing how to handle the various situations
and calls that arise.


Saturday 15th April was my day off.             I got a telephone call
at 1545 from                   one of the control assistants.          She
asked me if 1 could come in as there was a major incident at
the Hillsborough football ground.               She told me that some
people had been crushed.           1 had not heard anything before
that.


I got     to work     at   about   1610   and    reported   straight    to
control.       On saturdays there are usually only two people in
control but when I arrived there were at least six.              Shortly
after my arrival Superintendent Clarke asked me to go into
the Major Incident room to relieve                          who had been
there from the start.         It was now about 1630.         I asked her
what she had been doing as I had not worked in the Major
Incident room before or received any training for it.                  She
said that she had been writing all messages in a log.                  She
was not taking actual calls.         I then took over from her.         It
was     very   busy   to begin with with messages           coming   from
hospitals and ambulancemen and I were making a note of the
messages and of the time that they were coming through.                  I
was also given an ear piece to listen to the radio on ERC
which Is the emergency channel.


The major Incident control room consists of one console with
two telephone points.              The controller was                 and
he was dealing with the vehicles on ERC.                1 was then making
a note of what messages were coming back, eg vehicles to go
to the ground or vehicles being sent back to base.                     It
started to quieten down after one to one and a half hours
and we were then standing vehicles down and sending them to
Herrles Road bus depot.             Some of the messages which had been
coming through were unclear and so 1 asked for an earpiece
so that 1 could listen as well.               Some were loud and clear
and some you could not hear at all.             1 do not know where the
unclear calls were coming from.


The senior officer at Herries Road bus depot was Station
Officer Eason.           At one stage we were trying to contact him
but could not get through.               I think this was early in the
evening.      I was then asked to get the telephone number of
Herries Road so that we could try to get through on the land
           -----------------                      H
line.                          found the number and Arang it but it was
unobtainable.        lijt- then rang the operator and she said that
all lines were blocked for that area.              We then got through
to South Yorkshire Transport control room to see if they had
an internal line that we could use.                They said that they
would try to get through.               Eason then telephoned to us and
     said that he would ring at 10 minute intervals.


6.   We had received a lot       of press calls all afternoon. We had
     to open up a switchboard and divert them so that they could
     be answered by                                               We
     set up the switchboard at about 1700.


7.   As things began to quieten down I was told to go back to the
     control room to help on the telephones.         I went back and
     answered calls until we finished at 2120.        The calls were
     mainly from doctors doing everyday admissions and others
     from Northern General Hospital wanting to transfer patients
     to Hallamshire.


Dated the              day of M c u j                 1989
                       states :
1.   I   was born on
2.   I    am one of     four Standards and Efficiency Officers with
     SYMAS,     which position involves me in being responsible for
     liaison between the Ambulance Service and              the hospitals
     within   the     SYMAS   area.      My own    responsibility   is    in
     relation    to    the    Barnsley Area Health Authority and the
     Northern General Hospital in Sheffield.
3.   I joined the Ambulance Service in May 1966, initially as an
     ambulanceman, then a Shift Leader (a post which no longer
     exists),     I then      became   a Control    Officer,   thereafter
     Planning     Superintendent        and   I   became   Standards     and
     Efficiency Officer in October, 1988.           I am based at Control
     in Rotherham.
4.   I   was not onduty on Saturday 15th April, 1989.           I called
     into Control by chance shortly after 1500 to collect some
     items that I had left at work the day before.              As I was
     making my way into the Control building, Mr Alan Hopkins
     came rushing out of the building in order to speak to Roger
     Morley, who was standing near to me.            Mr Hopkins informed
     Mr Morley that there was trouble at Hillsborough.
5.   I carried on into the Control building to inform the Control
     Superintendent,     Ray Clarke,     that I was in the building.
     This is standard procedure if one enters the building when
     off duty.        Mr Clarke told me that an incident was taking
     place at Hillsborough.            At this point in time, a lot of
     'phones were ringing continuously, and I immediately began
to answer some calls.             It became quickly apparent that
there was a Major Incident taking place at Hillsborough.                       I
asked Ray Clarke If I could do anything to assist, and In
the meantime kept taking calls.
As far as possible, I kept a handwritten log, covering the
major tasks that I dealt with during the course of the
afternoon and early evening.           I was also aware of the SYMAS
Major Incident Plan and its general workings.
Ray Clark quickly decided to open a separate Incident Room
up,   next door to the Control Room,                 for the purposes of
solely dealing with the Hillsborough Incident.                        Mr Clark
took over the running of the Incident so I remained in the
Control Room and took charge of all emergencies and other
incidents    that     were      not    otherwise           connected        with
Hillsborough.     As it transpired, a number of calls relating
to the Hillsborough Incident continued to be received in the
Control Room rather than the separate Incident Room.
I decided that I would personally take as many calls from
the police as I could handle in order to give some co­
ordination to what was taking place,                  rather than two or
three Control     Assistants      taking   separate calls           from the
police.
I do   recall    that    at     some   stage    the       police   asked     for
confirmation     of     which    Hospitals          the    casualties       from
Hillsborough would be taken to.            I informed the police that
the Northern General Hospital would be the main hospital for
transfer    of   casualties      because       it    was    closest    to    the
      football ground.       I also recall that Police Force Control
      requested medical assistance at the ground at some stage.
      These calls should all be logged.             Sometime thereafter, I
      received a further call from the police Informing me that
      they had notified the Northern General Hospital and Royal
      Hallamshire Hospital to expect casualties.           I am quite sure
      that these hospitals had already been notified by ourselves
      to expect casualties.        As the Incident developed and the
      Northern   General     and   Royal    Hallamshire    Hospitals    were
      unable to take all casualties.          I Informed the police that
      I would Inform all hospitals necessary, which Included the
      Barnsley District General Hospital and Rotherham District
      General    Hospital,     and   gave    both    hospitals     as   much
      Information as possible regarding the Incident.              This call
      should also be logged.
10.   When   the police    Informed me that       they required medical
      assistance at the ground,       I Immediately rang the Northern
      General and Royal Hallamshire Hospitals to Inform them that
      medical teams were required at Hillsborough, and that SYMAS
      vehicles would be sent up to both hospitals In order to pick
      up the medical teams for transportation to Hillsborough.             I
      provided   similar     information     to   the   Barnsley   District
      General Hospital and in fact informed all three hospitals
      that we were dealing with a large number of casualties with
      crush injuries.
11.   Thereafter,   I continued to co-ordinate the Control              Room
      dealing with a large number of calls.             It is difficult to
     recollect the specific calls without reference to my own
     log,    although as the Incident progressed,                  the calls did
     begin to slow down.             At the same time, the staff In the
     Control Room still had to deal with all other emergency
     calls    that    were     not    concerned      with    the    Hillsborough
     Incident.            I   continued       to   work     in   Control      until
     approximately 2240, at which point in time I telephoned Mr
     Don    Page,    to   inform     him    that   somebody      from   the   Trent
     Regional Health Authority wished to speak to him.                        After
    making this call, I left for home.


Dated this    ^      day of                1989.
             states:-


1.   My date of birth is


2.   I am a Qualified Ambulanceman stationed at Batemoor.   I have
     21 years service with Sheffield Corporation/SYMAS.     I hold
     the Miller Certificate and I am an extended trained
     assistant, which is an intermediary qualification between an
     ordinary ambulance attendant and a paramedic.    I completed
     this training in March 1989.


3.   I work on an emergency crew and on Saturday 15th April 1989
     I had been on the 0600 to 1400 morning shift.    However, we
     returned late from a call and logged out at Batemoor at
     1455.


4.   I then went home and took the dog for a walk.    When I got
     back at about 1550 my wife said she had heard on the radio
     that there was a problem at Hillsborough and there had been
     a request for ambulancemen to report in.    I think she was
     listening to Radio Sheffield.     I immediately telephoned
     central control and they told me to report to station.     No
     further information was given.   I was still in uniform and
     drove back to Batemoor where I met              who had come
     in having seen the incident on TV.     We were the only two
     people there.
We took an emergency vehicle, which was the same one I had
re-equipped after the morning shift, and radioed in green to
Control at about 1610.     We used the ordinary frequency and
were told to proceed to Hillsborough and to switch to ERC
channel.     No instruction was given as to which part of the
ground we should report to.


We made the journey very rapidly with flashing lights and
siren and since the police had, by this time, blocked off
all major junctions we had no traffic problems whatsoever.
We arrived in only about 8 minutes,       the journey would
normally take 20/30 minutes.


We had no further radio contact on the way.      We arrived at
the Leppings Lane end because this was the direction from
which we had approached.    By this time everyone was leaving
the ground and Leppings Lane was a solid mass of people.
Fortunately we arrived from the Middlewood Road end and the
crowd was moving away in the other direction along Leppings
Lane.      We, therefore, managed to get within sight of the
gate without trouble.    It was about 1620 or 1625.


There were police officers outside the gate and I asked them
where the ambulance control point was.     They did not know,
   so       called Control on ERC to find out.   We could not
get through, partly because the line was busy,        and also
because of interference.       After about 5 minutes we heard
      control giving a general instruction on ERC for all vehicles
      to report to Herries Road Bus Station.         We,   therefore,
      followed the crowd at a snails pace down Leppings Lane
      towards the bus station.


9.    All I saw at Leppings Lane end was the crowd spilling out of
      the ground.     No casualties or bodies were apparent and no
      more ambulances were going in.      There were a lot of police
      and two fire tenders but I did not see any police horses.


10.   On arriving at Herries Road Bus Station we were still unable
      to confirm our position to control, but Mr Eason was there,
      co-ordinating operations and we reported to him.     There were
      already about ten ambulances waiting and we parked with them
      and stood by.    We waited for about an hour, after which Mr
                arrived from the football ground and instructed
      three vehicles, including mine, to go to the gym yard.       We
      did so immediately.    It would be about 1730 or 1745.


11.   On arrival in the yard behind the gym we parked alongside
      other ambulances, about 8 or 9 in total.       Mr Hopkins came
      and asked me to go round all the vehicles and collect      body
      bags.   I did so with the help of another lad from Rotherham
      whose name I do not know.    We took the bags to the gymnasium
      and passed them inside.     There were many police dealing with
      the bodies at this stage.       After this we returned to our
      vehicles and waited.
12.   There was a long wait before It was decided how the bodies
      should be dealt with, during which time, we were able to
      stand by at one end of the gym which had been converted to a
      makeshift canteen.


13.   Eventually______ and I were stood down without having been
      involved in the transfer of bodies.   On leaving Hillsborough
      we notified control on the domestic channel that we were
      returning to station and later confirmed our arrival in
      accordance with standard procedure.    We left the ambulance
      at Batemoor and logged out at about 2020.




Dated this         day of           1989.
                     states :
1.   I was born on
2.   I am a Qualified Ambulancewoman.            I am stationed     at
     Middlewood Ambulance Station.            I have been employed by
     SYMAS for seven years and prior to that I was a police
     officer.    I have had the following training - 2 weeks basic
     at Rotherham, 6 weeks basic at Markfield, Leicestershire, 2
     weeks advance driving at Markfield, SYMAS extended training,
     National extended training and I am a Registered Emergency
     Medical Technician.    I am paramedic.
3.   On Saturday 15th April, 1989 I was due to be on the night-
     shift commencing at 2200.      In the afternoon I was at home.
     At about 1515/1520 I saw on my television what was happening
     at Hillsborough.      I waited by the 'phone expecting to be
     called in but nothing happened.            I then called in to
     Control who told me to proceed to Middlewood Ambulance
     Station    as soon as possible.            I was   told that   an
     unidentified individual was on his way in and would meet me
     there.      I arrived at the Station at about 1615.             I
     prepared an ambulance for emergency duty.            Three other
     personnel - Ambulancewoman           Q.A.          and Q.A.
     arrived.    Q.A.           contacted Control and informed them
     that there were now two crews on station ready to proceed.
4.   Q.A.         and I then received an emergency call from
     Control to attend an asthma attack at a house on Shenston
     Road Off Leppings Lane.       We proceeded to Shenston Road.
     On approaching the scene we could not go direct to Shenston
Road because of fire engines blocking the road.                        We
therefore had to proceed all the way around the ground and
approach front the northern end.               On arrival at the house we
found a Liverpool supporter who had been let in to use the
telephone and at the end of the call had apparently had an
epileptic fit.      He had gained consciousness by the time we
arrived.      We took him immediately to Northern General
Hospital.     On arrival we handed him over to the staff.              We
reported to Control over the ambulance radio and were given
another emergency call to attend a Liverpool supporter who
had collapsed on a coach in Halifax Road (just north of the
ground).     The log should show the precise time of this
call.    We attended that spectator and took him to Northern
General Hospital.      We then called in to Control once more
over the ambulance radio and were instructed to take an old
lady home to                     Nursing Home from casualty at
Northern General.
                        <2 A s . U A * ~ T y
We proceeded to                    NGiPeiifjg 'ifSiaa-but could not find
the old lady when we arrived there.                We called into Control
again and was stood down for a period of 20 minutes.                   We
were then contacted by Control and told to take patient
number      from the east floor of intensive care at Northern
General across to Royal Hallamshire for a scan.                       We
collected that patient and an anesthetist and transported
him across.      We called in again to Control from Royal
Hallamshire.        We then attended to another unconnected
emergency and called into the Station at about 2000                1 then
*   \




            continued with normal duties until 0600 the next morning.

                        /4
        Dated this ^7        day of   j   1989.




    m
                           states:-


1.   I am employed as a qualified ambulance man at SYMAS.


2.   My date of birth is


3.   1 began work with the Sheffield Ambulance Service in 1973
     and qualified in about 1975.         1 have been with SYMAS since
     the ambulance service was transferred to them from the
     Sheffield City Council.          1 am based at Longley Ambulance
     Station.


4.   1 was off duty on Saturday 15th April and was listening to
     Radio Hallam, some time after 1500.         1 knew there was an
     incident at Hillsborough because they were asking over the
     radio for doctors and nurses.        1 rang control and asked if 1
     was required.     1 spoke to a control assistant who asked me
     to report to my own station.


5.   1 arrived at Longley Ambulance Station a little after 1530.
                     and                 were already there.     They told
     me they had already radioed control who had said to take any
     vehicle to Hillsborough using the ERC channel.            1 went with
                       1 drove.       We booked off station on ERC and
     were told by control to go to the ground.          I don't recall
     being told which end to go.
     We arrived at Penistone Road from Herries Road south at
     about 1540 and parked up behind three or four ambulances
     which were already parked in Penistone Road.               Station
     Officer Eason came up to us.        We were driving a day vehicle
     whose call sign was S462       and which could only transport
     patients in a sitting position.       We waited for two to three
     minutes for our turn to come up to drive into the yard off
     Penistone Road    and we drove in front first.        We loaded up
     with ten walking wounded and were told by                       to go
     to the Royal Hallamshire and we did so by going north up
     Penistone Road to the roundabout and then down Leppings
     Lane.


                                                                 i te   c.<
7.   We arrived at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital at about                and
     unloaded the casualties at the fracture clinic.          1 radioed
     control that we were green at Royal Hallamshire and we were
     told to go to Netherthorpe Parkway but before we got there
     we were told to go to the Herries Road Bus Garage where we
     arrived at about 1620.


8.   Mr Eason was in charge at Herries Road Bus Garage and 1
     waited there until about 1750.        During that time Mr Eason
     told             to proceed on foot to the ground to assist.


9.   On Mr Eason's instructions I drove to the ground at 1750 and
     parked in Penistone Road, opposite the ground.           Mr Eason
     came    over   to me   and   told    me   to   call   control        for
        instructions.     I called control on channel 4 and was told to
      return to station and book off.


10.     1 arrived back at Longley at about 1830 and booked off.


Dated    this   h       day of ^ f o j   1989.
D . O . B . O v e r 21

QUALIFIED AMBULANCE MAN (SYMAS)

1.    I have worked with Symas for about 6 years.        I have obtained
      the Miller         Certificate   and have    attended    the   post
      proficiency courses providing an up date on techniques and
      equipment.


2.    In relation to major incidents there is a manual on station
      and a check list to the rear of our identity cards.


3.    I am stationed at Bentley ambulance station in Doncaster and
      I work on an emergency shift rota.      The rota is a nine week
      period covering various hours.


4.    Although Saturday and Sunday were           days off I had worked
      Saturday morning 0600 until          1400 to cover      for other
      personnel.


5.    On Saturday the 15th I left work at about 1410 and returned
      home.     At just after 1500 I was watching the football on TV
      when I became aware of the incident.         At this time I was at
      my parents and as Symas would not be able to contact me
      there if required I telephoned control.


6.    It took about 2 or 3 minutes to get         through.   Iexplained I
      was from Doncaster station and askedif they were calling in
staff.   The control assistant asked me to -wait while she
asked the controller.     She then replied yes and asked me to
go to the station as soon as possible.    1 then drove the two
miles to the station.       I was still in uniform from my
previous shift.


I arrived at Bentley station at about        1510/1515.    The
afternoon emergency crew were         on station.      Leading
Ambulanceman        telephoned control to inform them that 1
was on station.   A few minutes afterwards Station Officer
          arrived on station.              phoned Control and
asked what they wanted us to do.    1 understand they asked us
to crew up and proceed to Tinsley Viaduct, Sheffield in an
ambulance.


I drove and             attended in vehicle number Delta 903.
Upon leaving the station we tuned to channel one ERC.      The
vehicle was a fully equipped emergency ambulance.            1
proceeded at speed with lights and horns towards Sheffield.
As far as 1 can recall              radioed control to inform
them that we were en route.


On the way we heard a message from control the gist of which
was "control to all mobiles - proceed to Hillsborough
Football Ground - report to gate 0".        I recall
radioed control and informed them that 903 had received and
understood the message.    En route to Sheffield,   channel one
      was very distorted with interference.     We had to ask for
      repeat messages.    I heard a further message en route
      requiring attendance at the gymnasium entrance of vehicles
      going to Hillsborough.


10.   We approached the ground down Herries Road South and parked
      in line at the bottom of Herries Road South.      There were
      about 10-15 ambulances in front of us.    In accordance with
      major incident procedure we switched off lights and horns.


11.   We waited in the vehicle for about 10 to 15 minutes and the
      queue did not appear to be moving.              then went to
      the front of the queue to ascertain what was happening.


12.   As           returned the queue before us moved and we
      therefore drove across Penistone Road into the line of
      ambulances at the football ground side.   We were approached
      by Mr D Jones who shouted to us and to the other vehicles to
      take of all blankets.    We handed those over to a St Johns
      Ambulance Brigade attendant, but retained one for our use.


13.   D. Jones then told us to take on board a Leading Ambulance
      man together with a crash team of doctors.          We were
      instructed to drop the Leading Ambulance man at the Herries
      Road Bus Depot and to take the team of doctors to Barnsley
      General Hospital.   He also instructed           to set up a
      control point at Barnsley District General.   The traffic was
      not a problem, but pedestrian supporters who were milling
      about did cause problems.   1 drove to the depot, then onto
      Barnsley District General as soon as possible.    On arrival
      we dropped off the medical team and parked the vehicle.


14.              radioed in to control that we had arrived at
      Barnsley District General.     We both went into casualty
      department and this had been cleared for preparation for an
      influx of casualties.             telephoned to ask what to
      expect and when.


15.   1 was informed that control had asked him to wait and they
      would get back to us.   Shortly afterwards another ambulance
      officer arrived in his own car.   He had also been called in
      by control to establish a control point at Barnsley District
      General.


16.   We waited for about 2 hours.                bgain contacted
      control requesting an update of the position.        Shortly
      after, Control contacted us to take an outpatient home.    We
      took the outpatient home and radioed into control that we
      were clear.   Control told us to return to base and call
before signing off.      At about 1930 we returned to base.    We
telephoned control who informed us that we could stand down.




Dated this      day of    K^y   1989.
