  Incident        105          9 OP5012          TYPING SERVICE DOCUMENT
                          ;X   '
                                                              OFFICERS REPORT NUMBER    R2 37

                                                                                        Station
      *
                         mmtrn
      Forenames          PHltLlP     KENNETH

 ■ ; 'A g e ■*                                       Date of birth

                         S;YORKS.POLICE, ECCLESFIELD
                                                                              .    ■-

      Occupatioft        POL P$468

      Telephone

      Number of Pages     K

      Dated              030589                                                          Signed


                 SEMI FINAL HILLSBOROUGH       15.4.89



                 At 9.00 am on Saturday, 15th April 1989, I paraded for duty at

                 Ecclesfield Police Station in respect of the semi final togetherwith
l/%
          i>%r   °tller members °*- D Group    we were transported by bus to the ground
                 where we took up positions in the North Stand for a briefing to be

                 held at 10.00 am                         f

                 On the day I was already aware of my basic duties and th« serial

                 number and identity of officers contained in it.

                 My serial No. was 17 and consisted of myself and ten officers.

                 PC 2913 Auckland, Pc 2933 Wadsworth, PC 3027 Tagg, PC 393 Palfrey,

                 Pc 809 Elson, PC 880 Whittan, PC 16 Wilson, PC 43 Kirby, PC 602 Mdore

                 and PC 346 Thompson.     All these officers with the exception of PC

                 Thompson being from D Group.

                 The prescribed duties for this serial was the supervision of

                 turnstiles 1-8 at the Leppings Lane End of the ground, giving access

                 to the North Stand.      A duty which both myself and the majority of

                 these officers have carried out on a number of previous occasions.

                 Prior to the day each officer in my serial had been given a copy of
the duties of Serial 17, and details of the parade time location.

The serial was identified in the order as being under Sub Sector 8,

and I was responsible to Inspectors Purdy and Sykes, whom I reported

to on arrival at the ground.

At 10.00 am a briefing was conducted in the North Stand by Chief

Superintendent Duckenfield, Supt. Murray and Insp. Beal.     At the

conclusion of this, arrangements were made with Inspectors Sykes and

"Wlysilpr a briefing of the serials, at the Lepplngs Lane end, at

11 am    at!*the rear of the West Stand.

The serial was then provided with a snack meal and a dr^tat and I

collected a personal radio and earpiece.    The radio was checked and

was In working order.

At 11.00 am all the serial went to the rear of the West Stand where

Insp. Sykes briefed the serials as to their specific duties and the

security of persons entering the ground.    I advised officers as to

care with searching, and seizure of articles, also action in respect

of drunks.                                                       -i-,-v,

Following this briefing the majority *of the serial remained at the

rear of the West Stand as no turnstiles appeared to be open for the

North Stand.    However a short while later I would say approximately

11.20-25 one turnstile opened so 2 officers were deployed to that

one.    There being quite a number of officers outside the ground at

this time and very few fans.

Around 11.45 am all the turnstiles for the North Stand opened so the

whole serial was deployed outside on the turnstiles.     2 Officers to

each and the remaining 2 and myself initially stood in the triangular

area formed by the turnstiles wall, the adjacent shop, and the

perimeter fence, the gates of which were opened and pinned back.

At this time there were only a few supporters arriving at a time, and

officers wree sometimes under employed with searching.     As is normal
2 or 3 officers were deployed together with the coach reception teams

on Leppings Lane itself.     I believe 3 were actually used, PC 2913,

PC 809 and 880.

During this early period I made arrangements for black dustbin bags

to be brought to collect items seized or disposed of by fans entering

the ground.     Normally quite a number of fans are in possession of

cans of soft     drinks on entering the ground, these are not permitted

In the ground,     They are given the opportunity to drink or dispose of

the cans.     Also where fans have cans of alcohol the same applies

except they are informed to dispose not drink them.       #

A short while after we had obtained the bags and     labels fdrproperty

a nufiaber of large plastic dustbins   arrived these were sited in

between 4 turnstiles for the same use as the bags.

Initially as I have stated there were very few fans arrived from

Liverpool and the officers were able to make searches of virtually

every person arriving at the turnstiles without causing any delays on

entering.     Orderly queues were formed but they amounted to perhaps 6

or 8 at one or two turnstiles, all      the entrances were not Usedby the

fans at this time.

During this early period there were no great problems with the fans

or their behaviour.     The majority consisted of middle aged arjd family

groups, there were light hearted exchanges with them.

From this early stage a problem started to arise which later on grew

quite considerably.     The North Stand was reserved for Liverpool

Supporters with brown tickets and the turnstiles although miMhered

were also lettered A also adjacent to the turnstiles wre plaques

brown in colour about 15" x 12" at about head height.     From this

period onwards numerous ticket holders came up to me confused as to

where they should enter the ground.     They did not appear to

understand the significance of the colour coding,     A further cause of
confusion was the layout of the actual ticket.     Numerous people asked

for entrance X,Y, M etc these being the gangway not the entrance, but

the layout of the ticket is such that the gangway, entrance and row

etc were all in the same size print.     Further confusion was also

caused by ticket holders not knowing which colour related to which

entrance, i.e. Brown North Stand, Red West Stand, Blue Leppings Lane

terracing,   As a result an increasing number entered the area in

front of stiles for the North Stand who wanted other areas of the

ground.

As time progressed the number of persons arriving at the ground

steadily increased.   They were arriving on foot, by coach and service

bus.   Initially they were searched arid seen by the officers on coach

reception and then came towards us, quite a number started to arrive

as time progressed in possession of and smelling of alcohol• as a

result the dustbins at the side turnstiles started to fill witheiftpty

or full cans of beer.    I instructed about 4 or 5 personally to place

part full cans in the bin.     I did however see other officers engaged

on both North and West Stand turnstiles instruct fans to put cans and

bottles into the bins.   As the numbers steadily increased the

officers made more selective searches of persons entering.     Orderly

queues were formed and there were no great problems in respect of

maintaining them apart from the confusion over tickets.

However on about 3 or 4 occasions I requested a mounted officer to

sweep the area in front of the turnstiles in respect of numerous

groups of youths who arrived without tickets and those who had arrived

and did not want to go in, or were waiting for friends with their

tickets.

On occasions there were about 50 or 60 persons milling about and on

one occasion upwards of 100.    The youths without tickets were

generally 18-24 age group and the ones I spoke with were, generally
in groups of 4 or 6 in number.   Mounted officers then entered this

area and cleared these groups out of the area and away from the

turnstiles.

This continued from approximately 12 noon to I would estimate 1330 to

1345 with a steady flow of fans gradually increasing.

At 1350 hours PC Wilson and PC Palfrey made 2 seperate arrests in

respect of possession of cannabis, the officers who had been engaged

on coach reception were brought back and continued with searching.

The procedure carried on for some considerable time after the arrests

the numbers gradually increasing but we did not appear to be having

any great difficulties apart from those already mentioned with which

I thought we were coping.   Once the turnstiles were fully manned and

officers were engaged in searched and queue control. I adopted a

position about 10“15 feet in front of them checking tickets and

monitoring those not making their way into the ground and non ticket

holders, etc.

I cannot say exactly at what time it was but I could estimate between

2.20 and 2.30 pm the area in which X was working suddenly became

deluged in a large number of fans the whole environment seemed to

change abruptly from having organised queues and turnstile entry to

being overwhelmed.   The whole mood seemed to change and the ttake up

of the crowd changing from mixed ages and Sexes to a predominantly

male and younger ones.   The proportion of people under the influence

of alcohol also changed and increased, at a conservative estimate I

would say 30% had had a considerable amount to drink.   The numbers

who were confused and agitated of the tickets were considerable.      I

was virtually inundated with enquiries at which entrance they

wanted.   This was adding to the congestion as those who Were at the

wrong turnstiles were trying to get back out into Leppihgs Lane.      As

the numbers increased X was gradually forced further away from the
turnstiles towards the perimeter gates and felt completely isolated

form Other officers, the only officers I could see were mounted on

Leppings Lane itself.     At one stage I saw officers engaged on West

Stand turnstiles attempting to close one of the perimeter gates to

ease the crush on those turnstiles, they managed it once but had to

open it again.

The numbers of fans seemed unending and it was virtually a river of

fans flowing towards the turnstiles.     At this point I saw a number of

youths had climbed onto the metal partition between West Stand

turnstiles and the Leppings Lane terracing they were making their way

along the top of it and over the wall into the ground.     I would say

about ten or twenty climbed over as I could see at this time.       I

radioed control at this time and received a reply that they would see

what they could do.     A short while later I saw Inspector Bennett

stood on top of the wall assisting more fans over.

As the numbers increased the presence inside the area between the

perimeter fence and the turnstiles became immense.     In fact at one

stage together with some other supporters I feared we would be

crushed behind the perlmter gate if it gave way, this being because

it was locked open with a pin on the floor and a bar across the top.

The pressure was such that this top bar was flexing an<J bending at

times and we feared if it gave way we would be crushed between the

gate on the fence.    The numbers of fans continued to rise and there

appeared no end to them .     As I was talking to a fan regarding

tickets I felt a spray of what I thought was water and a push from my

left.   The man at my side then said "You were lucky that can just

missed your head"     I saw that he, a man dressed in a white trench

coat was covered in a liquid.     He then said something about they’re

throwing cans from the back, meaning Leppings Lane.

I can recall during this period also seeing a surge of supporters
through the perimeter gate about 6 or 8 people away .and they cut

through the crowd like a knife forcing a bow wave of pressure to the

side.   I would estimate there were about 20 or 30 in the group and

they were chanting and waving their arms in the air.        I could see

that a fair proportion had cans in their hands.        These were not the

only ones with beer cans I saw during this period, but due to the

crush and sheer weight of numbers there was little I could do apart

from try and calm the ones near me down.

Although I knew there should be quite a number of officers around I

did during this period feel very isolated and at this time could see

no one apart from Insp. Benett on the wall, some mounted officers in

the crowd on Leppings Lane, Supt. Marshall on the bridge parapet and

another officer on the roof of a police vehicle in Leppings Lane near

t.o the shop;..' ."

My radio at this time seemed to be working, but as ofteh not and I

could hear shouts to open gates but due to the noise and officers at

one stage trying to close the perimeter gate it is hard to say if it

was them or the radio.      Shortly after that my earpiece became

detached during the crush and I cannot recollect any other

transmissions.

The situation was then as I have described and appeared to be getting

worse with confusion over tickets, fans pushing and shouting etc :and

I was literally at times fearful of my life if I had fallen over.           I

was unable to make any headway through the crowd to check to see if

the officers on       the turnstiles were alright as    I could not see orget

to them from where I was.      The   next thing that   happened was thatGate

A opened, which       is situated to the left of the   North Stand

turnstiles.    It     was then as if someone had let   the plug out, the

pushing and crushing in the area in front of these turnstiles

virtually abated with large numbers surging through tha t ^ p e j ^ g a te and
     '   ::iS                '                   ■ ■   -

-i              i'                                                    • ^AGE ■.
,        ■;$ f ■■■                           ^                               R237
into the North Stand area.

It was at this point that PC 2933 Wadsworth joined me and said that

they had had to climb through the turnstiles for their safety.                The

crowd then eased off completely and the queues at the turnstiles

returned with an elderly gent who had been stood with me for safety

near the fence joining a queue of about 20 at the right hand

turnstile and by this time Gate A had closed again.              I would say it

only remained open for 4 or 5 minutes at the most.

Shortly after the gate had closed and the queues reformed a number of

officers ran from Leppings Lane and in through the turnstiles,                I

could hear nothing on my radio but heard one of them shout that there

had been a pitch invasion and all available assistance was required

inside.              Together with PC Wadsworth and other officer^ I entered the

ground by climbing over the turnstiels, turned right and ran across

the back of the West Stand towards the corner with the South stand.

As we ran past the tunnel entrance to the terracing and i n t h e area

at the back of the stand I can say that there appeared to be nothing

untoward and there was really quite a marked absence of people in

this area.

As we went to the pitch via the rear of the Police Control I gathered

as many of my serial together as I could and it included I think

PC's 2933, 3027, 346, 880 43, 809 and some other officers;

We entered the playing area from the South Stand and I an|i virtually

certain that the game had stopped at this time but I cannot be sure.

I looked across the Leppings Lane end and could see officers stood on

the fencing gesticulating to the crowd to move over to the left and

to move back.             The terracing area itself appeared full.   I went to

the central pen areas behind the goals pens 3 and 4 and saw Insp.

Purdy stood on the perimeter fence tyring to get the fans to move

across.              At this time I did not appreciate what was happening.    He
f       I i                                                                  page      9!
    ■                                     \                              ■   R 237 .

shouted to take a serial into pen 2 so I collected a group of

approximately 10 officers together and went to gate 2 which was

open.     As we went to enter the gate I saw a young girl being carried

over the head of the fans and towards the gate, some then shouted that

she was injured.        It was at this point that I realised or started to

realise that something drastic was wrong.             When the girl had cleared I

entered Pen 2 via gate 2 and we formed a cordon to push the fans back

away from the gate and made our way towards the railing fence

separating       Pen 2 from 3. As I reached the fencing and looked over

into Pen 3       the crowd seem     to partand move back away from the front.

I could then see what I can only described as a huge pile o| bodies

stacked 4 or 5 deep in palces, laid on thefloor at the- rear of the;

perimeter wall.        They were as deep as the 2nd step up; bn .the

terracing about half way along I could see a youth stuck out from the

bodies who       appear&d to be trapped       by his legs with the bodies up as

far as his       waist, he was shouting frantically for help.

I remained in Pen 2 and PC 809 and 2913 climbed over into the central

pen 3 to render assistance as were other officers who had entered the

central pen.        Those officers and some of      the   fans then passed the

injured       and dead to myself and other officers and fans and we passed

them out onto the field where further first aid could be given-                  I

cannot say how many were dead or injured but I can recollect passing

only 2 or 3 who were conscious over and well over 8-10 who were

either unconscious or dead.        As well as by this route I saw people

being carried towards the rear of the terracing and out onto the

pitch via gate 3.                                     '
When I first looked into Pen 3 the only place I saw bodies or injured

persons was behind the perimeter wall and in              front   of the broken crowd

barrier on the terracing.         I did not see any injured on the floor or

otherwise in Pen 2 apart from the young girl being carried overhead.
The persons who I assisted to carry out varied in age from teenagers

of both sexes to I believe one man I would say was in his 30's with

a white shirt and Jeans on.

After we had removed all the injured and dead from the pen I returned

to the pitch area.    At this time I saw that there were numerous

persons being treated and carried away on stretchers by both Police

and fans.     I then saw fnas ripping down the advertising hordings from

the West Stant, again initially the reason for it was not apparent,

but it soon became evident they were being used as makeshift

stretchers.     I then went into Pen 3 with other officers and helped

pass these onto the pitch.    At this time it was apparent that numbers

of the fans still did not realise what was happening as some must

have thought we were going to arrest those taking thehordings d o w n , s

they had to be told forcibly by other fans what was happening.

We then remained in the pen and kept the fans away from the clothing

and belongins which were piled at the front of the terracing.       At some

stage a Scenes of Crime Officer entered the pen in plain clothes and          j

started to photogrpah the scene.    The crowd went literally wild and

surged forwards to get hold of him, from what was shouted I believe

they thought he was press.    We had to fight our way out of the pen

with the officer and withdrew for safety.

After leaving the pen I returned onto the pitch area where there wre

numerous police officers a lot of whom were obviously distressed I

gathered what officers I could of my serial together and as there

appeared nothing else we could do on the pitch and in the absence of

any instructions we returned to the rear of the West Stand where we

were deployed as per the original orders on supervising exit of

supporters when they were released.
Obviously large numbers were distressed at what had happened as they

left but there were considerable numbers who still appeared worse for
                                                                    '          PAGE     -11
    ’            * t                                                    ,      R237

    jdrink leaving the ground.
        ■.   *    .    :   \   -

     We remained on this duty until all the crowd had dispersed and the

     removal of bodies from a temporary mortuary in the lane outside

     Leppings Lane had taken place.

     On completion of this duty we returned to the North Stand where after

     submitting my debriefing sheet and radio the serial returned to

     Claywheels Lane for standby and awaiting transport at 6pm.             The serial

     finally went off duty at 7 pm at Ecclesfield Police Station.

     I can say tht I have worked duties at Hillsborough football ground

     over the past six years and the majority of those duties have been

     performed at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.          Whilst at D

     Division I was, engaged on escort of fans from the City C^ntreyahd

     subsequently in the terracing.  Whilst at F Division * i n c e J u l y 1988
                                          \.                   ■■'’ Y :^
     I have worked a number of matches and itave invarla^>ly.;wqir.^^^'.■6n■, .the, •
                                                                                    .

     turnstiles for the North Stand.       I have never experienced such a

     sudden mass influx of spectators as happened on this occasion.



OF REPORT
