                                             f".

                                                                                                  <§>0 & 2 S        File Copy




                                                                            \
                                                                       < f!cJ
              '/
                                                                                                   Date

                   (S h o w full description including any identifiable features.   Clearly indicate if

                                       item (s) are recovered or part recovered)
                                                                                                                    VALUE



At 8.15ara on Saturday the 15th of April 1989 I paraded for duty at Hackmthorpe Police S
Station in ful.1 uniform for duty in connection with the F.A. Cup semi final to be
played betwee n Liverpool F.C. & Nottingham Forest F.C. at Hillsborough                                        ootball ground

later that da te. I travelled to Hillsborough and was present at the Nor th Stand where a
briefing took place, commencing at approximately 10.00am 15«^»89« I wa3 attached to
serial 6 with the following officers, P.S. 729 Norburn, DC 1828 Metcalfs, PC 28 Drewitt,
PC 2818 Marsh all, PC 861 Wadsworth, PC 3217 Wadsworth, PC 3162 Pears, PS 1159 Long,and
PC 169 Fillir ,gham . Inspector Harvey was the officer in charge, Chief Inspector Beal
was second ir command and the officer responsible for the serial was Supt Greenwood,
After the br iefing I consumed a packed lunch.
                                                                       f the South stand
The duties oi serial 6 was to man barriers to be errected at the rear c:
adgaeaniz at entrance E adjacent to the car park and barriers from turnstiles A-G at the
Leppings Lane end. The area between the two barriers was to remain sterile. Liverpool
supporters w «re not to be permitted entry. The only persons allowed entry were to be
                                                                          Stand, ie
authorised pk rsons ar>d persons with tickets for entrance E of the South
Nottinham FouTest fans*
                                                                          at     entrance
At approxima,1;ely 11.00am I took up a position at the barriers situated
E to the Sou h Stand.                                  The following offi<cers were also
                                                                         159 Long,
in position at those barriers, DC 1828 Metcalfe, PC 2818 Marshall, PC '
                                                                        >ol supporters
& PC 169 Fil idngham. From approximately 2pm there were numerous liverpcc
                                                                        ngs Lane, via
who had to bis re-directed from that location to the turnstiles at Leppii
Pentetone Hoad. Most of the crowd appeared to be in good humour with the exception
                                                                         ppings Lane.
of a few who were nnqpnbc at having to walk quite a long distance to Lr
At about     >pm I became aware of a large build up of fans taking plac<: at the Leppings
                                                                         .et through our
Lane turnsti Le area. It was at that time that 6 mounted officers were
                                                                           small jar it—
barrier to a tend at that area. From our position we were able to see a
                                                                          large number of
proportion o the crowd that had built up. Whilst this was happening a
                                                                         ie ianaccbcbExx
Liverpool fa as were also being directed away the South stand area to 1 1
Leppings Roai turnstiles via Pennistone Koad. A large number of the fa is were without
tickets and on numerous occasions I was asked dkBxttic*x£KBBX*hXBHghzti«pimaBttiK8X
by those fan to escort then through the turnstilesi^^
All those requests were denied and the fans were told to leave, the arei. A steady flow
of Nottinghsjm Forest supporters were still entering the ground after 3 P®*

Cl D/6
                                                                                                                     File Copy
                                           SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

                               STOLEN PROPERTY—CONTINUATION FORM



                       Divisional Crime No.                                                             Date

                        (S h o w full description including any identifiable features.   Clearly indicate if

                                           item (s) are recovered or part recovered)
                                                                                                                    VALUE



At around 3»0<>pm a call went out to the effect there was numerous Liver;jool fans on the
playing area iind together with other officers I immediately went into tl.<e ground via the
gates next to turnstile E, through a small standing area and onto the p: tch.Qnce on the
playing area 1! saw that there were other officers in attendance behand                                        he Leppings Lane
goal. A large number of fans were climbing over the securitge|’egge and jIso xa±ax±kgxJ^tgtaa
climbing up into the West stand from the terrace.There were anont/fans on the pitch at that
stage, althou gh play was still in progress. The central terrace area war packed solid
with fans although                 there appeared to be ample room for fans in the pens either side,
I went to the fences and realised that due to the amount of people in tlute centre pen that
fans were bei;ig crushed against the front fencing. At this stage I assi ^ted fans trying to
climb over thu fencing and onto the playing area.I then went into the 1<!ft hand side pen
Mtj-ymneiKtwd x - >■                wgiravftT* to assist o her fans. As I entered that pen I looked
into the cent e pen and saw numerous people of both sexes lying on the                                         errace steps,

These people ’fere unconcious most of which appeared to be dead. I stayet on the terraces
     after a short time was called onto the y i g y x ^ f M r m to form a cordoifL across the
playing area preventing fans fighting and liverpool fans running acroos the pitch to
the spion cop. Many of the Liverpool fans were abusive and calling offic ers Murdering Bast
Bastards.
When the croujls had left I returned to the North Stand where I saw DS N<<prburn. I had
a short conve: ?sation with that officer and he wrote down a brief resume of                                              i»x.

what had happ jned during the incident.
I retired fron duty at 7»3Qp®®




Cl D/6
                             uj-vC u o t'i-C

                                                                                                Date
                                                       £~~l
                 (S h o w full description including any identifiable features.   Clearly indicate if

                                    item (s) are recovered or part recovered)
                                                                                                              VALUE



At 8.15am on Saturday the 15th of April 1989 I paraded for duty at Hackmthorpe Police S
                                                                        tnal to be
Station in fu 11 uniform for duty in connection with the F.A. Cup semi f
                                                                         football ground
played betwee a Liverpool F.C. & Nottingham Forest F.C. at Hillsborough
                                                                         fch Stand where a
later that da te. I travelled to Hillsborough and was present at the Nor
                                                                         s attached to
briefing took place, commencing at approximately 10.00ara 15.4.89# I was
serial 6 with the following officers, P.S. 729 Norburn, DC 1828 Metcalfs, PC 28 Drewitt,
PC 2818 Marst all, PC 861 Wadsworth, PC 3217 Wadsworth, PC 3162 Pears, P3 1159 Long,and
PC 169 Fillir gham . Inspector Harvey was the officer in charge, Chief Inspector Beal
was second ir command and the officer responsible for the serial was Supt Greenwood.
After the br iefing I consumed a packed lunch.
The duties of serial 6 was to man barriers to be errected at the rear of the South stand
adgaeanfcz at entrance E adjacent to the car park and barriers from turnstiles A-G at the
Leppings Lane end. The area between the two barriers was to remain sterile. Liverpool
supporters w ere not to be permitted entry. The only persons allowed entry were to be
authorised p,«>rsons and persons with tickets for entrance E of the South Stand, le
Nottinham Foa‘rest fans*
                                                                            at tkss entrance
At approximaLi;ely 11.00am I took up a position at the barriers situated
E to the Sou -;h Stand.                                 The following offi|<cers were also
                                                                            159 Long,
in position at those barriers, DC 1828 Metcalfe, PC 2818 Marshall, PC
& PC 169 Fii: Ingham. From approximately 2pm there were numerous liverpcol supporters
who had to bis re-directed from that location to the turnstiles at Leppings Lane, via
                                                                           :e exception
Penfefetone Ro ad. Most of the crowd appeared to be in good humour with the
                                                                            ppings Lane#
of a few who were acHBtjpgstx at having to walk quite a long distance to Loj
                                                                             at the Leppings
At about 2.4 3pm I became aware of a large build up of fans taking place
Lane turnsti Le area. It was at that time that 6 mounted officers were !.et through our
barrier to a ttend at that area# From our position we were able to see u snail
                                                                         large number of
proportion of the crowd that had built up. Whilst this was happening a
                                                                        ie jbaxHKti±Kxx
Liverpool fam,s were also being directed away the South stand area to t]
Leppings Ro ai turnstiles via Pennistone Road. A large number of the fais were without
                                                                                                        ;±axHsiiaaraoc
 tickets and on numerous occasions I was asked tmlaktein»
 by those fan s to escort then through the turnstiles
 All those re quests were denied and the fans were told to leave the area# A steady flow
 of Nottingham Forest supporters were still entering the ground after 3?m*

CID/6
                                                                                                          File Copy
                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

                          STOLEN PROPERTY—CONTINUATION FORM



                 Divisional Crime No.                                                              Date

                   (S h o w full description including any identifiable features.   Clearly indicate if
                                      item (s) are recovered or part recovered)
                                                                                                          VALUE



At around 3.0<>pm a call went out to the effect there was numerous Liverpool fans on the
playing area itnd together with other officers I immediately went into tie ground via the
gates next to turnstile E, through a small standing area and onto the pj tch.Once on the
playing area     saw that there were other officers in attendance behand the Leppings Lane
goal. A large number of fans were climbing over the security fence and *Iso xirimxikfiobtasfca
climbing upinto the      West stand from the terrace.There were sara/fans on the pitch at that
stage,although   play was still in progress. The central terrace area wa;; packed solid
with fans alt lough            there appeared to be ample room for fans in the pens either side,

I went to the fences and realised that due to the amount of people in the centre pen that :
fans were bei:ig crushed against the front fencing. At this stage I assisted fans trying to
climb over th'i fencing and onto the playing area.I then went into the loft hand side pen
                                             to assist o her fans. As I entered that pen I looked

into the cent;::*e pen and saw numerous people of both sexes lying on the terrace steps.
These people ’^ere unconcious most of which appeared to be dead. I stayed on the terraces
    after a s iort time was called onto the ystayxalraLnRH to form a cordon across the
playing area preventing fans fighting and liverpool fans running acroos the pitch to
the spion cop . Many of the Liverpool fans were abusive and calling officers Murdering Bast-
Bastards*
When the crouls had left I returned to the North Stand where I saw DS Norburn. I had
a short conversation with that officer and he wrote down a brief resume of idtaabbqaxtx
what had happsned during the incident
I retired fron duty at 7.30pm




 CID/6
