               THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
               Queen Anne’s Chambers
               28 Broadway London SW1H 9JS                                              tyUfSCf
               Telephones Direct Line 01-210 2109
                           Switchboard 01-210 3000
               Teiex 917564       GTN 210                                                  CctPi&b
               Fax No. 01-222 6006 - 210-3488
               DX No. 2318 Victoria

Messrs Keeble Hawsons                                        Please quote
7 St James Row                                               L89/2117
Sheffield                                                    Your reference
SI 1XA
                                                             Date
For the a tte n tio n of                                     9 May 1989



                                      BY FA X AND LETTER




HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL


You will recall th a t at th e pre-Inquiry m eeting on 28th April Lord Justice Taylor
indicated th a t any body against whom any allegation was to be made would be
informed of it and the substance of the evidence supporting it

You will appreciate th a t the task of assembling the evidence for the Inquiry is a
formidable one and statem e n ts are still being taken. However, it seemed right to let
you have what must be a preliminary indication of criticism s which may be levelled at
the City Council, as the local authority responsible for the safety c ertific a te s under
the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975, as soon as possible before the commencement
of the Inquiry.

The following a re the main criticisms which so far appear from the evidence available:-

1.       The pens on the te rra c e s a t the Leppings Lane end of the ground constituted a
        potential danger if crowded. The means of egress onto the pitch were
        inadequate and you should have insisted th a t there were more gates, th a t they
        were properly signed, th a t th ere were means of access laterally between the
        pens, again properly marked, and th a t all gangways were properly marked.

2.       The directional signs were inadequate, so th a t those entering were necessarily
        channelled to the tunnel leading to the c en tral two pens.

3.      The crush barriers within the pens were not properly positioned and one a t least
        was of insufficient strength.

k.       The tunnel giving access to the te rra c e was not of a constant gradient but
        sloped steeply a t the te rra c e end: this was potentially hazardous if a large
        crowd cam e down the tunnel.

                                                     1.
5.     The wall a t the turnstiles was not adequate to prevent persons climbing into the
       ground.

6.     Access by ambulances or fire engines to the playing are a and the surround was
       not adequately provided for. Furthermore, the provision of first-aid equipment
       was insufficient.

Should any further m a tte rs deserving of criticism come to our attention, we will of
course let you know of them.




                                   DAVID BRUMMELL
                               Assistant Treasury Solicitor
