                                                                                                       M IR .15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                               Date and tim e raised                                             Num ber



T itle                                                                                         L        l& b A ' Ukliz M & i
(Include source and any document number if relevant)


Receiver’s instructions - urgent action     -y*d no              h            ijo /K
                                                                                                                                  Receiver



              J ffc /'is L o t   -$   jtbS dko^       6LCcqtm,( ' 5  /                 ^
                                                                                                                                  Irv
D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated                                                 '       v

No(s) o f actions raised________________ V-                              fV    U»VS                          S \I
                                                                                                                              Statement Reader
S tatem ent reader's instructions

                                                                                                                                     <1<fl
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                              O /M       SIO
 Examined • fu rth e r action to be taken




                                                                                                                                  "lidfxerE
 F u rth e r action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master Num ber Form
HILLSBOROUGH

 15th April, 1989




A Personal Account

  of the Tragedy
This personal account of my experience at Hillsborough is intended to
supplem ent the statem ent that I have already submitted to the Judicial Inquiry
into the disaster. Consequently, this report serves to reflect the em otional impact
of what happened to me, as well as recording the facts. My principal objective
here is to reproduce my feelings at the time, rather than to retrospectively
examine w hat w ent wrong, although inevitably I do have my own opinions on the
sequence of tragic events, based upon my own experience. I have had to express
some of those opinions in this account, but they are confined to the end so as not
to interfere with my m ain intention.


Whilst the mem ory of that day will always be with me, I thank everyone who is
 helping me to come to term s with it, particularly my loving family and Linda. I
 am also grateful to Dr. Creer, whose invaluable counselling and encouragem ent
 has enabled me to produce this report.


 In G od’s nam e, I pray that nobody shall ever have to describe a similar
 experience to this one again.
                                   Introduction

I have prepared this account as som eone who has been a regular football
supporter for many years. I have a season ticket for the Spion Kop at Anfield
and, during my three years as a student at Nottingham University, I travelled to
many away matches, particularly in the M idlands and London, to watch Liverpool
F.C. play. I therefore have experience of visiting a number of different football
grounds and, on many of these occasions, they were filled to capacity.


In particular, this year’s F.A. Cup Semi-Final was my third visit to Hillsborough
in twelve months. The other two visits were for the Sheffield W ednesday v.
Liverpool league match in January 1989 and, perhaps more importantly, the 1988
F.A. Cup Semi-Final between the same two teams as the ill-fated match on 15th
April 1989.


A t the previous semi-final I had stood in the centre section of the Leppings Lane
terrace, and for the league match I had sat in the West Stand, which is also
reached via the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane End. O n 15th April this year, my
ticket was again for the standing area of the Leppings Lane terrace.
I had intended to arrive at the ground this year at about 2.00 p.m., as I did at last
year’s semi-final, b u t a series of traffic hold-ups along the M62 motorway had
m eant that the journey from Liverpool had taken longer than anticipated. I was
travelling with a colleague from work, and he suggested a num ber of diversions
along the way which enabled us to avoid some of the congestion.


When we eventually reached Sheffield, there were still many other people parking
their cars and many coaches just arriving at the same time as us, so I was not too
concerned that we had arrived later than I had hoped. I believe that the time
that we parked was about 2.00 p.m.


For some reason, the recom m ended route to Hillsborough this year, as detailed
by South Y orkshire Police before the match, was different to the route
recom m ended by the RA C last year. This may have been due to the fact that
after last year’s m atch the direct route from Sheffield to M anchester (along the
A616 and the A628) had been so congested that traffic was moving literally at
walking pace for miles and miles. I therefore thought that I would follow the
different route that had been recom m ended to familiarise myself with it,
particularly for the purpose of avoiding a repeat of the congestion I had
experienced the previous year on the return journey. I had not anticipated such
delays on the way to Sheffield, though.


Furtherm ore, the different route m eant that I had to park in an unfamiliar area
com pared with previous visits, so I was not sure how far away the ground was
when I got out of the car. I didn’t think that it could be far, though, because
there were a num ber of traffic policem en around showing people where to park.


My colleague stopped off for a couple of m inutes to buy himse lf some lunch, but
even so we thought that we still had plenty of time. After all, the ticket itself
recom m ended taking up a position 15 minutes before kick-off, and I thought that
we would certainly arrive before then. Even with this brief stop, I suppose we
reached the ground between about 2.20 p.m. and 2.30 p.m., which should have
been ample time, albeit later than we had hoped.


                                          3
However, we had not anticipated the confusion that greeted us as we approached
the turnstiles. I searched in my pocket for my ticket to see which of the two
entrances (that led from the street to the actual turnstiles) we needed to use, and
realised that even though we were several yards from the outer blue gates which
lead up to the turnstiles, we in fact needed to move over to our right slightly in
o rder to approach our allocated turnstiles through Entrance B. T here were so
many people approaching the ground that it was difficult to make even this slight
change of direction. O ther people to our right had, likewise, realised that they
too were approaching the wrong entrance to the turnstiles, and the result was that
many people were colliding with each other in the road as they tried to get to the
correct place.


I’m sure that at last year’s semi-final there were police and stewards directing
people in the road on the approach to the turnstiles, and so this problem did not
arise then.


Furtherm ore, this marshalling last year m eant that orderly queues had been
form ed up at the turnstiles and, as is the case at most grounds I have visited,
these queues were kept apart last year by policemen, some of them mounted,
moving betw een them and so avoiding the problem of the queues merging into a
solid mass o f people outside the ground.


I had read in the press before the game this year that the police were issuing a
warning about pickpockets operating in the queues at the turnstiles, which had
apparently b een a problem at last year’s semi-final. I had told my colleague to be
aware of this, and I therefore expected to see an even greater police presence at
the turnstiles this year to combat the problem.


I was, therefore, particularly surprised to see so few policemen actually near the
turnstiles, considering the warning that had been issued, and the fact that there
did not seem to be any attem pt being m ade to form orderly queues. This looked
to me as though any pickpockets around would find the situation even more to
their liking than the previous year. I again warned my colleague to be
particularly careful with his ticket, because the article that I had read mentioned


                                            4
 that last year som e people had their tickets stolen while they were actually
 queuing. If this was indeed the case, it certainly seem ed odd that the efficient
 marshalling th at existed last year was not extended further. In fact, this year it
 did not seem to exist at all.


T here was a m ounted policeman by the blue entrance gates that we were
approaching and he was allowing a few people at a time to pass through.
However, there were no queues in evidence at the turnstiles. T here was just a
single mass of people. T he only other policem en that I could see were up by the
turnstiles. As far as I could see, there was one mounted policeman farther
forward and only a few on foot. T here w ere none between the m ounted
policeman at the blue entrance gates and the rear of the mass of people who had
passed through those gates.


The area was certainly very congested when I was allowed past by the mounted
policeman, but I did not think that it was dangerously so, at that time. I was, of
course, at the back of those waiting to go through the turnstiles, though, so it was
difficult for m e to tell what the situation was like further forward. The
atm osphere at this time was one of excited anticipation of seeing, what we all
hoped, would be a great match. T here was the usual pre-match singing as people
waited to get into the ground, with the added sense of expectation associated with
the prospect of another Wembley Cup Final, should the team win. The
underlying m ood was certainly good-hum oured and well-behaved. A t the same
time, inevitably, people were eager to get inside the ground.


As one would norm ally expect, I had seen people drinking from ran* on the way
to the ground, but I distinctly rem em ber thinking to myself that I had not
personally seen any drunkenness. I rem em ber that because it was conspicuous by
its absence. I’m sure that some people probably were drunk, but I did not see
any evidence of it. Many of the side streets near to the ground w ere blocked off
by policemen, and they did not seem to be having any trouble with drunken
supporters, as far as I could see.


I m sure that, like me, those responsible for crowd control had expected people to
have been drinking. The large dustbins that are habitually placed at turnstiles to
accept empty cans, and to serve as a rem inder that no alcohol is allowed inside
football grounds, certainly suggests that there is an expectation that some people
will be drinking up to that point, otherwise they would not be put there. Having
said that, personally I prefer not to drink before I go to a match. In any case, if I
am driving to an away match, I would not even consider i t


Just after I went through the entrance gates, the mounted policem an moved so as
to hold up the crowd in the street and I could see that, gradually, the num ber of
people waiting to get past him was building up. There did not appear to be any
other assistance being given to control the num ber of people still in the street
outside. Again, I thought how much b etter the situation had been with last year’s
marshalling. A fter a short pause, m ore people were let in behind me, but I had
not moved at all because the crowd still in front of me seem ed to be in exactly
the sam e position as it had been when I was allowed through the entrance gates
myself. This m eant that I began to feel uneasy as the whole area was becoming
very crowded indeed. Before long, a crush began to develop and people were
 then slowly being carried along in the general direction of the turnstiles.


 I had earlier put my hand in my pocket to make sure that my ticket was safe, but
 within a few minutes, the crush had becom e so intense that I was unable to move
 my arm sufficiently to take my hand out of my pocket again. I could not move in
 any direction, other than that in which the crowd was slowly moving - towards the
 turnstiles. We seem ed to be forced to take a couple of short steps forwards by
 the weight of people behind us, and then the crowd would stop for a while.


 Because of my height, I was actually able to see where I was going, although I
 had no control whatsoever over the way that I was being earned forward.
 However, there were many shorter wom en and children ail around me who were
 not even able to see where they were, or where they were going. W hat is more,
 because of their size they were in even m ore discomfort that I was, and I was
 becoming very anxious myself. The increasing number of screams, and the frantic
 shouting that was going on near me, indicated that I was not alone. However,
 further back many people seemed unaw are of this and they continued their
 singing. I was able to see over most people’s heads in front of me, and it did not
 appear as though there was a free-flow of people through the turnstiles at all.
 Instead, the buiid-up of people at the front of the worsening crush was hampering
 those people who were nearest to the turnstiles, as they tried to get through them.
 The reason that the crowd was moving forward did not seem to be because
 people were passing through the turnstiles, but rather that the pressure of people
 behind us was increasing. Certainly, the further forward I moved, the more
 painful the crush becam e. However, there was nothing that I, or anyone around
 me, couid do about that because we simply could not move against the crowd.
The only way to get out of the crush seem ed to be to wait until we had reached
 the front and then had a chance to get through the turnstiles. Clearly, that was
going to take quite som e time, but we had no choice.


The m ounted policem an near to the turnstiles was shouting very angrily at people
near him to move back, but it was simply impossible for them to move at all.
Those of us further back, towards the middle of the crush, could not move either.
Action was required at the very back of the crush. People needed to be moved
at the back so that the pressure in the middle, and then at the front, could be
alleviated. T here was nothing to be gained from directing instructions to those
who were unable to move themselves. Only by sending people backwards,
starting with those already at the back, would there have been any hope of easing
the pressure further forward. However, once we had passed through the outer
blue entrance gates, it was not possible to move back into the street due to the
vast num ber of people still trying to get through those gates.


There was a brick wall a few feet to my left and many people were being forced
up against it. They w ere calling out fof the crowd to ease back away from them,
but none o f us were able to move in order to help them. My colleague had been
standing slightly nearer to the wall than I had, and initially he had been almost
next to me. However, as the crowd edged forwards, it seem ed as though the
people nearest to the wall were, in fact, moving at a slightly slower pace than
those nearer to the centre of the crush. This m eant that, as I finally neared the
front, I had lost sight of my colleague as he was slightly behind me, as well as to
the side.


As I reached the front, I had a clearer view of the actual turnstiles and I could
see that many people were being forced up against the walls in betw een the
individual turnstiles, as wei! as into each other. Furtherm ore, a large blue
concertina gate to my left was causing a lot of pain for those who were being
pushed up against i t Many people in the crowd were calling out for the
concertina gate to be opened in order to provide people with an escape route
from the crush, and also to prevent anyone from being seriously hurt. These calls
had continued for several minutes as I had waited for my own chance to reach
the turnstiles. Even when people were level with a turnstile, it was still extremely
difficult to actually pass through because so many other people were also trying at
the sam e time. A t the front, the crowd was swaying from side to side so that one
minute I was facing a turnstile and the next minute, a brick wail next to i t


I looked across to the far turnstile over to my right, and I noticed that a young
boy was being carried out, on his back, above people's heads. H e was wearing a
Liverpool F.C. tracksuit top. H e was passed to a policeman who, I suppose, may
have been on horseback because he was clearly visible above everyone else,
although he was not in the crush himself. H e was, in fact, leaning around the end
of the turnstile wall in an attem pt to get hold of the boy.


I have since seen television coverage which shows this boy being helped to safety,
so that film would help to indicate the approximate time that I managed to get
into the ground, because it took me a further 2 or 3 minutes to get in. I would
guess that it was about 2.40-2.45, though.


It was a huge relief to get through the turnstile because the situation outside had
been deteriorating all the time. I had to wait another several m inutes before my
colleague m anaged to get through the turnstile himself. I stood in the area
betw een the turnstiles and the tunnel entrance to the centre terrace waiting for
him.


The calls th at I had heard, when I was outside the ground, for the large
 concertina gate to be opened because of the danger of people being hurt, were
 still audible as I stood waiting inside* A num ber of fans had actually climbed up
 on top of a wall at the side of the crush outside, and had walked along to a ledge
 directly above the turnstiles. A num ber of policemen inside the ground, between
 the turnstiles and the entrance to the tunnel, looked concerned at this, so they


                                             3
went over to stand just below the ledge. I could not hear what was said, but the
fans held up their still intact tickets and were then allowed to jum p down to the
safety of the area where I was waiting. I do not believe that, under normal
circumstances, this type of action would have been permitted. I therefore
presume that the policem en who allowed it to happen were sufficiently satisfied
that the situation outside the turnstiles was such that it warranted their use of
discretion as to how best to allow people into the ground. Sending those people
who had climbed over the wall back outside the ground would only have added to
the confusion outside. I believe that this fact was recognised by the police
officers inside the ground.


Then I noticed my colleague come through one of the turnstiles, and we then
proceeded towards the tunnel directly opposite the turnstiles which, I knew from
previous visits, led to the terrace.


I only recall seeing one steward at the start of the tunnel and he was merely
observing those people who were passing through the tunnel. However, there
were two stewards at the foot of the steps to my right, which led to the seating in
the West Stand, and they were checking tickets as people went past them and up
the steps. No check was made of my ticket, or to my knowledge, of anyone else’s
ticket amongst those entering the tunnel.


On each of my previous visits to Hillsborough, I have stood in the area between
the turnstiles and the tunnel for several minutes. Despite having looked around
this area as I have waited each time, I have no recollection of any signs, or
stewards, directing people to the terracing at the sides. This equally applies to
my last visit on 15th April of this year. I have to say that I did not know that
there was another way to gain access to the terracing, other than the way that I
could actually see directly in front of me - namely through the tunnel that led to
the centre section of terracing.


I did not recall there being fencing at the sides actually on the terrace and, even
if I had recalled that from my previous visits, as I could not see an alternative
way onto the terrace, I’m sure I would still have walked through the tunnel. I
rem em ber that when I have visited other football grounds, such as W atford and
Leicester City, which also have fences across the terraces, gates in them have
been opened to allow people to pass through from one section to another.
Indeed, I recall stewards at other matches using such a system to systematically
fill sections of the terrace as they wanted, before closing certain side gates and
then filling up another section. This prevented any one section from becoming
too over-crowded. Such a system did not exist at Hillsborough. T here were no
gates in the side fences, as far as I could see.


The point that I am making is that, despite having seen the ground before, its lay­
out was certainly not clear to me and, in the absence of instructions or directions,
I entered the terrace section by what am ounted to the only way I thought was
possible. I had time to survey the area, so I feel sure that someone who is in a
hurry to enter the terracing, unless they w ere already aware of a route to the
outer edges of the terrace, or were to be directed by someone, would also follow
the route that I took. O f course, this route led to the most crowded part of the
terrace, although from anywhere other than inside the ground it would not be
possible to actually see this. Nevertheless, it is well known by anyone who has
ever been to a football match, that the area directly behind a goal is a
particularly popular place to stand, if that area is, of course, a terrace rather than
a seating area. Consequently, such areas are always more crowded than the
edges of a terrace.


As I started walking through the tunnel, I could see daylight above people’s heads
but I could see that the far end of the tunnel was obstructed by the sheer number
of people congregated around it. Although I thought, at that moment, that this
was only to be expected for such a big m atch just before kick-off, I rem em ber
thinking when I actually reached the far end of the tunnel, that I was completely
surprised by just how full the area already was.


I found it difficult even getting through this wall of people onto the start of the
terrace, but as I did, I soon realised that it would be best not to try and move
directly towards the goal, because that area was already far too packed. It was
also difficult to move to either side, so the only direction in which I could see any
hope of finding a place to stand, in any degree of comfort, was to move
diagonally forwards. This is what I did. In fact, I moved diagonally to my right
and my colleague followed behind me. As I edged my way forward, I could see
that there appeared to be slightly m ore room nearer the front. In any case, I
wanted to try and get a clearer view as much as anything at this time.


I was already aw are that the area that I was standing in was alm ost certainly
more densely populated than it had been at any stage of last year’s semi-final. I
was particularly w orried about this, in view of the fact that I knew how many
people were still trying to get into the ground. I thought that it would just not be
possible to accom m odate any more people in the centre section of the terrace. I
reassured myself, however, that there did appear to be far m ore spaces on the
side sections of the terracing and that, therefore, people still trying to get in
would be directed to those areas, surely. It would be clear, at a glance, for
anyone inside the ground that this centre-section was dangerously overcrowded,
whereas there was still plenty of room on the side section beyond the side fence.
This had not been visible before I had gone through the tunnel, though. I began
to wish that I had been able to stand in the side section myself, but I could not
see any way of getting to it.


With the m atch due to begin within a m atter of minutes, I found myself standing
with a barrier directly in front of me. I know, from past experience of capacity
matches, that it is usually far m ore com fortable to stand with a barrier just behind
rather than just in front of you. T he only direction in which I could move was
forward, so I decided to duck underneath the barrier. A num ber of other people
did the sam e thing, and so although I stood up just the other side of the barrier,
the additional people who followed me caused me to be pushed further forward,
and nearer to the perim eter fence. At this stage, however, there still appeared to
be more room w here I was standing than where I had previously been standing,
and I was relieved that the barrier was no longer immediately in front of me.
There w ere no m ore barriers betw een me and the perim eter fence - only people.
There is always some crowd m ovem ent during a match, and I feared that I would
continually be pushed up against the barrier unless I moved. My colleague had
not ducked under the barrier, though. Instead, he had managed to move
backwards slightly and he was standing about 10 feet behind me.
 Gradually, I was feeling the pressure of the crowd increasing all around and it
 was becoming very uncomfortable. I was now standing about 3 feet away from
 the perim eter fence in the centre section of the terrace slightly to the right of the
 goal. As I stood there, I was acutely aware that the situation was becoming
 rather desperate, and that it was in danger of becoming extremely serious. I had
 never experienced anything like it before. T here seemed to be no control,
whatsoever, on the num ber of people being allowed in.


Even before the team s were on the pitch, people all around me, but mainly in
front of me, w ere calling out for som eone to help them. Some were screaming
and some who w ere able to move themselves were trying to climb o u t Their
attem pts to escape were seemingly interpreted by the policemen on the other side
of the fence as an attem pt to invade the pitch. I could hear fans protesting as
they were being restrained on top of the fences by policemen. Someone actually
called out that he thought that some people at the front by the fence, were dying,
but he was pushed back off the top of the fence and onto the terrace again.
Clearly, those early warnings were not being heeded, despite the increasingly
widespread pleas for assistance and screams.


At this stage, although I could not move from the spot where I was standing, I
had been able to raise my arms from by my sides to steady myself and so avoid
falling over if the crowd began to sway. A t the time, that seem ed a natural
reaction, although there were almost certainly too many people already packed in
to enable such a sway to take place. Gradually, however, the situation seem ed to
be getting worse and worse, and I could feel that more and m ore people were
being allowed onto the centre terrace, despite the already dangerous
overcrowding. T he crush was getting tighter all the time.


T here were now more policem en and some S t John’s Ambulance m en gathering
on the other side of the fence obscuring my view of the pitch, so I did not see
when the team s actually came out on the pitch, but I heard a roar from the crowd
which signalled the m om ent that this did take place.


I rem em ber thinking God, no. Please don’t bring them out now. Things will
only get worse”.
Regrettably, that roar from the crowd coincided with an increase in pressure on
the terrace as people who had not, at that time, taken up their positions, would
have been alerted to the fact that the m atch was about to start, and they would
be rushing so as not to miss anything. Unfortunately, my fears had been realised.


From that m om ent on, I found myself pressed up against the person in front of
me and both my arms were pinned betw een other people’s bodies. T hat then
m eant that the only part of my own body that I was capable of moving was my
head.


Although my whole body was in severe discomfort, my left arm, left leg and back
were in the most pain. In particular, a teenage girl who had been standing next
to me had her head twisted round facing me, and the side of her face was being
forced up against the upper part of my left arm. The excruciating pain in my arm
was almost unbearable, and I feared that my arm was simply going to snap under
the pressure. Ail I could see of the girl was her face, as the rest of her body was
being sm othered by other people. She was clearly in a great deal of pain. H er
head was in a vice between my arm and the body of another man behind her. It
was impossible for any of us to move at all.


I could tell that the poor girl was having difficulty breathing and she was
incapable of speaking, because her face was being squeezed so tightly that it was
being contorted. H er expression did not seem to change and her tear-filled eyes
were just staring straight at me, pleading with me to help her. Although her eyes
were full of tears, it was almost as though the pressure being exerted on her head
was preventing those tears from flowing down her face.


As I found myself captivated by this desperate sight next to me, I could feel a
foot tapping on mine, gently at first, but soon it became more agitated, and I felt
sure that it must have belonged to the girl because it had only started when I first
looked at her. I knew that signal m eant that she needed help urgently.


I turned my head and saw a policewoman directly in front of me, so I called out
to her. She looked at me as I started snouting, so I know that she heard me. I
pleaded with her to do something for the girl next to me, either herself, or to call
for assistance. She simply looked away.


I asked myself why there were so many people on the other side of the fence
looking at the situation, but just standing still and not actually moving? We were
the ones not able to move. We needed to be helped by those who could move.
Then I noticed som eone running towards the fence. A t last, I thought, someone
was going to help us. As the man reached the fence, he lifted up a cam era to his
face and then just walked away in search of another picture!


T he pressure of the crowd had been building up gradually to the point where I
 could no longer move at all, and I did think that it could not possible increase
 any more. However, I do recall a sudden instance when the pain becam e even
 more intense, and the pressure on my body even greater. I rem em ber yelling out
 at this m om ent and many other people, particularly behind me, also called out at
 the same time. I believe that the match was still in progress because I could still
 hear much of the crowd reacting to the play on the pitch with cheers and
 applause, unaw are of what was happening all around me. I could not actually see
 the players, though, because my view was still obstructed by the motionless
 people on the other side of the fence.


 I thought because so many other people had called out at the sam e time as me,
  particularly in the area behind me,, indicating a widespread increase in the level
  of pain being endured, that there must have been a surge at the back and that
  even m ore people were trying to get in. It was the suddenness of that pain and
  the sim ultaneous shouts and screams that I rem em ber vividly.


  This did seem to prom pt some action on the pitch in front of me. The police
  were beginning to look more anxiously towards the back of the terrace, whereas
  before their gaze seem ed to have been fixed upon those who were suffering at
  the front. Some of them actually climbed onto the fence themselves to try and
  get a clear view of the rear of the terrace. This then created a gap in my line of
  vision, which enabled me to see the pitch and some of the players. They were
  standing still. The match appeared to have been halted.
 T here were quite a few people now standing on the touchline and some w ere also
 on the pitch. Some were policemen, som e St. John’s Ambulance men and some
 spectators who had been able to climb out. They appeared to be arguing with
 each other and then they pointed at us.


The players then turned and walked off the pitch and, as this was happening, I
saw a m an lying on his back in front of me, just on the edge of the pitch. Some
policem en w ere kneeling down next to him. Someone had taken off the m an’s
shirt and pulled down his trousers, and the policemen were giving him the kiss-of-
life. I am sure that was the first time that I saw someone being attended to on
the pitch, because I rem em ber it having such an impression upon me. It only
served to confirm my fears that people were in real trouble. The man on his
back did not appear to be moving at all. H e was a large man, and that showed
me that even size and strength could not save some people from being crushed. I
knew that I had to try and keep my rib-cage above the crush and keep breathing.
In that respect, my height of 6’ 2 Vi' was absolutely invaluable.


As attem pts to revive the man on his back continued, the num ber of people
moving onto the pitch steadily increased. Fans, policemen and am bulancem en
alike were carrying limp bodies onto the playing area. Some were pummelling
hearts with their hands, others were giving mouth-to-mouth resuscitation.


I could see that a very narrow gate in the perim eter fence several yards to the left
of where I was standing had been opened, and policemen were trying to extricate
those nearest to it from the tangle of bodies. Their efforts proved largely
fruitless, because even when they seem ed to have hold of people, the sheer
compression that existed at the front of the terrace served only to thwart attempts
to release them.


This was the only gate in the fence that I could see. T here were none near to
where I was standing. Only the people nearest to that gate had any chance of
getting through it. Still the only thing that I could move was my head, so I knew
that there was no prospect of being able to reach the gate myself. A num ber of
people behind me had been able to raise themselves above the crush and they
literally climbed over the heads and shoulders of those still trapped around me
until they reached the perim eter fence, and then jum ped down on the other side
to safety.


Even at this stage, many policemen w ere still lined up along the touchiine and
were restraining some of those who had been able to free themselvesJfrom
encroaching onto the pitch. Those fans would have been aware of what was
happening on the terraces where they had just been standing, and so they seemed
anxious to get onto the pitch to help those who were lying injured.


Gradually, however, many of those policem en began to realise that their help was
needed in trying to evacuate the terrace area, rather than preventing those who
had escaped from walking on the pitch. W hen this realisation did sink in, the
trickle of people being carried onto the pitch to receive attention soon became a
flood. U nfortunately, though, judging by the number of heads which were being
covered with discarded items of clothing, it was already far too late.


Then I noticed that an ambulance was slowly moving in front of the perim eter
fence until it reached an area just behind the goal, slightly to my left. It was then
forced to stop because there were a num ber of people lying on the ground in its
path. These people were completely still.


I looked back at the girl standing next to me. H er foot was no longer tapping on
mine, and the grimace on her face had been replaced by a ghastly vacant
expression I realised that she had died. N ot only were people dying up against
the fence, but they were dying next to w here I was standing as well. Although the
girl was dead, the pressure being exerted on my arm by her jaw-bone was still
causing m e to wince with pain. She was still in exactly the same position that she
had been when she was alive.


The continuing pain in my arm, com bined with having to withstand the force
being exerted on the rem ainder of my body, was necessitating much heavier than
normal breathing and I was b eginning to feel quite exhausted. I did not think
 that I would be able to cope for much longer with my frightful predicam ent and I
could see no sign of any forthcoming assistance to ease my plight.




                                          16
 I then thought that I too would suffer the same fate as the girl on my arm and
 that, before long, I would also be dead.


 Knowing that I was totally unable to help myself or, indeed, anyone else around
 me, and having seen no signs of encouragem ent in front of me, I had accepted
 the fact that soon my pain and suffering would stop and that I would not feel
 anything at all.


 At that time, my sense of panic seem ed to disappear as it merely seem ed futile.
 Instead, my thoughts turned to my family and my girlfriend. I could see their
 faces in my mind, but the images were blurred. I felt desperately sad as I thought
 of how distraught they would be. I just wanted to be with them again, so that I
 could say goodbye ’properly". I tried to bring their images into focus so that I
 could be with them in spirit, but they merely faded.


Somehow I was becoming oblivious of the situation I was in, and strangely I was
distancing myself from it as if I had played my p a n in it, but that it was about to
come to an end.


I began to feel that I was merely a bystander watching a rather shocking film that
I could turn off anytime I wanted. However, I looked up at the top of the stand
to my right and saw a row of television cameras which were pointed towards us.
I then came out of the trance that I had allowed myself to fall into, and realised
that I was very much p a n of the horror that was going on all around. I had
kidded myself that I was looking through a camera at the terrible scenes in front
of me, but in fact they were trained on me as well.


T here were, by now, large num bers of people on the pitch clustered in small
groups attending to an ever-increasing num ber of casualties. Many advertisement
hoardings had been ripped down and were being used as makeshift stretchers to
carry those who were injured. M ost of these "stretchers" that I saw were being
earned by spectators rather than am bulancemen, and their faces showed clear
signs of strain as they ran towards the area below the television gantry on the
right-hand side of the pitch as I looked, before returning to carry other injured
fans.
There were many bodies lying covered all over the place, but still some of the
injured were receiving m outh-to-mouth resuscitation and still people were using
their bare hands to try and force hearts to beat again.


Eventually, I noticed that the crush seem ed to be easing slightly behind me, and I
was able to move my arms for the first time since the initial surge had rendered
them useless. T h en whoever had been forced up against my back moved away
from me slightly, and I was able to stand upright. Gaps started appearing in the
terrace and I was able to take a step backwards. At that moment, I looked down
at my feet and I noticed two bodies face down, one lying across the other, at
almost the exact spot where I had been standing all that time.


A m an came over towards me and he helped me to lift up a young boy. We
turned him over and then I felt ill. The boy’s face was blue and his m outh was a
dark shade of purple. He must have been dead for some time. H e had probably
been lying on the ground ever since the crush began, unknown to everyone, not
that anybody would have been able to pick him up even if they had known he
was lying there. H e was probably in his mid-teens with dark hair and, I think,
wearing a dark blue anorak. This is the body that was lying on top of the other
one. I had to just help the man lift his body onto the perim eter fence and two
other m en took him from us.


During the time th at I was in a trance, my recollection of events is somewhat
vague and by the time that I had come out of that trance, and was able to move
slightly, I do not recall seeing the girl that had died on my arm.


There was now space to move almost right up to the fence, although there were
many bodies lined up against it, and people were b eginning to lift them too. I
m anaged to lift one more child’s body over the fence, although I am unable to
describe this child because, although I did lift the body, I have absolutely no
recollection of any physical features whatsoever. I seem to recall almost seeing a
mere outline of this person in my mind, and no more. I had been so shocked by
the sight of the young boy, that it was almost as though my mind refused to
accept any more punishm ent for the time being.
The effects of the crush on my arm m ade the grim task physically very difficult.
The other m en that were helping in the lifting operation could see that I had
been hurt, and there was no way that I would have been able to lift heavier
bodies than those that I had already struggled with, so they insisted that I was
helped out of the centre terrace section myself. However, I could not get over
the perim eter fence at the front, because its height meant that, even with
assistance, I would have needed to pull myself up and over in order to get onto
the pitch, which I would not have been able to do with my injury. So instead,
som eone helped me over the lower fence at the side which led to the sparsely
populated side terrace section. Even though this fence was lower than the one at
the front, I had difficulty negotiating it because of my arm and also because the
sheer exhaustion caused by the crush had m ade me feel giddy.


Because I felt unsteady on the top of the fence, I did not want to jump over until
I felt that I could land safely on my feet, because the terrace was obviously solid
concrete. T he m an who still had hold of me called to two men on the side
terrace for help, and they came over to try and catch me. They told me to jump
but, unfortunately, they only succeeded in breaking my fall, and I actually landed
on my left knee.


They checked that I was not too badly injured and helped me to stand up. The
red stain on my trouser leg betrayed the fact that my knee was bleeding. I was
able to stand, though, and although it certainly hurt, at least I thought that meant
that I had not broken anything,


The two m en then went off to see who else they could help as I leaned against a
barrier and just tried to catch my breath and compose myself as best I could. My
nose was also bleeding, but I was just so relieved to have got out alive. I really
had not thought that I was going to.


I looked around at the stunned faces on the terrace. Many were crying
unashamedly. A fter a few minutes, I m anaged to get my nose-bleed under
control, and I limped back to the side fence that I had escaped over. By this
time, the front of the area where I had been trapped had been virtually cleared.
However, a few yards further back there were still many people congregated in
the centre section of the terrace, but they were able to move freely by now. I
could not see any remaining injured fans in this area and the danger appeared to
have passed. As I began to reflect upon w hat had happened, I stared at the
nearly-empty front section of the terrace and found that I could no longer hold
back my own tears. Yes - it really had happened.


Then I looked towards the back of the right-hand side section of terrace that I
was standing in, and noticed that the people at the front of the stand above were
ripping down the advertisem ent hoardings just in front of their seats, and were
passing them down onto the terrace. I had earlier seen the use to which similar
hoardings had been put while I was still trapped myself, so I thought that more
"stretchers” were needed on the pitch.


T here were not many people standing near the side fence (that I had escaped
over) but this is where the hoardings were being passed to. I, and three others,
got hold of one of the hoardings and carried it above our heads, a short way up
to the perim eter fence. I was careful to take the weight mainly with my right
arm, being mindful of the injury that I had sustained to my other arm. As we
were passing the hoarding over the fence, some people just behind were waiting
to pass another one to us. At the sam e time, some other hoardings were being
passed over the side fence into the centre section of the terrace.


Since the events at Hillsborough, I have seen a photograph in the Liverpool Echo
which showed what, I am certain, is this very moment. Although the cam era is
too far away for it to be possible to positively identify myself, the num ber and
position of the hoardings is just how I rem em ber them. The official ground clock,
clearly visible in the photograph, shows the time as 15.37. From this, I am able
to deduce that I was probably trapped on the centre terrace until about 15.30, or
thereabouts.


Having passed the hoardings over the fence, my thoughts turned to my colleague
who I had becom e separated from even before the teams had come onto the
pitch. The last time that I had seen him, he was about 10 feet behind me and I
n    felt sure that he would not have been in the same danger that I had been in,

m    because the worst part of the crush seem ed to have been concentrated along the
     length of the perim eter fence, and back just as far as the first set of barriers
     which were nearest to it. This had at least seemed the case when I had been
     trapped, because som e people behind me had been able to climb out over the top

m    of those of us at the front.


     Nevertheless, I was naturally concerned to find him, in view of what I had seen
     happening to other people. I stood and scanned the centre terrace section to see
     if he was still am ongst those who had rem ained in that part of the ground, and
     then likewise around the side section of the terrace where I was standing myself,
     but to no avail.


■m   I then hobbled down towards a gate in the perim eter fence and a policeman on
     the other side helped to lift me through it and onto the pitch. H e asked if I
     needed my leg seeing to, but as that was not of immediate concern to me, I
     replied that I would be ail right.


     I started looking round at people on the pitch in an attem pt to reunite myself
     with my colleague. By this time, most people were standing around and it
     appeared that m ost of the injured fans had already been taken care of. There


m    were still a few injured people receiving attention, but for most people on the
     pitch there did not seem to be any further assistance that they could give. As I
     walked across the pitch, grown men who had been reunited with their friends
     were standing with their arms round each other, crying on each other's shoulders.
     Everyone around knew just how they felt and shared in their sense of relief at
m    finding each other, but at the same time there was an atm osphere of numbness at
     the shock of seeing so many who had suffered so much.


     Despite having earlier convinced myself that my colleague would have been safe
     where he was standing, I began to feel anxious that maybe something had
     happened to him. I looked back at the terraces behind the goal and walked
     along the touchline to try and catch sight of him, but there was no sign of him
     anywhere.




                                               21
I walked around the perim eter of the pitch in front of the stands and then
backwards and forwards across the pitch, but still nothing.


Then I also rem em bered that the m edia were covering the match, and feared that
my family and my girlfriend would be sitting at home aware of the tragedy that
had just occurred, and would be fearing for my safety. I thought that I would
have to let them know that I was all right as soon as I possibly could, to stop
them worrying about me. I thought about trying to get to a telephone outside,
but nobody appeared to be leaving the ground and, indeed, there had been an
announcem ent over the public address system requesting that people did not
leave the ground in order to avoid causing congestion in the streets around the
stadium, which needed to be kept clear to allow ambulances to gain access. So I
thought that I would have to stay where I was. I knew that I had to get in touch
with those at hom e soon - but how could I?


I wandered around not knowing what to do, and I was getting increasingly
worried about not being able to allay the fears of my loved ones. Then I noticed
that the N ottingham Forest m anager had come onto the pitch, and was being
interviewed by a television crew. T here was a cordon of police across the width
of the pitch betw een me and the im prom ptu gathering of newsmen by the players’
tunnel entrance, but I thought that here was my chance to pass my message
home, so I casually walked through the police line, expecting to be questioned,
but I was allowed to pass through unchallenged. I was confused as to why it had
been deem ed necessary for there to be such a line there anyway at this time. I
then went over towards the group of people who had converged around Brian
G ough and noticed that there was another hand-held television camera on the
pitch nearer to me, filming two fans who had escaped the crush. Out of
desperation, I walked up behind them and put my head between theirs in an
attem pt to get myself seen on television and show everyone at home that I was
alive. I just m outhed the words "I’m all rig h t Fm all right" as if I was talking
directly to my family and the cam eram an was providing a link-up service. Then I
realised, however, that any pictures were probably being recorded and edited, so
the chances were, that idea would not have had the desired effect so I frantically
tried to think of something else.
Then I noticed a ground official nearby with a portable telephone. I thought that
my prayers had been answered, so I walked over to where he was standing and
gave him my ’phone num ber and pleaded with him to ring it for me. H e dialled
the first half of the num ber and then the screen just went blank. The battery had
gone because he had ’phoned for so many other people before I had reached
him. I was becoming increasingly perturbed over the fact that the nightmare that
I thought had ended when I managed to escape from the crush, was continuing
for different reasons.


I then walked back to the Leppings Lane end of the ground, where I had
originally been trapped. The centre section of the terracing was now occupied by
a num ber of policem en who were sitting down with their helmets in their hands,
looking just as dazed and shocked as everyone else. Some of them were crying as
they reflected upon the awfulness of w hat they had witnessed.


I could not decide w hat to do next. Should I stay in the ground and try and find
my colleague, or should I try and leave and look for a public telephone to ’phone
 home? I again reassured myself that my colleague would have been in a far
 better position than me, and, as I had survived, so I felt sure that no harm would
 have come to him. In any case, when we had first arrived we had agreed to m eet
 back at the car if we were separated for any reason, although obviously at that
 time we did not envisage the circumstances which were to lead to that becoming
 a reality. T hat’s it, I thought. H e’ll be back at the car wondering where I am.
                                      i



 I went over to the corner of the pitch, where I saw someone going through a gate
 back onto the terrace. I asked a policem an who was standing by the gate
 whether it was possible to get out of the ground, even though the vast majority of
 people were still in their places. H e directed me down a side passage which led
 away from the side section of the terrace, having told me that it led to the exit.
 This was the first time that I had realised that there was another entrance/exit
 leading to the terrace, other than the tunnel by which I had gained access to the
 terrace myself.
Half-way along the passage, I came across a supporter who was walking in the
opposite direction, back towards the terrace. H e actually asked me if I knew
w hether the match was still going to be played or not! I just hope that he had
not been aware of the scale of what had happened if he was able to ask such a
question. H e could not possibly have seen the sort of scenes that I had
witnessed, surely. I half looked at him and m uttered "I sincerely hope not",
before continuing along the passage to the ex it


The gam e was over as far as I was concerned. How could they possibly play a
match now? I thought of the young victims that I had seen crushed to death. It
wasn’t just their ages and the num ber of bodies that I had seen that distressed
me, it was the way they had died which was so terrible. They had known what
was happening to them, just as I had known what was happening to me. The only
difference was that I still knew, and always would - but they knew no more.


Match. W hat match?


I walked out into the street and saw that other people had already left the
ground. A man was banging his hand on the side of a police car which had
 parked on the other side of the road, directly opposite the Leppings Lane
 turnstiles. H e was shouting at the driver. No attempt was m ade by other police
 officers around to restrain the man. H e was not being aggressive or threatening,
 he was rath er expressing his anger and frustration. Whilst I would not wish to
 condone his actions in any way, I could understand that an experience such as
 that endured by so many people that day, and maybe also by the man I saw in
 front of me, could quite easily provoke such an unbalanced response. Although I
 could understand his emotion, I did not agree with what he was doing and I could
 not see it achieving anything. However, I do think that his state of despair was
 responsible for his behaviour.


 I believe that this was also recognised by those people around the m an who were
 calmly trying to diffuse the situation, and so prevent it from becoming
 confrontational. Although I did not w ait to see if there were any further
 developments, I would not consider what I saw to be interpretable as a criminal
 offence.
I would stress, m ost strongly, that the incident that I have just described was the
only tim e during the whole afternoon that I had personally seen any action which
I would describe as ’’disagreeable’'. Prior to that, every action of the fans that I
had seen had been totally admirable, beyond reproach and, at times, quite heroic.
From the time that I was trapped on the terrace, until I actually left the ground,
the impression that I had was that most of the initiative was being shown by fans
themselves who had been aware of the scale of the problem far sooner than those
people who had been on the other side of the fence from the beginning.


As I walked away from the ground, my im m ediate problem was to find a
telephone. Having turned left and walked up a hill, the first public telephone
that I cam e to had a queue of about a dozen or more people waiting to use i t I
realised that I needed to ’phone as quickly as possible, so I went in search of
another one. Regrettably, I found a similar situation at the next one also. Many
of the shops nearby were closed, but I came across one which was open and I
asked the assistant if there was a ’phone that I could use. She showed me to the
back room and I joined a short queue of fans waiting to use i t Recognising
everyone's sense of urgency, all calls were kept as brief as possible and, for the
benefit of those behind me in the queue, I asked my father to ring my girlfriend
for me w hen I eventually reached the front of the queue. Everyone else seemed
to be making ju st one call and listing other people that should be contacted on
their behalf. It was only fair.


Having left the shop, I still felt that I wanted to speak to my girlfriend myself, so
that I would know whether or not the message had been passed on, in order to
ease my mind. I carried on walking, but each queue in the little shops seemed to
be getting longer and longer. Everyone seem ed to have had the same idea.


I noticed some residents had come out into their front gardens and were chatting
to each other over their fences. They seem ed to be aware that something was
going on, so I asked a lady w hether I could use her ’phone. She kindly allowed
me to, and I was able to speak to my girlfriend. After expressing my gratitude to
the lady, I then realised that my plea for help had prompted others to follow, and
a queue had already formed in her hallway. I hope that she did not mind.. She
did not seem to, fortunately. I think that she could see the relief on my face and
no doubt on those who ’phoned after me. I had just made the two most precious
'phone calls of my life.


T hat was one great weight off my mind, but now I had to try and get back to the
car and check that my colleague was there. I did not know exactly where I was,
because I had approached the ground from a totally different direction to the way
that I had walked in search of a telephone. I decided that the best thing to do
was to walk back to the ground and then I knew that I would be able to find my
way back from there.


After about five minutes, I arrived back at the ground and by this time people
had clearly been asked to leave the stadium and many people were filing out into
the streets.


It took me about another 20 minutes to walk back to the car, and when I finally
reached it there was no sign of anyone waiting there. A family were standing in
their driveway nearby, so I gave them a brief description of my colleague and
asked if they had seen anybody waiting by the car, and they confirmed that
somebody had been, but that he had walked back in the direction that he had
come from after a few minutes. The family could see that I was very upset and
that I had been injured, so they took me into their house. Fortunately, one of
them was a nurse and she looked at my injured arm for me. She thought that the
injury was not too serious, although since the full extent of crush injuries are not
visible, she could not give a full diagnosis. She did, however, put some cream on
it for me, which she said would help until I was able to have a proper
examination.


The time must have been about 4.40-4.45, because the television was on in the
house and the football scores were being shown on BBC1. I could not believe
that these were deem ed to have been of any significance whatsoever, considering
what had just happened, but then I did not know what coverage, if any, had
already been given to the scenes at Hillsborough that I had witnessed. I did not
have to wait long, as the programm e switched to a scene which was already
indelibly etched in my mind. The talk was of at least 50 fatalities and over 100
injured. At the very least, I thought.



                                         26
Som eone in the house tried to ring the emergency number on the screen to
enquire about my colleague, to reassure m e that he had not been hurt, and to
convince me that it was quite likely that he had been the man that they had seen
earlier by the car. Inevitably, the line was engaged each time they tried.


A fter 10 minutes or so, there was a call from the road outside to say that the
they had seen earlier had returned. I looked out of the window. Yes - it was
him. Thank God.


Fortunately, my colleague did not appear to have been injured or too badly
affected by what he had witnessed either. However, at that time, neither of us
were aware of each other's circumstances in the crush, and it did not seem an
appropriate time to begin a discussion to establish such details. Personally, I felt
that I had seen far too much to be able to describe events with any degree of
clarity so soon afterwards.


My overriding priority was to get myself hom e as soon as possible to show my
family that I really was all right. The car that I had driven to Sheffield was not
insured for any other driver, so I knew that I would have to drive myself. I felt
that I was physically capable of doing so, despite my injuries, and I made sure
that I felt sufficiently composed in my mind as well, before setting off. Naturally,
I avoided talking about my experience on the return journey, for I knew that if I
began recalling the horrendous scenes that I had witnessed, I would break down
emotionally and would not be able to continue driving. In any case, I deliberately
stopped the car and had a walk roiind a num ber of times along the way, to make
sure that I was able to continue.


Looking back, I am amazed myself that I was able to drive home under the
circumstances and, perhaps, had I been m ore rational about my dilemma, I may
have acted differently. However, after such an experience, how could anyone
have m ade a rational decision? Fortunately, we both got back safely and I felt
that I, and everyone who was concerned about me, could best cope with what had
happened with me at home.




                                         27
                                  Some Final Thoughts


In conclusion, I would agree that the opening of the large concertina gates
adjacent to the turnstiles was understandable in view of the circumstances outside
the ground and the danger that existed up at the turnstiles, and the need to deal
with that danger. However, the efficient crowd control on the approach to those
turnstiles, which had been much in evidence at the 1988 F.A. Cup Semi-Final at
Hillsborough, was sadly lacking on this occasion- In my opinion, the need to
open the concertina gates stemm ed directly from the inability to control the vast
number of people outside the ground in the same way as the previous year.


Furtherm ore, from inside the ground, it would have been clear, at a glance, that
the centre section of terracing at the Leppings Lane End was dangerously
overcrowded, even before those gates were opened, and therefore, that any
sudden influx of people into the ground would certainly have to be directed away
from that area, otherwise safety would be severely compromised. I believe that,
had b etter com m unication existed betw een all parties, then the decision to allow
a rush of fans through the gates would only have been taken in the knowledge
that those people were then to be directed away from the centre tunnel. It would
appear that the consequences of opening the gates without such directions were
not fully understood by the person who took the decision. Therefore, whilst I
would not wish to directly criticise the decision to open the gates, errors of
judgem ent were certainly made as to what action was needed once the gates
were, indeed, to be opened. For instance, apparently last year stewards directed
people away from the tunnel once the centre section was full. This shows that
the need to avoid overcrowding on that section of terracing was recognised last
year. Why was the situation different this year? Last year, I had actually taken
my place on the terrace before the need to direct people away from the centre
section arose.


The counters that register the num ber of people that have actually passed
through the turnstiles do not, to my knowledge, indicate the precise area on the
terrace where those people have subsequently gone to stand. However, by
actually looking at the terraces, one would have gained a good impression of their
distribution, almost instantly.


                                          28
The situations both inside and outside the ground had deteriorated gradually over
a period of time, and so the need to take action to avert the danger did not arise
suddenly, by any means.


However w ell-intentioned the opening of the concertina gates may have been, the
consequences of doing so were not sufficiently considered. I therefore have to
disagree, most strongly, with the senior police officer from South Yorkshire who,
at a press conference shortly after the disaster, expressed his opinion that the
opening o f the gates had not been a contributory factor in the deaths. Although I
have stated that I acknowledge the need to have opened those gates, I feel
certain that the surge of people through them, once opened, towards an already
overcrowded terrace, certainly did contribute to very many of the deaths that day.


Certainly, the overall organisation of the event, both before and after the main
crush on the terrace, was woefully inadequate. I have m entioned, in particular,
the different m easures that were used at last year’s semi-final, because they show
that, on that occasion, consideration had, rightly, been given to the problem s of
dealing with a large crowd at Hillsborough. Clearly, last year those measures
suggested that the event dem anded efficient organisation if everything was to run
smoothly. Those of us who were at that match, though, will rem em ber that even
then there was room for improvement. However, to abandon so much of that
strategy suggests to me that there was a degree of unjustified complacency
surrounding this year’s match, on the p art of the organisers. Hillsborough only
attracts capacity crowds when it is used as a venue for F.A. Cup Semi-Finals, so it
would seem sensible to refer to experience gained from the previous such match.


I welcome the comments from the Hom e Secretary who was keen to stress that
hooliganism was not a factor in this disaster. That is something which all of us
who were unfortunate enough to have been caught up in the events at
Hillsborough are fully aware of. Indeed, I would further suggest that, but for the
miraculous response of many of the supporters, and the life-saving action that
they took, the effects of the crush would certainly have been far worse. Those
who were not so well informed, would have done well to have borne that in mind
before they tried to prejudge events based solely upon their pre-conceived notions
of those who support football.
r
f
     Those of us who enjoy watching the sport deplore the behaviour of those who do
f    seek to spoil spectators’ enjoyment as m uch as anybody else does but, on this
     occasion, it is im portant to realise that the central issue is one of safety and not

f    one of hooliganism.


f
f
f
r'   In this account, I have tried to describe som e of the emotions that I went through
     that day. No words, whether written or spoken, can possibly fully convey the
     sheer horror of the experience that I or, indeed, anyone else went through.

t    Whilst I have produced this report to the best of my ability, inevitably I feel that
     it is incom plete insofar as it does not portray a full picture of what it was really
     like. For instance, obviously I have not been able to incorporate all the different
     sounds that, when combined with the visual images as well as the desperate
     sensation of being crushed myself, and the feeling of utter helplessness with
     regard to my own safety and the safety of those others around me, served to
     accentuate the awfulness of the situation.


k    However, I do accept that only I will really ever know what happened to me, but
     by recording these details, and by talking about them, I shall gradually come to
     terms with them.


k




                                               30
W hen you walk through a storm

H old your head up high

A nd don’t be afraid of the dark.

A t the end of the road th ere’s a golden sky

A nd the sweet silver song of a lark.

W alk on through the wind,

W alk on through the rain,

Though your dream s be tossed and blown;

W alk on, walk on with hope in your heart

A nd you’ll never walk alone,

Y ou’ll never walk alone.




                                    To the girl who died on my arm

                                    and all those others who suffered,

                                    - Rest In Peace



                                    You'll Never W alk Alone.
