                                                S T A T E M E N T ^ WITNESS

                    (CJ Act, 1967, s.9:            MC Act, 198O ,s.102:               MC Rules, 1981, r.70)


STATEMENT OF                                                        PAUL DAVID WRIGHT

DATE OF BIRTH                                                       BORN.

OCCUPATION OF WITNESS                                               POLICE CONSTABLE 831

ADDRESS AND TELEPHONE NUMBER                                         POLICE OFFICE            ADWICK ROAD          MEXBOROUGH
                                                                     583151

THU statem ent, consisting of     Six.       pages each signed by me. I* true to the b e n of my knowledge and belief and I make it

knowing th at. If it it tendered In evidence, I shall be liebte to prosecution If I have wilfully stated in it enything which I know

to be false or do not believe to be true.


               10        day of     J u ly               19
                                                                   89
D ated the
                                                                                                                        PC 831
                                            Signed . . . . . .

                                    Signature witnessed by


l........... ......                                                                         being unable to reed the statem ent below,

i,                                                       of                                                                     . reed

it to him before he signed It.

D ated the               day of                          19



I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police Force presently stationed

at Mexborough in the Doncaster Division.



On Saturday 15 April, 1989, I was on duty in company with a ntEnber of

other Officers involved in football duties at the Semi Final match to

be played at the Hillsborough Stadium between Liverpool FC and Nottingham

Forest PC.



I was attached to Serial 32 along with six other Officers under the

supervision of APS 2895 Thomas.



At 10 am I attended a briefing held in the North Stand at Hillsborough

along with all the other Officers involved in duties that day.                                                     This

briefing ended about 10.50 am and after a word from our Serial Coimander,

Inspector Millett, we were directed to our positions along Penistone Road North/

Signed                                                           Signature witnessed by .

               PC 831       U
                                                                                       QPI'X Cox
        .                     STATEMENT OF WITNESS
\ Jf)

            <CJ. Act, 196T, s. 9; M.C.A., 1980, s. 102; M.C. Rules, 1981, r.70)

   Continuation of statement of                        PAUL DAVID W I G H T



 Halifax Road situate in close proximity to the Gate Public House.

  AT this time I was in company with PC 1968 Tanms.



  Upon arriving at my position at 11 am it became obvious to me that the

  area        was quite busy for the time of day and I was surprised at the

  number of Liverpool supporters walking passed me up Halifax Road in

  the opposite direction of the Hillsborough ground . During this time

  I received nunerous enquiries as to the location of the nearest Public

  House or off licence, I answered these queries by directing these

  supporters towards the two Public Houses at the top of Halifax Road

   i.e. The New Bridge Inn and The Railway Inn.



  At 12.30 pm myself and PC 1968 Tamms were joined at our location by

  PC 3087 Keenan.           At this time the atmosphere was good and a number of

  sugDrters stopped to chat to myself and the other Officers.



  At 1.55 pm a train was seen arriving at Wadsley bridge railway station

  and it soon became apparent that this train was carrying Liverpool

  supporters,           the majority of whcm were escorted down Halifax Road

  by mounted Officers, these supporters were generally well behaved

  and jovial although a large nunber of them, I would estimate 1 in 5 were

  carrying and consuming seme form of alcoholic beverage.



  About 2.30 pm we were joined at our location by another serial and

  by Inspector Townend.             It was around this time that the area became

  very busy itfi tJt vast /numbers of supporters walking dowrv;Halifax Road,
   Signed..                           ..............         Signature witnessed by.

                   pc
                          STATEMENT OF WITNESS
{3}
        (C.J. Act. 1967. s. 9; M.C.A., 1980, s. 102; M.C. Rules, 1981, r.70)

 Continuation of statement of             PAUL DAVID WRIGHT



having either just arrived at Wadsley bridge or returning from

the public houses in this area.            The pavements were now just a sea

of people, the majority of whan were young males.                At this time we

were instructed to carry out checks of these persons and to prevent

anyone from progressing any further along Halifax Road with any

alcohol, this was done by asking these supporters to either drink

their beer at this location or to leave their cans, bottles etc on the

surround wall of the car park belonging to the Gate Public House,

this they did with little or no complaint, the majority elected

to consume their alcohol at that location.



At 2.55 pm along with other Officers I attended at the Gate Public

House due toa report from a customer that "ALL HELL HAD BROKEN LOOSE"

inside.On arrival we found that the externall doors were locked and

as no other means of entry could be found Officers forced the front door

open , once inside the building it was clear that some sort of

disturbance had occurred, the floor around the pool table was covered

with broken glass and pieces of smashed pool cues.                 After speaking

to a regular customer it was ascertained that a fight had broken

 out between rival supporters and that some Liverpool supporters

had tried to pull a man outside to try to enable the fight to continue,

these supporters had failed to do this and had left the premises prior

to my arrival.       As I was talking to this man other Officers had spoken

to the Landlord who had agreed to close the bar down and to enpty

the premises as soon as possible.             I then returned along with other Officers


 Signed..
             PC 83a/
                                                                                          to 2.
                         STATEMENT OF WITNESS
(4 )
       (C.J. Act, 1967, s. 9; M.C.A., 1980, s. 102; M.C. Rules, 1981, r.70)

Continuation of statement of
                                      PAUL DAVID WRIGHT



to my original position on Halifax Road.



At 3.05 pm I was instructed by APS 2895 Thomas to return , with the

remainder of the Serial to Hillsborough , but whilst en route a

radio message was received that instructed all available officers to

attend at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.                     On arrival I noticed

that the area was virtually clear of football supporters and along

with other Officers I was ordered to form a cordon across the

entrance and to then await further instructions , whilst in this

cordon an ambulance arrived at the ground, this ambulance was

immediately directed to the small lane (that runs parallel with the

river) behind the Leppings Lane Stand.



At 3.15 pm a number of people could be seen milling around inside

the ground, shortly after this I was instructed along with my Serial

and other Officers to enter the ground and give assistance . As I

tried to enter through the main gates I had to move around , and step

over injured persons who had been removed from the terraces by other

supporters or Police Officers.



As I travelled towards the tunnel that leads onto the terraces I saw

a young Liverpool Supporter being tneded to by two Officers, the mans

face was a blue/grey colour and he lay motionless. As I reached this

man I immediately checked to see if he was breathing, he wasn't and no

pulse could be felt at the carotid, I then commenced artificial

Signed..                                        Signature witnessed by.
(5 )                        STATEMENT OF WITNESS

        (C.J. Act, 1967, s. 9; M.C.A., 1980, s. 102; M.C. Rules, 1981, r.70)

    4.     ' ote statement
                  *4     * of                      PAUL DAVID WRIGHT
Continuation



respiration while another Officer performed external chest compression.

We continued this for about 10 minutes or so, but by this time it was

obvious that this particular man was unfortunately beyond help. I

then covered his face with his jacket and left the two other Officers

to move the body while I went through the tunnel and onto the

terraces, as I did so a supporter grabbed hold of my arm and led

me towards a young man who was weeping uncontrollably , after speaking

to this man I ascertained that his brother had just died in the tragedy.

I attempted to console him and arranged for sane nearby stewards

to take care of him while I offered my assistance elsewhere, by this

time the area behind the stands was a mass of supporters who were just

wandering around, sane were attempting to help the injured although

others seemed intent only on.causing problems for the Police Officers,

that is to say they were hurling threats and abuse at myself and other

Officers as we attempted to remove the bodies of the dead and injured

and one man in particular had to be physically restrained by other

supporters to prevent him fron attacking me, this man was obviously

drunk and he had lost all trace of self control.                                 Once through the tunnel

I assisted other Officers and supporters in the removal of the

bodies, the bodies were carried through the tunnel and placed in a

temporary mortuary, which had been set up on the Lane outside the

stands. I assisted in the removal of three bodies to this location.

At sane time druing this stage I assisted in an attempt by another

officer to revive a man who had been laid at the exit of the tunnel

this attempt failed and along with the other Officer and a couple of

supporters                   /his man to the mortuary.                     Once thm-fi I was ordered by
 Signed............   A         ...................-     Signature witnessed by.....
          '      PC 831 Q                                                              -----------
                                                                                    ^   <To 2„
                              STATEMENT OF WITNESS
(6 )
           (C..I. Act, 1967, s. 9; M.C. A., 1980, s. 102; M.C. Rules, 1981, r.70)

  Continuation of statement of
                                            PAUL EAVID WRIGHT



an Inspector to make a makeshift barrier around the bodies to protect

them from public view.             Then along with other Officers I joined a

cordon that was formed to protect the eleven bodies that by this

stage had been placed there. I remained in this cordon for seme

time until it became obvious that help was required inside.



When I returned inside the majority of bodies had by then been removed

although, there were some still remaining at the foot of the terraces

adjacent to the retaining wall, these bodies were being removed

by other Officers so I assisted the walking injured out to where the

ambulances were waiting and then onto them.



I remained in that area for the rest of the day helping the ambulance

crews to load the stretchers onto the ambulances and from time to time

offering comfort to some of the injured. By this time the supporters

had started to leave the ground and a vast number were hurling threats

and abuse at us, calling us 'murdering bastards' and saying

that we'11"pay for this! I again joined the cordon around the mortuary

and remained there until PC 3087 Keenan came to me and told me to

rejoin my Serial and then go around to the North Stand where

at     6   pm we were stood down.
