           Sheffield Archives Ref: fa L | ^ | ! f b 62J




                                                          21 April 1989




Dear Sir


88s HILLSBOROUGH - 15 APRIL 1989


I an grateful to you for writing and the information that you included
in your letter will be of great interest to ay investigative team.
It may b® that tie shall be in touch with you again to take up the points
that you have made.
Thank you very such for writing*

Yours faithfully




Chief Constable
xscir
NORTH S T A N D
.    s s c
         O)
     CO 3                co
     to y-v
     W  ^
     ££           a5
■-■■■E-'iS' -Xiifip.
                                H U1
     Is
     2 13 E E
    a   >,;e ? s
    .<g c r*-'■.□>
    *o o       8
;■£
    O x»          :v v 1 S ':
                       .'o
    iE
    “  '5
       -t-*   :
'■‘k r ' O i ^
        NCI

"V . 32 '     i
\ . 40
-   U         -




        14. oo;
Sheffield Wednesday F.C. pic
   Hillsborough Sheffield         NORTH STAND
                               MEM B ERSHIP AREA




                               IF ° 0UWMlM'Mn
                                       1-130
                                  • ?5PTg% l ‘5 55-


                                        ill



                                      ■pepunjsj Aeuouu jou peSueipxa
                                   iw pij. on uoiieioossv neqiooj am
                                    p sms) - aAg -0 suooe|n6ey 'seiny
                                       eq; a i pefqns psrwsi j j o NDIN
                                  aacwaa •sniiai siNomsod uno*
                                  dn 3w i o i aaisanoa aav hoa
    »




G J Dear Esq QPM DL LOB
Chief Constable
West Midlands Police
PO Box 52
Lloyd House
Colmore Circus Queensway
BIRMINGHAM




Dear Chief Constable Dear

HILLSBOROUGH POLICE ENQUIRY


I am writing to put on record for your own internal enquiry several
important factors which I am sure will not be overlooked by yourselves and
I hope that comment from outside the force will not be dismissed.
              «



I attended the match on Saturday, 15 April 1989, and whilst I am
emotionally involved I have endeavoured to be as objective as possible.   I
shall not comment on the ticket allocation as I am sure the Yorkshire
Police will properly justify the decisions to the enquiry.       However, I
feel bound to report the following.


Something very obviously went wrong outside the ground in the Leppings Lane
area well before the start of the game on Saturday afternoon.    Last yaar,
the same teams played at the same venue with the same ticket allocations.
When myself and my friends arrived at the ground then, at about 2.40 pat for
-gafces-A to the North Stand, the area was quiet .and claar
ground without difficulty. Last year, as with this, I had net up with
friends near Glossop and travelled towards Sheffield cm the A57, resulting
in the need to park near the Nottingham section of the ground.


Last year we were prevented from using the side residential streets from
Penistone Road to reach Leppings Lane for crowd control reasons.       This
year, arriving at a similar time, we were allowed to do so, but were told
by Police we might as well not bother because of the crush of people there.


Last year, despite the entrance area being cleared, we were checked for
tickets well before reaching the turnstiles. This time, despite passing
through two Police barriers at each end of the side street, there was no
check on tickets.
                                                                     Page 2


G J Dear Esq QPM DL LOB
Chief Constable
West Midlands Police                                         17 April 1989



The number of people in the Leppings Lane area at 2.40 pm was quite
unbelievable.   However, there was very little policing.    For the several
turnstiles to Gate A for the North Stand seating there were two mounted
police and perhaps only as many as four or five other officers. The crush
of people was quite terrifying.    Further over to the right, at Gate B for
the terraces the situation was worse.


I decided to stand aside from the crush. The police were unable to achieve
any order by way of a queue. I stood to the left of the turnstiles, near
the large blue concertina exit gates for the North Stand.     At 2.50 pm I
was convinced that the start of the game would be delayed with so many
thousands still outside the ground.    I am sure there will have been some
without tickets, but the crushing was to get to the turnstiles, not to
force an entry - one can only assume that the majority had tickets.   Much
of the speculation of Sunday and this morning has been that the gates were
opened by the police to relieve a problem of ticketless fans outside the
ground. I do not believe this to be so.


Explanations of the cause of the crushing on the terraces have centred on
the exit gates besides turnstiles B being opened by the police.      Please
note that the exit gates to the North Stand beside turnstiles A were also
fully opened at approximately 2.50 pm. I entered through this gate.       I
enclose my complete £14 Stand ticket as evidence.      I had travelled with
six friends, all of us in the North Stand.       Five of them have complete
tickets, only one passed through the turnstiles.


When the gate was opened we were encouraged in by the police.    I was
horrified at the numbers.  There must have been at least twenty police
inside.


From the distance in the Stands it is not possible to determine the rights
and wrongs of the police action in relieving the crush on the terraces.
However three points stand out :

i    When the first fans climbed over the wire fence, some obviously
     injured and in pain, the first reaction of some officers was to get
     the individuals off the playing area and back onto the terraces at the
     sides. Some were obviously gesticulating that they had had enough and
     were not prepared to do so. The matter of the treatment of football
     fans is another debate, but there is an obvious natural suspicion by
     police that there must be an ulterior motive when a football fan acts
     in a manner which is in any way out of the ordinary.
                                                                      Page 3
G J Dear Esq QPM DL LOB
Chief Constable
West Midlands Police                                           17 April 1989



ii    When the extent of the tragedy was apparent, there were many policemen
      available to help.     Many stood around watching.     This is not a
      criticism of them. I am sure if they believed they could help or knew
      what they should be doing they would have been active. The direction
      and leadership of this skilled and competent resource available is
      questionable.

iii   no public announcements were made.    It had been obvious for some time
      that there were fatalities with fans carrying the dead away on
      advertising hoarding boards to the other end of the ground, with their
      heads covered.    When the goal netting was pulled down, with police
      assistance, to allow better access to the worst area, it incited
      taunts of hooliganism from the Nottingham Fans - who did not know any
      better.    You can imagine the reaction this caused from the uninjured
      Liverpool fans who had escaped onto the pitch.     A surge of fans down
      to the Nottingham end followed which could have developed into a
      totally different unfortunate incident. As a consequence many hundred
      police were unnecessarily lined up as a human barrier across the width
      of the pitch to prevent any further encroachment by the Liverpool
      fans.    Surely whilst young people were still dying on the terraces
      this was a total waste of an essential resource.


Liverpool Football Club has been a part of my life since my very young
childhood. I shall not be walking away from it now.     I have a four year
old Liverpool-mad son who has yet to see the team play live.   Please give
me the confidence in your findings that I might be able to take him along
to fully realise the joy of the game before he reaches the age of manhood
and can look after himself.


I do not question the decision to open the exit gates to relieve the awful
crushing and problems outside the ground.  My concerns are simple s

*     why were there not ticket checks in advance of reaching the turnstile
      area?

*     why was there so little policing in this area when there were so many
      police on the other side of the gates?

*     was proper consideration given to delaying the start of the game as a
      solution to ease the crushing of people desperate to gain entry before
      3.00 pm?

*     as the situation developed and the horror of the tragedy emerged, what
      happened to police discipline and leadership?     Many were obviously
      desperate to help and I am sure will require the aid of your own
      counselling services, but so many appeared to be lost.

*     why were public announcements not made thereby easing the situation of
      those not caught up in the incident and thereby avoiding the waste of
      the great many police in the human barrier across the pitch?
                                                                Page 4




G J Dear Esq QPM DL LOB
Chief Constable
West Midlands Police                                     17 April 1989




Your staff will have a difficult enough task in your enquiry. I do not
expect a formal reply to this letter, but I would appreciate an
acknowledgement of its receipt.  I trust you will do so.




Yours sincerely




COPY :   Mr P Robinson
         Chief Executive
         Liverpool Football Club
         Anfield Road
         Anfield
         LIVERPOOL
