                                                                                       M I R . 15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and time raised   h A i i h m ________                 Number
                                                                              L~lM >/N^.rPi

 itle
Title   ijAJl&J    k?     31   ^fcAh       [o Im A         A
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No _1
                                                                                                                         Receiver


                                                                                                                     1^+1Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                        1044
                                                                                                                     Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions                                                                           AJQSL—

                                                                                                                         Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised                                                                                              9 < c 3 o .

Examined - further action to be taken
                                                                                                    | |

                                                                                                                         Indexer
Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                              Notts.

                                            16th April 1989


Dear Sir,

LIVERPOOL   v FOREST

PLEASE, PLEASE I HOPE YOU WILL TAKE A SERIOUS   NOTE OF MY EXPERIENCE AT
SATURDAY'S MATCH.

I am the mother of two young boys age 9 and 12.   I took them to the match
on my own .   Wanting to ensure the children's safety, I arrived in the
ground at 12.10 to find a good, safe spot.

We were in the Spion Kop to the right hand side facing the pitch.   There
were only a handful of people in the ground and we decided to stand where
a group of policemen were standing, thinking they were to stay in the area.
We stood above a walkway with a wire mesh in front and thought the boys
would have an ideal view of the match.

What happened then, to us, could have ended in a tragedy, maybe as serious
as the other end.

10 minutes before time, thousands of Forest fans started making their way
into the area of the ground where we were.  Then men and youths started
scrambling up the mesh in front of us, some clambering over.    Twice my
youngest son was heavily kicked in the head. Then men just clung to the
wire mest to get a view and would not get down. My youngest was suffocating
as the chap in front of him was about 3ft taller.   I screamed at them to get
down because he could not breath.  They would not move. We were packed in
like sardines and I tried my best to lift him for air but the idiots clinging
to the mesh were too tall and I could not lift him.

All along this mesh children were lined at the front. Another mother had
the same problem except she had her husband to help relief the pressure
off the children.

What I am saying, is that, had these idiots pulled the mesh away, we would
have fell about 7' into a concrete pit i.e. the walkway.    The result of
that happening would have caused a tragedy.

There were no police in this area at all from 10 minutes before the kick
off. We tried to attract some police in the distance for a long time to
remove these people, but could not. The nearest police wenecordening
off a small group of what appears to be Liverpool fans but we were trapped
and could not get any help.

Please hear what I say, children were suffering because no police could
see the danger these idiots were causing hanging on to the mesh.

I know you have enough on your plate at the moment, but you cannot appreciate
the problem unless you are made aware of it.

Yours faithfully,
                                                                                      FURNIVAL HOUSE
J MERVYN JONES MSc
                                                                                      Furnival Gate
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE
                                                                                      Sheffield S1 4QN
  HILLSBOROUGH INQ UIRY TE A M
                                                                                      Telephone: 074 2 727599

WEST M IDLANDS POLICE HQ                                                              SM ITH D O W N LANE POLICE STATION
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                                                Liverpool L7 3PR
                                                                                      Telephone: 051 -7 09 7190/7231
Colmore Circus Queensway
Birmingham B4 6NQ
Telephone: 021 -2 36 5000, extn. 2025                                                 Your Ref:

 NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
                                                                                      Our Ref: JMJ/DMD
 Fowler Street
 Birmingham B7 5DA
                                                                                      Date:       6 J u ly 1989
 Telephone: 021-359 3332




Dear

I have received your letter dated 16 April 1989 from South Yorkshire Police
concerning the tragic events at Hillsborough on Saturday 15 April 1989.

The contents of your letter have been of great interest to my investigation
team.

If you have any further information please do not hesitate to contact my
investigation team at Nechells Green Police Station. Alternatively you may
write to the Secretary of the Inquiry as below;-

   Mr R M Whalley
   Secretary to the Inquiry
   50 Queens A nne’s Gate
   London SW1H 9AT

Yours sincerely




 J M Jones                                                                                                        *   V    v
 Assistant Chief Constable




                                         Nechells Green Police Station
        PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE A T ................................................ ............
