                          I    bI
          ty




    OU-
•              .............
STATEMENT OF:        Christopher Robert Hiles.      P.O. 253.
                     Ecciesfield Police Station     570200 x 209.


I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police,currently stationed at
Ecciesfield Police Station,
                                    *




At 10.00am on Saturday 15th April 1989 I paraded for duty at Ecclesfield Police Station
in connection v/ith an F .A.Cup Semi Final football Match being played at the
Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground,Hillsborough,Sheffield,

The competing teams were Nottingham Forest and Liverpool,

My duties this day v/ere to process Liverpool supporters arrested in connection
with the above stated football match.The process duties included verifying the arrested
person's name,address and date of^birth and where appropiate taking his photograph,
his fingerprints and recording that persons antecedent history.

During the early part of the afternoon,I assisted Pc 178*+ Donohue to Fingerprint,
photograph-and complete the antecedent history of the following persons;

1   .
        Arrested for Obstruct Footpath.

2   .
        Arrested for suspicion of theft of pedal cycle.

3.

        Arrested for Possess Unlawful Drug - Cannabis.



        Arrested for Possess Unlawful Drug - Cannabis.

5   >




        Arrested for Obstruct Pc.


All the above persons arrived at Ecclesfield Police station at 2.30pm that afternoon
and were all processed by myself and Pc 178*+ Donohue by 4.00pm that same afternoon.

By this time I was fully aware of the Major incident at Sheffield Wednesday
football ground and from enquiries made we were told to remain at Ecclesfield Police
Station on standby,.

At 7*00pm that same evening I was instructed to go to Firth Park Section Station,
which is my usual place of duty and to stand by there.
This I did and carried out other clerical duties whilst standing by.

At 10.30pm that same evening I reattended at Ecclesfield Police station where I was
instructed to work a foot patrol duty in Ecclesfield Square to cover the turning
out of public houses that night and to prevent any public order situations arris ing.

I carried out these duties as requested until midnight and from that time until
2.00am on the morning of Sunday 16th April 1989 I worked on a Transit van public
order patrol within F2 Division. Nothing untoward happened on that patrol and I
finished my duty at 2.00am that morning at Ecclesfield Police Station,
