                                                                                                         (Jd\{~~y v/
                                                       f '
          *'«
         Mkipument Form                  Date and time raised   5   • <q - q                    Number



Title.          (*%\P>T0^U5r\nJ^           &<~c;in^       ^ P^ . Cj.x\p.         —^yfoaJL
(Include source and eny document number if relevant)        Ab H

Receivers instructions urgent action Yes/No
                                                                                                              Receiver



Document registered/indexed as indicated                                                                       Indexer

No(s) of actions raised

Statement readers instructions                                                                                Statement
                                                                                                              Reader


Indexed as indicated                                                                                           Indexer

No(s) of actions raised

 Examined - further action to be taken                                                                      0/M           SIO




                                                                                                                  lexer
Further action no(s)

When satisfied ell actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Mastar Number Form
                     ;\-ir i -—        J                 " *"*


           SOUTH      YORKSHIRE              POLICE


                             'F' DIVISION



OPERATIONAL ORDER 'F* 2/88                                28th March 1988



        F A COP SEMI FINAL - LIVERPOOL V NOTTINGHAM FOREST
                    SATURDAY 9TO APRIL 1988



DISTRIBUTION


Chief Constable
Assistant Chief Constable (Operations)

Chief Superintendent Operations and Traffic

Chief Superintendent, 'F' Division

Deputy Divisional Conrrander, 'F' Division

Detective Superintendent, 'F' CID

Superintendent, 'FI' Sub Division

Superintendent, 'F2' Sub Division

Superintendent, *E2’ Sub Division

'FI"Sub Division, Control Room

'F21 Sub Division, Control Room

Sub Sector Chief Inspectors

Ground Control
'F' Administration
Chief Superintendent, 'A', 'B', 'C', 'D', 'E*, and CID
Senior Officers duties

Inspectors duties

Sector 1 (Ground) duties

Sector 2 (Liverpool) duties

Sector 3 (Nottingham Forest) duties

Ticket colour coding

CID duties

Dog Section

Mounted Section
Administration etc

Traffic Control

Trains
Coaches - Liverpool and Nottingham Forest

Vans - Liverpool
Vans - Nottingham Forest
Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol) Act 1985

Cones
Route signing
Special Constabulary

Ground Regulations

Maps
Schedule of manpower
                            SOOTH YORKSHIRE FCLICE


                                 *F* DIVISION


OPERATION ORDER *F« 2/88                                   DATE; 28 MftRCH 1988

                             F A COP - SEMI FINAL
                           HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD


                       LIVERPOOL v NOTTINGHAM FOREST
                            SAHJRDAY 9 APRIL 1988

1.     INFORMATION

1.1    The F. A. Cup Semi Final tie between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest
        Football Clubs will take place at the Sheffield Wednesday Football
        Stadium, Hillsborough, Sheffield on Saturday 9th April 1938, kick-off
        at 3.00pm. The gates allowing access to the ground will open at
        12 noon and admission will be granted to ticket holders only.
1.2    In an effort to minimise traffic and spectator congestion and to
        maximise segregation, the stadium has been divided in accordance
        with Appendix 'T'.
1.3    Liverpool supporters have been allocated tickets for the >Sest Stand
        and Terraces and the North Stand and access will be via tbe turnstiles
        in Leppings Lane.

1.4    Nottingham Forest supporters have been allocated tickets for the
        Spion Kop and the South Stand and access will be via the turnstiles
        in Penistone Road North and at the rear of the South Stand.

1.5    The tickets have been colour coded and details are shown it Appendix 'E'.

1.6    A sterile area has been created between the turnstiles at the rear of
        the South Stand and those in Leppings Lane.

1.7    To further assist in the segregation of opposing supporters within the
        ground, tickets have been allocated to 'neutral' supporters (i.e. FootbaLL
        Association and Sheffield Wednesday Football Club) in the North Stand
        (Penistone Road end) and the South Stand (Leppings Lane end).

1.8    Tte routing of vehicles and spectators has generally been designed to
        ensure that the approach of respective supporters will present them
        at the end of the stadium appropriate to their particular ticket.

1.9    Extra time will be played in the event of a draw at full time.

1.10   If, following extra time, the match remains drawn, then the replay will
        take place at Aston Villa Football Stadium.

2.     INTENTION

2. 1   It is the intention of the Police to allow this match to take place and
       to ensure public order and safety both inside and outside the football
ground, to segregate and control opposing fans and prevent unnecessary
obstruction of the highway and damage to property. This will be
attained and displayed with a high standard of smartness and professionalism.

METHOD
Chief Superintendent Ntole will be in overall command of the event,
assisted by Chief Inspector Oughton.

The operation will be in three phases, as follows

Phase 1 - Before the match (1000 - 1500hrs)

p|w» 7 - During the match (1500 - 1630Hrs) **

Phase 3 - After the match (1630Hrs until stand down) **

** Subject to 30 minutes "extra tijne".
The operation will be divided into three sectors, each of -which will be
designated to a Senior Officer who will have responsibility for that
Sector. The Sector areas are shown on the map at Appendix 'T' and the
Senior Officers are:-
SBCTOR                                        OFFICER

Sector 1     (Sheffield Wednesday             Superintendent Marshall
              Football Stadium)
Sector 2     (Liverpool Supporters)           Superintendent Greenwood

Sector 3     (Nottingham Forest Supporters)   Superintendent Chapman

Each sector will be further divicted into Sub Sectors with a Chief Inspector
in charge, as shewn at Appendices A(i) and A(ii).
Separate Operation Orders have been prepared by "D" and Traffic Divisions
in respect of Policing arrangements for Sheffield City Centre and the
Ml motorway.
PEE MATCH BRIEFING
Tte event is being policed by Officers, some of whan have never visited
Sheffield Wednesday Football Stadiun previously and who, therefore, will
be unfamiliar with the ground and locality.
In an effort to alleviate this problem, a pre match briefing will take
place at 10.00am on Friday 8th April 1988 at Sheffield Wednesday Football
Ground, entry via the "Gynrasiun Gate" in Penistone Road North. All
supervisory officers of the rank of Inspector and above should attend.

REPORTING FOR DUTY
All Officers shown in the attached Appendices will, unless otherwise
stated, attend the gymnasiun at Sheffield Wednesday Football Stadiun at
9.45am for briefing at 10.00am prompt on Saturday 9th April 1988.
Entry to the stadiun will be via the "Gymnasiun Gate" in Penistone Road
North.
                                                                                     (3)




3.4.2   On arrival, each Inspector will report to the Administration Desk situate
        inside the entrance to the gymnasiun and will report his serials present.

3.4.3   Police Officers attending in their own vehicles must find their own parking
        facilities outside the football ground.

3.4.4   The parking facilities at Niagara Sports Ground and Claywheels Lane,
        Sheffield will not be used.

3.5     BRIEFING - MKPCH DAY

3.5.1   After reporting for duty at the gymnasiun, all officers will be briefed
        as to the general requirements of the day and will commence duties in
        accordance with the instructions of their individual Inspector.

3.5.2   Inspectors will ensure that officers under their command disperse to tteir
        respective places of duty with a minimun of delay.

3.5.3   Packed meals will be provided and will be taken at the appropriate time
         and place, dependant upon the exigencies of duty.

3.5.4   Sergeants will brief members of their respective serials as totheir
         Individual duties as outlined in Appendices B, C and D.

3.6     GROUND SECURITY

3.6.1   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club will be responsible for the overnight
         (8th/9th April 1988) security arrangements at the ground.

3.6.2   LTmediately following briefing, two 'explosives' dogs will search the
        stadium assisted by the serials scheduled for duty Inside the ground.

3.7     CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION CEPAR’Peff

3.7.1   Members of this department will be on duty at the ground. A rained CID
        post will be situated in the gymnasium at the ground and at Hanmerton Road
        Police Station and will deal with all conplaints of crime and arrests for
        criminal offences made in connection with this event which do not require
        immediate attention. Any such complaints will be directed to whichever
        of the above locations is most convenient.

3.7.2   In addition, teams of Officers will operate from Parkside Section Station,
        Wads ley Bridge Section Station (Halifax Road) and the Police Control
        Caravan (Hillfoot Bridge/Neepsend Lane).

3.7.3   Detective Superintendent McKay will have an overall responsibility for
        Crime and the CID Operation as a whole and duties of personnel are
        shown at Appendix 'F'.

3.8     DOG SECTION

3.8.1   Members of the Dog Section will mainly be used as a deterrent before and
        after the match on the routes to and from the stadiun, at the coach parks,
        transit van parks, railway station, private vehicles parking areas and
        escorting supporters to and from the stadiun.

3.8.2   They will not normally be used in public order situations but the Sector
        Conrnander has the overriding discretion to use dogs in such circunstances
        where he feels a serious public order situation may occur.
3.8.3     Duties of the Dog Section personnel are set out at Appendix 'G'.

3.9       M3UOTED SECTION

3.9.1     Members of the Mounted Section will be enployed outside the ground to
          maintain order, segregate supporters and escort them from and to their
          transport.

3.9.2     Duties of Mounted section personnel are set out at Appendix 'H'.

3.10      CONTROL ROOM

3.10.1    A Control Room will be established at Sheffield Wednesday Football
          Stadium in the Police Control Box situate between the South and West
          Stands.

3 .10.2   Superintendent Murray will be in overall control with the assistance
          of Officers shown at Appendix 11'.

3.10.3 The Control Room will oversee the entire operation and will operate on
       both UHF and VHF channels.

3.11      TRAFFIC CONTROL

3.11.1 Traffic points will be worked both before and after the match by the
       personnel shown at Appendix 'J'. Fluorescent sleeves will be worn.

3.11.2    It will be necessary to switch certain traffic lights off in order that
          the flow of traffic can be maintained.   These lights are identified at
          Appendix 'J' together with the officer responsible for ensuring that
          they are turned 'off' at the commencement of the operation and 'on' at
          its conclusion: Keys will be supplied to the relevant officers for this
          purpose.

3.12      TRAVEL AND POLICING ARRANGEMENTS

3.12.1 The routes to the ground and designated parking areas for coactes,
       transit vans and private vehicles are shewn at Appendix 'T'.

3.12.2 ROHE SIGNING
          Signing of the routes to the ground has been arranged in conjunction with
          Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. In the event of congestion contin­
          gencies exist for detours to be inplemented by members of the Road Traffic
          Motor Cycle Wing.

3.12.3 To assist in identifying traffic problems, a fixed wing aeroplane will be
       taken into use from 1300 to ISOOhrs and from 1630hrs to the close of tha
       operation.

3.12.4    BY TRAIN - LIVERPOOL

          Broadly speaking, Liverpool supporters will travel on 'special' trains
          and alight at Wadsley Bridge Railway Station where they will walk the
          half mile to the ground under Police supervision.   Service trains will
          also be operating to Midland Railway Station and supporters using this
          service will travel by 'special' South Yorkshire Transport buses to
          the Leppings Lane end of the ground where they will alight.
3.12.5 Details of train arrival/departure times and duties relating thereto are
       shown at Appendix 'K'.

3.12.6 BY TRAIN - NOTTINGHAM FOREST

         Nottingham Forest supporters who travel by train will alight at Midland
         Railway Station In the centre of Sheffield and travel the three mile
         journey to the ground by 'special1 South Yorkshire Transport buses and
         will alight an the Penistone Road North side of the stadiun.

3.12.7 Details of train arrival/departure times and duties relating thereto are
       shown at Appendix 'K* .

3.12.8   BY COACH - LIVERPOOL

         Liverpool supporters who travel by coach will be encouraged to use the
         M62/M1 motorways, leaving the latter at Tankersley (Junction 36).
         Duties relating thereto are shown at Appendix 'L'.

3.12.9   Coaches found approachingthe venue by other routes should be directed
         to the designated parking areas and not the stadium itself.

3.12.10 On arrival at the designated parking areas, supporters will alight and
        walk to the ground under police supervision.

3.12.11 BY COACH - NOTTINGHAM FOREST

         Nottingham Forest supporters who travel by coach will be encouraged to use
         the Ml motorway leaving at Tinsley (Junction 34). CXjties relating thereto
         are shown in tte 'D' Division Operation Order.

3.12.12 Coaches found approachingthe venue by other routes should be directed
        to the (designated parking areas and not the stadiun itself.

3.12.13 On arrival at the designated parking areas, supporters will alight and
        walk to the ground under police supervision.

3.12.14 BY TRANSIT VAN - LIVERPOOL
         Liverpool supporters who travel by transit van or similar vehicles will
         be encouraged to use the M62/M1 motorways, leaving the latter at
         Tankersley (Junction 36). However, it is not feasible to attempt to
         channel such vehicles through one "checkpoint* and it will oe the duty,
         therefore, of all Serials outside the ground to check these vehicles
         and their occupants as outlined at Appendix 'M'.

3.12.15 All transit vans will be directed to the designated parking area wtvere
        supporters will alight and walk to the ground under police supervision.

3.12.1.6 BY TRANSIT VAN - NQflTINfflAM FOREST

         Nottingham Forest supporters who travel by transit van or similar vehicle
         will be encouraged to use the Ml motorway, leaving at Tinsley (Junction
         34). However, it is not feasible to channel all such vehicles through
         one "checkpoint" and it will be the duty, therefore, of all Serials
         outside tte ground to check these vehicles and their occupants as outlined
         at Appendix 'N'.
                                                                                          VO)




  3.12.17     All transit vans will be directed to the designated parking area where
              supporters will alight and walk to the ground under police supervision.

  3.12.18     SPORTING EVBfTS (CONTROL OF ALCOHOL) ACT 1985 - AS A*«CED

              A precis of the Act is shown at Appendix 'o' and the legislation will
              be strictly enforced in relation to coaches and transit vans or similar
              vehicles.

  3.12.19     PRIVATE VEHICLES - LIVERPOOL

              Liverpool supporters who travel by private vehicle will be encouraged to
              use the M62/M1 motorways leaving the latter at Tankersley (Junction 36).
              They will proceed to th? designated parking areas on the Parson Cross
              and Foxhill estates.

  3 .12.20    On arrival at tte designated parking areas, supporters will alight and
              walk to the ground under police supervision.

^ 3 .12. 21   It is envisaged that traffic will also approach the stadium via the
              Flouch (A616). There is a contingency plan should the volume of this
              traffic be such that it is impracticable to direct it to the designated
              parking areas referred to at papragraph 3.12.19.

   3.12.22    PRIVAJE VEHICLES - NOTTINGHAM FOREST

              Nottingham Forest supporters who travel by private vehicle will leave
              tte Ml motorway at Tinsley (Junction 34) and proceed to the designated
              parking area in the Neepsend area of the city.

   3.12.23    On arrival, supporters will alight and walk to the ground under Police
              supervision.

   3.12.24    CQK3HES AND TRANSIT VANS - RETURN JCXJRNEY
              Coaches and transit vans will not leave their designated parking areas
              until authorised to do so by Ground Control. The return journey for
              these vehicles wil be th? reverse of that on the incoming journey.

   3.12.25    CQPCHES AND TRANSIT VANS - GENERAL
              No coach or transit van will be allowed to load, unload or park in any
              area other than tte (designated parking areas, nor will they be allowed to use
              routes other than those (designated, unless diverted by Police Officers,
              following consultation with Ground Control.

   3.12.26    PARKING RESTRICTIONS
              Parking of   vehicles in the immediate vicinity of the ground and on main
              roads will   be strictly controlled by use of parking cones. These will
              be set out   during the early hours of the day in accordance with
              Appendices   P and Q.

   3.12.27    The emergency services have been informed of all parking restrictions/
              arrangements.
   3.12.28    It will be the responsibility of Police Sergeant 102 Fidler to ensure
              that these cones are in position before 0700hrs Saturday 9th April 1988.
3.12.29   No Officer will allow any vehicle to park in contravention of these
          restrictions without seeking the authority of Ground Control.

3.12.30   KPCVAL OF VEHICLES

          Where a vehicle is parked in such a position as to warrant removal, then
          this will be arranged by the Officer concerned through Ground control
          following consultation with his supervisory Inspector. Two Brirrec
          recovery vehicles will be available to remove vehicles.

3.12.31   Where a vehicle is parked in contravention of parking restrictions and
          does not merit removal, then the driver nay be dealt with In th? usual
          nanner.

3.12.32   CAR PARKING

          There will be limited privately operated car parks in the vicinity of
          the ground. No assistance will be given in the operation of these
          ccnmercially run car parks. It is intended that private vehicles will,
          as far as praticable, use the designated parking areas shown at
          Appendix 'T'. This operation will be carried out by me.Tfcers of the
          Special Constabulary whos<= duties are shown at Appendix 'R'. Parking
          will be permitted on all roads where restrictions do not apply.

3.12.33   90Um YORKSHIRE TRANSPORT BUSES

          South Yorkshire Transport will operate 'special buses' fran Midland
          Railway Station to the ground. At the end of the match, they will t>e
          parked in Penistone Road North (Adjacent to Wadsley Bridge and facing
          towards City centre)and Penistone Road North (Directly outside the
          ground and facing towards City Centre) for transportation of Liverpool
          and Nottingham Forest supporters respectively. Curing th? match they
          will be parked in Penistone Road and Herries Road Bus Depot and th?
          former will be the only vehicles allowed so to park.

3.12.34   ■ft*? routing of South Yorkshire Transport buses both to and from th?
          stadium is shown at Appendix 'K'.

3.12.35   SHEFFIELD WEENESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB - OFFICIAL CAR PARK

          Oily drivers possessing official passes will be allowed access to this
          part of the ground which is situate at the rear of the South Stand.
          Certain coaches containing F A and Club officials, etc. will be allowed
          to enter the car park and drop passengers before driving to a parking
          area away from the ground (Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Training
          Ground, Middlewood Road).

3.12.36   Under no circunstanoes will any other vehicle, other than Police vehicles,
          be allowed access.
3.12.37   The gates giving access to the South Stand Car Park will close at 2.00pm
          and will not re-open until half an hour after kick-off. This fact has
          been publicised to persons having legitimate access.

3.12.38   Club Stewards will be enployed at the access points in Leppings Lane and
          Penistone Road North to control access and egress.

3.12.39   Vehicles owned by the television corrpany providing coverage of the game
          will be permitted to park in the South Stand Car Park at both the Leppings
          Lane and Penistone Road North ends.
3.12.40   PARKPC - POLICE VHflCUS
          Police vehicles will park in the car park at the rear of the gymnasium,
          accessed via the "Gymnasiun Gate" adjacent to Gate 'O'. Oily official
          vehicles will be allowed access and movement into and out of the ground
          must be kept to an absolute minimum.

3.12.41   CBSTRUCTiaC - OTHER TOftW BY VEHICLES
          Street tracers, ticket ’touts' and any other person causing obstruction
          will t» roved on. If they persist then they will be arrested and
          brought to the Police Roam where they will be dealt with as outlined in
          paragraphs 4.1.1 to 4.1.7 (Headed 'Prisoner Process').

3.13      RAILWAY PHOFEKTif
          Trains will carry Liverpool supporters to Wads ley Bridge Station. These
          trains and th; Station will be manned by BTC Police who have the
          responsibility for policing this property. Officers shculd only enter
          th; station for th; purposes of police duty at the invitation of,
          and acccrrpanied by, a merrber of the BTC Police. This alsoapplies to
          all other railway property, including sidings, cuttings, lines, etc.

3.14      SHEFFTTT-n WEEfCSDftY FOOTBALL C U B GRCXEP REGULATIONS

3.14.1    A precis of th? Ground Regulations is shown at Appendix *S'.

3.14.2    Where an officer seizes property by virtue of the Ground Regulations
           he will:-
          A)   Supply th; person from whom the article has been seized
               with his 'collar nuntoer'.
          B)   Inform that person that the item may be recovered on
               ccnpletion of th? game from the Police Property Post at the
               rear of th» Spion Kop, in thp case of Nottingham For-st
               supporters, and the Police Property Post at the rear of the
               West Stand, in the case of Liverpool supporters.

          C) Affix a latwl to th; item bearing the owners name and the
             Officer's "collar nuntoer".
          D) Ensure that th; item is taken to the appropriate Police
             Property Post and entered in the Property Register.

3.14.3    It is a condition of entry to the ground that persons agree to be searched.
          Any person refusing to be searched will be in breach of those conditions
          and will be refused entry.

3.15      LICENSED FftEXLSES
          The great majority of licensees in the immediate vicinity of the ground
          will either close their premises completely at lunchtime and early
          evening or operate a 'selective door' whereby football supporters are
          not admitted.
3.15.2    It will be th? responsibility of all Serials outside the ground to
           identify those premises which remain open and to monitor the behaviour
           of persons resorting thereto.
                                                                                   (9)



3.15.3   Alcohol is not available to members of the public inside the ground.

3.15.4   A precis of the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol) Act 1985 is shown
          at Appendix 'O'. This legislation will be strictly enforced both in
          relation to vehicles and in relation to persons entering or attenpting
          to enter the ground.

3.16     B C X a C Y AND EVACUATION PROCEDURES

3.16.1   In the event of an emergency situation arising (i.e. fire or bomb call)
          which rr&y require evacuations of all or part of the Stadium, the
          procedure outlined will be followed:-

3.16.2   Ground Control will pass the following message over the P A system and
          this will indicate to Police personnel that a provisional emergency
          and evacuation procedure is in force

                      "THE ATTENDANCE OF MR MEADOWS IS URGENTLY
                      REQUIRED AT POLICE CONTROL"

3.16.3   Should an emergency evacuation be necessary then an oral message will
         be passed to Police personnel via Inspectors and Serial Sergeants,
         giving specific instructions as to the action to be taken.

3.16.4   In the event of an "all clear" situation, the following message will be
         passed to Police personnel that the necessity for emergency evacuation
          has ceased:-
                      "MR MEADOWS IS NO LONGER REQUIRED AT POLICE CONTROL"

3.16.5   Evacuation procedures for various parts ofthestadiun are   shown on the
          appropriate serial order.

4        AEMDGSTRATION

4.1      PRISONER PROCESS
4.1.1    All persons arrested ordetained inside theground will be taken, in the
          first instance, to the Police Roam at the rear of the North Stand. Those
          arrested outside the ground will either be taken to the Police Rocm or
          Harrmerton Road Police Station (in the case of Nottingham Forest simporters)
          and Ecclesfield Police Station (in the case of Liverpool supporters)
          whichever is most convenient.
4.1.2    Where a prisoner is taken to the Police Roan, details will be obtained,
         the prisoner searched, the arresting officer and prisoner photographed
         together and form PACE 19 ccrrpleted. The arresting officer will then
         corrplete the necessary paperwork which he will hand to the Process Super­
         visor in the gymnasium, which is adjacent to the Police Room. Once the
         paperwork has been checked, it will be handed to the offior in charge of
         the Police Rocm and will acconpany the prisoner and his property to the
         appropriate station for processing/charging.

4.1.3    Where a person is arrested for a criminal offence, the prisoner will
         firstly be taken by the arresting officer to the CID point in the gynnasiun
         or at the station, where the office in charge will decide on the further
         course of action.
                                                                                  (10)


4.1.4    The duties of the "Prisoner Process" teams engaged on this operation are
         shown at Appendix "I".

4.1.5    Two vehicles with detention facilities will be parked adjacent to the
         Police Room for the retention of prisoners and a further detention vehicle
         wi n be parked at each of the two Police Stations for identical purposes.

4.1.6    After initial process, persons detained will be transferred to Hanmerton
         Road Police Station (in relation to Nottingham Forest supporters) and
         Ecclesfield Police Station (in relation to Liverpool supporters).

4.1.7    Inspectors must ensure that officers on serials under their command do not
         go off duty without firstly submitting the requisite paperwork.

4.1.8    EJECTIONS
         Where circumstances are such that a person is to be ejected frcm the
         Stadium for breach of the Ground Regulations, then he will not be photo­
         graphed, etc but his details will be recorded on an 'ejection slip* for
         entry in the Police Rocm Register, prior to ejection.

4.1.9    COURT APPEARANCE
         Where an arrested person is charged and bailed to Court then the Court
         dates allocated to this operation will be strictly adhered to. On all
         occasions, therefore, the staff at the Charge Office, Bridge Street,
         Sheffield, will be consulted as to availability of dates before a
         prisoner is released on bail following charge.

4.1.10   Provisional arrangements have been made should the number of persons
         arrested and kept in custody or the seriousness of offences necessitate
         a Special Court being convened on Monday 11th April 1988. In the event
         of such criteria being met then Chief Superintendent Mole will be informed
         in order that this contingency can be put into operation.

4.2      MISSING/POUND CHILDREN

4.2.1    Reports of missing children will be passed via telephone to Ground Control
         incrder that the necessary action can be taken.

4.2.2    Any child who has become separated frcm his parent/guardian will be taken
         to the gymnasium at the rear of the North Stand. Ground Control will then
         be informed via telephone in order that the required action can be taken.

4.3       FOUND PROPERTY

4.3.1    All found property will be taken to the Administration Desk in the gymnasium
         and the register completed.

4.4       UNIFORM

 4.4.1    All South Yorkshire Police Officers will wear full uniform, including
          helmet (with chin strap down) and gloves. Anoraks will be worn in
          inclement weather. Female Officers should wear trousers and not skirts.
                                                                                      (11)
  *
  4.5      TRANSPORT - P d J C E P B S O W C L

  4.5.1    There are no parking provisions for officers arriving in private vehicles.

  4.5.2    Officers arriving in police transport will alight at Gate 'O' in
           Penistone Road North. Drivers of police transits will report to the
           Administration Desk situate inside the entrance to the gymnasiun for
           instructions as to the utilisation of their police vehicle. Where such
           vehicles are used for purposes not involving the personnel carried
           therein, then, on completion of the game and dispersal of the crowd,
           the driver will return to the Administration Desk to collect the
           vehicle keys in readiness for the return journey.

  4.5.3    Polios vehicles which are not taken into use during this operation will
           be parked at tte Road Traffic Division premises at Clayv.heels Lane,
           following consultation with the office: in charge of those premises.

  4.6      REFRESHMENTS

*4.6.1     Packed lunctes will be provided and there will be distributed at
           rivaling locations prior to the allocated meal times.

  4.6.2    Refreshment will be taken as indicated on the individual Serial Order
           at the venues stated.

  4.7      MAPS

  4.7.1    Maps of the ground and surrounding area are included in this Order
           for information purposes. (See Appendix 'T').

  4.8      OPERATIONAL OREER - DISTOIBUTION

  4.8.1    This Operational Order will be distributed to Inspector Level and above
           only. A Serial Order will be distributed to all Sergeants involved in
           the operation.

  4.9      PRESS AND PUBLICITY

0 4.9.1    Publicity has been given to traffic routes and parking arrangements for
           the event by the Football Liaison Officer and Press Liaison Department.

  4.9.2    All contents concerning the event and replies to enquiries from the
           rredia will be handled by Chief Superintendent Mole or through the Press
           Liaison Office which is under the control of Superintendent Pratt.

  4.10     COMPLAINTS

  4.10.1   All corrplaints against the Police will be dealt with in accordance with
           Foroe Standing Order 5S. Conplainants who approach Police Officers
           engaged on this operation will be directed to one of the Officers shown
           at Appendix "I".

  4.11     ocmracmoNS

  4.11.1   All communications relevant to the event will be directed through
           Ground Control.
                                                                                     (12)



  4.11.2     The following UHF/VHF channels will be utilised in relation to this
             operation:-

            A) UHF personal radio channel 25 will be used by all supervisory
               officers, both inside and outside the ground.

             B) UHF personal radio channel 19 will be used by all CID personnel
                engaged on duties in the Parson Cross and Neepsend private
                parking areas.

            C) VHF radio channel 2 will be used by mobile patrols.

  4.11.3    "FI" Sub Division's operational functions will continue to be transmitted
             on UHF personal radio channel 35.

  4.11.4    Personal radios will be issued at the Administration Desk in the
             gymnasiun to all supervisory officers.

  4.11.5    Strict radio discipline will be maintained at all times. Messages must be
             kept as short as possible and, where this is not the case. Ground Control
             has the overriding option of cutting short any transmission irrespective
            of rank.

  4.11.6    Ground Control can also be contacted on internal extension 3277.

  4-12      AUDIO VISUAL AIDS UNIT

   4.12.1   Four members of this Unit will attend 'tfatch Day*briefing,Thereafter,
            they will be operating in the Wadsley Bridge Station, andcoach and
            transit van parking areas of both team supporters before and after the
            game. CXaring the match they will operate inside the stadiun.

  4.13      CVERTDC

  4.13.1    All overtime claims will be submitted to supervisory officers and will
            be clearly marked "SEMI FINAL - LIVERPOOL v NOTTINGHAM FCrEST".

  4.14      REPORTING OFF DOTY
%
w 4.14.1    It will be the responsibility of individual Inspectors to report the
            whole of their Serials off duty, account for any member not present and
            ensure that all radios are returned. He will also submit the cte-briefing
            form previously supplied to him.    Serials 1-22 will report off duty
            at the Gymnasium Serials 23-66 will report off duty at Claywteels Lane.

  4.12.2    Authorisation will be sought via Ground Control before any serial is
            "stood down".




 Chief Siyerintendent
 •F* Division
                                                                    Appendix »A(ii)'

                                    INSPECTORS


                  SECTOR 1(A) - CHIEF INSPECTOR BRAYPORD
                                                                             Call sign
Sub Sector 1      (Serials 1-3)            Inspector Howland (F)              inH-i^ l

           2      (Serials 4-6)            Inspector Taylor (E)               India 2

           3      (Serials 7-8)            Inspector Vickers (E)              India 3

           4      (Serials9-10)            Inspector Wilson (E)               India 4




          SECTOR 1(BX - CHIEF INSPECTOR CREASER

Sub Sector 5      (Serials 11-12)         Inspector Gray (B)                 India 5
           6      (Serial 13)             Inspector Hooley (B)               India 6
          7       (Serials 14-15)         Inspector Walker (OPS)             India 7
          8      (Serials 16-19)          inspector Sykes (F)                India 8A
                                          Inspector Broanhead (C)            India 8B
                 (Serials 20-22)          Inspector Selwood (E)              India 9
                 (Reserves)
                                                                  *GPendix *A(ii)»




                                  INSPECTORS



                SECTOR 2(A) - CHIEF INSPECTOR WARING (LIVERPOOL)
                                                                          Call sign
Sub Sector 10   (Serials 23-35)         Inspector Cooke (C)               India 10

           11   (Serials 26-27)         Inspector Moore (C)               India 11

           12   (Serials 28-31)         Inspector Turner (C)              India 12A
                                        Inspector Townend (A)             India 12B

           13   (Serials 32-33)         Inspector Grace (C)               India 13

           14   (Serials 34-35)        Inspector Ingham (A)               India 14




                SECTOR 2(B) - CHIEF INSPECTOR BEAL (LIVERPOOL)

           15   (Serials 36-37)        Inspector Finch (A)                India 15

           16   (Serials 38-40)        Inspector Scholey (C)              India 16

           17   (Serials 41-42)        Inspector Robinson (Ops)           India 17

           18   (Serials 43-45)        Inspector Bullimore (C)            India 18




                M3BELE UNITS
      ■
           19   (Serial 46)            Inspector Bullas (OPS)             India 19

           20   (Serial 47)            Inspector Steel (A)                India 20

           21   (Serial 48-50)         Inspector P Smith (E)              India 21

           22   (Serials 51-53)        Inspector Purdy (Ops)              India 22
                                                                  Appendix tA(ii)t


                              INSPECTORS


                SECTOR 3(A) - CHIEF INSPECTOR PRICE (NOTTINgaH FOREST)



                                                                            Call sign
Sub Sector 23   (Serials 54-55)            Inspector Maek (HQ)              India 23

          24    (Serials 56-58)            Inspector Armitage (E)           India 24




                SECTOR 3(B) - CHIEF INSPECTOR SUWER (NOTTINa«M FOREST)

          25    (Serials 59-60)        Inspector McDowell (HQ)              India 25

          26    (Serials 61-62)        Inspector Haycox (HQ)                India 26



                MDBH£ UNITS


          27    (Serials 63-66)            Inspector Hudson (F)             India 27




                LIAISON INSPECTORS



                Sector 1                   Inspector Sewell (F)             India 28
                Sector 2                   Inspector Delaney (F)            India 29
                Sector 3                   Inspector Donnelly (HQ)          India 30
                         SUB SECTOR 1                                APPENDIX *B*

                                                            Inspector Howland
                         PERIMETER TO/OC

                         Phases 1 and 2 (Before and during match)

                         Eighteen Police Constables - perimeter track (equidistant
                         spread around ground). TTy? Sergeant will renain in tb?
                         vicinity of the players tunnel throughout this duty and tfr»
                         Officers on the track will follow his example by standing
                         and facing the crowd at the following times:-
                        Before kick off, half time and full time and also during any
                        stoppage of play or when there is any crowd unrest. This
                        will be indicated during the game and shortly before half and
                        full time by the sergeant leaving the players tunrv?l and
                        standing near the touch line.   Particular attention should
                        be paid to prevent any person climbing tfr? fence to gain
                        access to the ground, the gates must remain bolted at all
                        tiines except when in use. No-onp is to be allowed access to
                        the track from the terraces without consent of a Senior
                        Officer (except to receive medical attention)
                        Riase 3

                        As the ground clears, officers of this serial will remain ii
                        location until instructed otherwise.

                        Emergency Evacuation Procedure

                        In the event of such a situation arising(indicated at item
 MEAL - Staggered       3.16 in the Serial instruction). PC's at eitter end of tfr»
 before match           ground will take up positions at the fence gates. *n*»se
 in gym                 gates will only be opened if a specific message to evacuat*
                        is given on the public address system.


 Serial 2        FI     SCUHi STAND LOWER LEVEL
 PS                     Phase 1 (Before natch)
 PC
                        A) 2 PC's will be located behind turnstiles 19-22 to ensur®
IMF
£1                      persons entering these premises do not possess itens
PC                      prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc., weapons or
PC                      missiles) or alcohol.
PC
PC                      B) 2 PC's will be situated behind turnstiles 33-36 to
PC                      ensure items shown above are not brought into tb? ground.
PC
PC                     C) Remaining PC's will patrol rear of terraces to maintain
                       order.

                        Phase 2 (Coring match)

                       All Officers will be located at tte rear of these terraces
                       and maintain order as required.

                       Phase 3 (After match)

                        This serial will be prepared if instructed to take up a
                        position in front of these terraces on the perimeter track to
2AL                    prevent a pitch invasion or ensure the safety of the match
aggered Airing natch   officials if necessary.
 gym                                                          - -        ^
                           SOWH STAND UPPER LEVEL

    Serial 3          PI   Phase 1 (Before match)

     PS                    A) 2 PC's will be situated at the rear of turnstiles 23-28
                           to ensure persons entering these premises do not possess
 1) PC
                           items prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc., weapons,
 2) PC                     or missiles ) or alcohol.
 3) PC
 4) PC
                           B) TV*> PC's will be situated behind turnstiles 29-32
 5) PC                     to ensure items shown above are not brought into the
 6 ) PC                    ground.
 7) PC
 8 ) PC                    C) ReiTaining PC's will patrol the stand concourse to
 9) PC
10) PC                     ireintain order.
11) PC
                           Phase 2 (During match)

                           Officers will be located at the entrances to the stand to
                           nmntain order as required.

                           Phase 3 (After match)

                           Remain until stand clears of all supporters.
   MEAL:
   Staggered during        EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURES
   match
   in gym                  In the event of such a situation arising (Indicated at
                           3.16 in the serial instructions) PC's in the upper level
                           of the South Stand will take up positions at the internal
                           partition gates and ensure they are open. Those on duty
                           on the lower level will ensure that exit gates at fitter
                           end of the stand are open.

                           Further instructions will be as directed by control or
                           passed over the public address system.

                           Officers will be nominated for individual points at the
                           start of this duty.

  H
                            SUB SECTOR 2
                                                          Inspector Taylor
     Spr i^l 4              SOUTH STAND CAR PARK (Penistone Road end)

     PS                     Phase 1 (Before match)
 1 ) PC
 2 ) PC                     A) 2 PC's will be located at the players entrance to
 3) PC                      maintain order, ensure the safe entry of the teams and
 4) PC                      officials and prevent access by unauthorised persons
 5) PC                      in conjunction with the club’s staff.
 6 ) PC
 7) PC                      B) Supervise queues at turnstiles 29-36 and prevent
 8 ) PC                     items prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc., weapons
 9) PC                      or missiles) or alcoholbeing carried into the ground.
10) PC
                            C) 4 PC'S patrol in the area between the gates and the
                            players entrance (in pairs) to maintain order.

                           D) 2 PC's will assist club staff at the gat^s at Penistone
                           Road to prevent unauthorised access by vehicles. These gat<»s
                           will close for vehicle access from 2pm to half an hour after
                                                                             kick-off
                           Phase 2 (During match)

                           Retrain on patrol in car park as above and prevent entry
                           into this area by supporters without tickets. Coverwhole
                           of car park after half time when Serial 5 are mealing.
    MEAL                   Phase 3 (After match)
    After kick off
    in gym                 Remain in this area until crowd clears, prevent movement by
                           vehicles until all spectators on foot have left the area.



                           SOUTH STAND CAR PARK (Leppings Lane end)

    Serial 5               Phase 1 (Before match)
                       E
     PS                    A) 3 PC’s will supervise queues at turnstiles 23-28 to
 1 )-PC                    ensure persons entering these premises do not possess items
 2m e                      as above.
 3) PC
 4) PC                     B) 3 PC's supervise queues at turnstiles 19-22 to prevent
 5) PC                     items shown above being carried onto the ground.
 6 ) PC
 7) PC                     C) 4 PC’s to patrol in the vicinity of the television
 8 ) PC                    control vehicles to ensure their security.
 9) PC
10) PC                     Phase 2 (During match)

                           Retrain on patrol in the car park as above and prevent entry
                           into this area of supporters without tickets. Prior to
                           half time this serial has responsibility for the whole of
                           the car park whilst Serial 4 are mealing.

                           Phase 3 (After match)

                            This serial will be located in the area between the official
    MEAL:                  car park and the exit from the enclosure at the rear of the
    After half time.       West stand to prevent Liverpool supporters entering the
    in gym                 official car park and supporters who are leaving the South
                            Stand fran exiting other than via Penistone Road CRus will
                           ■be in conjunction with other serials and Mounted Dept.)
          ial 6           E   SOITTH STAND CAR PARK (Leppings Lane end)
     PS                       Phase 1 (Before natch)
 1) PC
 2) PC                        This serial will supervise the barriers to be erected at
 3) PC                        either end of the roadway between turnstiles A-G at Leppings
 4) PC                        Lane and the start of the South Stand Car Park.
 5) PC
 6 ) PC                       They will prevent access to this area by all Liverpool
 7) PC                        supporters and any other persons without legitimate reasons
 8 ) PC                       (i.e. with tickets) frcm entering.
 9) PC
10) PC                        Vehicles will be prevented from entering tte car park frtn
                              Leppings Lane.

                              Phase 2 (During natch)

                              4 PC's will remain in this area throughout the match to
                              supervise barriers and preventacess.

                              Phase 3 (After match)

                              Ensure barriers remain in position and opposing fans do not ccr
   MEAL                       into contact.    Remain until area clears of all supporters.
   Meal after half time
   in gym                     P€R<»CY EVACUATION PROCEDURE

                              In the event of such a situation arising (Indicated at 3.16
                              of the serial instruct ions) Officers on duty in tl>? car park
                              will ensure that access gates at Leppings Lane and Penistone
                              Road are clear and unobstructed and no vehicles - except
                              emergency services - move.
                       SUB SBCTCR 3
                                                         INSPECTOR Vickers
                       SPION TOP TERRACES

     Serial 7          Phase 1 and 2 (Before and during natch)

     PS                PC's will be located at the entrances to tte Spion Kop
 1) PC                 terraces in pairs to maintain order and ensure that these
 2) PC                 entrances remain clear at all tin*?s.
 3) PC
 4) PC                 In the event of Liverpool Supporters gaining entry into
 5) PC                 this end of the ground they will be contained at tbs
 6 ) PC                extreme southern part of the terraces at the rear of Gate
 7) PC                 to await transference under escort to their own area.
 8 ) PC                Under NO circumstances will any supporters be transferred
 9) PC                 from these terraces to other parts of the ground via tfr?
10) PC                 perimeter track.

                       Phase 3 (After natch)
    MEAL
    After kick off    Remain in ground until these terraces ar=     clear of all
    in gym            supporters.



                      REAR OF SPION KDP TERRACES
    Serial 8          Phase 1 (Before natch)

     PS               A) 2 PC's will be located behind turnstiles 37/42 (Located
  1) PC               in official car park) to ensure persons entering ttese
 2) PC                premises do not possess items prohibited by the ground rules
 3) PC                (Banners, etc., weapons, missiles or aleehoi)
 4) PC
 5) PC                B) Re.-aining officers will be at the rear of turnstiles
 6 ) PC               situated on Penistone Road (43/76) to ens-.xe that itens
 7) PC                as shown abov*= are not brought into tfr» ground.
 8 ) PC
 9) PC                Phase 2 (EXirinq match)
10) PC
                      This serial will remain on patrol in the rear of th? Spion
                      Kop terraces to prevent unauthorised access and ensure
                      security of kiosks, etc.

                      Phase 3 (After natch)

                      Remain in ground until these terraces are clear of all
   MEAL               supporters.
   After half timp.
   in gym             E?CRGENnf EVACUATION PROCEDURES

                      In the event of such a situation   arising (Indicated at
                      3.16 in the serial instruction)    PC's on serial 8 will
                      ensure all exit gates are open.     Further instructions will
                      be as directed by control either   by radio or the public
                      address system.
                   SUB SECTOR 4
                                                         Inspector Wilson
                   F B g s ra e road tu r n s tile s

                   Phase 1 (Before natch)

                   This serial will be responsible for turnstiles 43-54. They
  PS               will ensure persons entering these premises do not possess
) PC               items prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc., weapons
) PC               or missiles) or alcohol.   They will also naintain orcter
) PC               and ensure orderly queues are formed.   This will be done in
) PC               conjunction with Mounted Officers who are on duty at this
) PC               location.
) PC
) PC               Phase 2 (During match)
) PC
) PC               mis serial will be located at Entrance *Z* to the Spion
) PC               Kop.

                   Phase 3 (After match)

                   At the ccrrmpncement of Phase 3 this serial willleave th?
  MEAL
                   ground and supervise loading of SYPTE buses in Penistone Road.
     er half trr
  f  gym




                   PENXSTCNE ROAD TORNSTIUE5

  Serial 10        Phase 1 (Before match)

                   This serial will be responsible for turnstiles 55-64.
                   They will ensure persons entering thes*1 pr^nises do not
                   possess items as shown above. They will also naintain
                   order and ensure orderly queues are formed. This will
/ PC               be done in conjunction with Mounted Officers who are on
                   duty in this location.

                   Phase 2 (During match)

                   This serial will be located at Entrance "Y" to the Spion
                   Kop.

                   Phase 3 (After match)

                   At the commencement of Phase 3, this serial will leave
 MEAL              the ground and supervise loading of SYPTE buses in
 After kick off,   Penistone Road.
 in gym
                       SUB SECTOR 5
                                                    Inspector Gray
                       NGR1H STEM© - UPPER LEVEL

  Serial 11        B   Phase 1 (Before natch)

   PS                  A) Five PC's and 1 Sergeant will be located in tbs area
1) PC                  at the rear of turnstiles 1-8 (lappings Lane end) to ensure
2) PC                  that the fans    entering are not in possession of items
3) PC                  prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc., weapons,
4) PC                  missiles or alcohol)
5) PC
6) PC                  B) Ten PC's and 1 Sergeant will patrol (in pairs) on tfr?
7) PC                  upper level concourse to maintain order.
3) PC
9) PC                  Rase 2 (During match)
3) PC
1) PC                  All Officers will be located on the upper concourse to
2) PC                  maintain order.
3) PC
I) PC                  Phase 3 (After match)
3) PC
                       A) At the ccnmpocement of Phase 3 (Ten minutes before end
                       of game) 1 S^rg^ant and 8 PC's will take up position at
                       the upp^r concourse exit gate (Top of rarp) to Penistone
                       Road to prevent supporters leaving and entering Penistone
                       Road.   All supporters must be directed to Leppings Lane
  MEAL                 exit.
  After kick off
  in gym               B) Remaining PC's patrol until stand is clear.
                        NDKIM STAND - LOHH* LEVH,

   Serial 12            Phase 1 (Before natch)
    PS                  A) 2 PC's will be located at the rear of G&te *0*
 1) PC                  (Penistone Road) to assist the stewards and prevent
2) PC                   unauthorised access.
3) PC
4) PC                   B) 2 PC's will be located at the gate to tfr? car park
5) PC                   at the rear of the gyrmasiun (Penistone Road) to assist
6 ) PC                  the stewards and prevent unauthorised access.
7) PC
8) PC                   C) 2 PC's will be located at the rear of turnstiles
9) PC                   73-88in Penistone Road to ensure persons entering
0) PC                   are not in possession of articles prohibited by tb?
1) PC                   ground rules i.e. banners, weapons, missiles or
2) PC                   alcohol.
3) PC
4) PC                   D) Remaining PC's will patrol lower level concourse
5) PC                   of North Stand.

                        Phase 2 (IXirinq match)

                       A) 2 PC's to remain at Gate "O* for duties outlined
                       above.

                       B) 2 PC's to remain at car park for duties outlirv»d
                       above.

                       C)   Remaining PC's will patrol concourse in pairs.
                       Phase 3 (After match)
  NOTEs-
  1 Sergeant will be   At the ccmpncejnent of Phase 3 (Ten Tj.nut»s before end
  responsible for      of game) 1 Sergeant and 8 PC's will take qp position at
  A, B, and C in       lower concourse exit gates to Penistone Road to
  Phase 1              prevent supporters leaving and entering Penistone Road.

                       ALL supporters must be directed to Leppings Larv» exit.

                       B)   Remaining PC's will patrol until stand is clear.
 H al
 After half time
 in gym.
                       PCRQ-NCY EVACUATION PROCEDURES

                       In the event of such a situation arising, PC's located
                       at tha gates at the end of each level giving access
                       to rairps leading to Penistone Road will ensure these are
                       open.

                       Officers will also take up positions at exit gates in
                       Penistone Road and Lappings Lane to ensure ttese are
                       open.

                       Further instructions will be as directed by control
                       or passed over the public address system.

                       Officers will be nominated for individual points
                       at the start of this duty.
                     SUB SECTOR 6                   Inspector Baoley

                     WEST STAND

   Serial 13         Phase 1 (Before natch)

    PS               A) 2 PC's will be located at the North entrance gates
1) PC                to this stand to assist stewards in supervising entry
2) PC                and where necessary preventing entry of unauthorised
3) PC                persons.
1) PC
5) PC                B) 2 PC's will be located at the South entrance gates
S) PC                to this stand to assist stewards in supervising entry and where
7) PC                necessary preventing entry of unauthorised persons.
i) PC
>) PC                C) 2 PC's will patrol the concourse /bar area to naintain
;>) PC               order.
O PC
>) PC                D) 6 PC's will be located at the front of the stand
                     to prevent missiles being thrown/stand tickets being
                     dropped to the terraces below or persons cliitiing frcm the
                     terraces to the stand and to maintain order.

                     Phase 2 (During natch)

                     PC's will be located at the entrances to the stand to
                     maintain order.

  *EAL               Phase 3 (After retch)
  After kick off
  when relieved by   Renain in stand until clear.
  Serial 16
  in Gym
                     EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURES

                     In the event of such a situation arising indicated at 3.16
                     in the serial order. PC's will take up positions at the
                     emergency exits at the extreme front corners of the stand
                      and ensure the gates are unlocked.   Other officers will
                     take up positions at the entrance steps to the stand and
                     again ensure the gates are open.

                     Further instructions will be as directed by control or
                     passed over the public address system.

                     Offioers will be nominated for individual points at the
                     start of this duty.
                             SUB SECTOR 7
                                                             InsP®ctor   Halter (C*»)
                             LEPPDCB LAIC TERRACE AND REAR BCLOSURB (SOUTH)
      Serial 14              Phase 1 (Before natch)
                       B
                            This serial will ensure that supporters entering through
 1)   PC                    turnstiles A-G do not enter in possession of items
 2)   PC                    prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc., weapons
 3)   PC                    missiles or alcohol).
 4)   PC
 5)   PC                    They will also ensure order is maintained on the terraces.
 6)   PC
                            Phase 2 (During natch)
 8 ) PC
 9) PC                      This serial will be located in the central tunnel to tte
10) PC                      Leppings Lane terraces to naintain order as required.
      MEAL                  Phase 3 (After natch)
      After kick off
      in gym                Supervise exit of supporters into Leppings Lane.




                            LEPPINGS LA»C TERRACE AND REAR ENCLOSURE (NCKIM)
   Serial 15                Phase 1 (Before natch)

                           This serial will ensure that supporters are entering through
1) PC                      turnstiles 9-16 do not enter in possession of iteire
2) PC                      prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc., weapons,
3) PC                      missiles or alcohol).
4) PC
5) PC                      They will also ensure order is naintainec on tte terraces.
6 ) PC
7) PC                      Phase 2 (During natch)
8 ) PC
9) PC                      This serial will be located in tfy? tunnel to tte North
                           Pen in the Leppings Lane terraces, to na-i-.tain order as
                           required.

                           Phase 3 (After natch)
   After
                           Supervise exit of supporters into Leppings Lane.
   half trne
   in Gym

                                 ‘CY EVACUATION PROCEDURES

                           In the event of such a situation arising, indicated at
                           3.16 in the serial instructions, PC's will take up
                           positions at the exit gates and ensure ttey are open.

                           Further instructions will be as directed by control
                           or passed over the public address system.

                           Officers will be nominated for individual points at the
                           start of this duty.
                     SUB SECTOR 8                     Inspector Syfces
                                                      Inspector w»«
                     LEPPINGS LANE TURNSTILES

   Serial 16         Phase 1 (Before natch)

    PS               This serial will be responsible for turnstiles A-G.
1) PC                They will ensure that persons entering do not possess
2) PC                items prohibited by the ground rules (Barriers, etc.,
3) PC                weapons missiles or alcohol). They will maintain order
4) PC                and ensure orderly queues are formed.
5) PC
6 ) PC               Phase 2 (During natch)
7) PC
8 ) PC               This serial will be located in the West Stand.
9) PC
0) PC                Phase 3 (After natch)

                     At the carmencement of Phase 3, this serial will leave
   MEAL              tte ground and take up a position in Leppings Lane
   After half time   opposite the turnstiles to await exit of supporters and
   in Gym            prevent disorder.




                     LEPPINGS LANE 'TURNSTILES

   Serial 17         Phase 1 (Before match)

    PS               This serial will be responsible for turnstiles 1-8.
1) PC                They will ensure that persons entering dc not possess
2) PC                items prohibited by the ground rules (As shove).
                     They will naintain order and ensure orderly queues are formed.
Jit
5) PC                Phase 2 (During natch)
6 ) PC
7) PC                This serial will be located in the central tunnel to
3) PC                tty? Leppings Lane terraces.
9) PC
0) PC                Phase 3 (After natch)

                     At the commencement of Phase 3, this serial will leave
                     the ground and take up a position in Leppings Lane
                     opposite the turnstiles to await exit of supporters
                     and prevent disorder.
   MEAL
   After half time
   in Gym
                        LEPPINGS U tfE TORNgim S

      Serial 18         Phase 1 (Before match)

     PS                 This serial will be responsible for turnstiles 9-16.
 1) PC                  They will ensure that persons entering do not possess
 2 ) PC                 itene prohibited by the ground rules. (Banners, etc.,
 3) PC                  weapons, missiles or alcohol.    They will maintain
 4) PC                  orcter and ensure orderly queues are formed.
 5) PC
 6 ) PC                 Phase 2 (During match)
 7) PC
 8 ) PC                 This serial will be located in the tunnel to the
 9) PC                  North Pen.
10) PC
                        Pha-^e 3 (After natch)

                        At tte ccrmencement of Phase 3 this Serial will leave
                        tl>? ground and take up a position in Leppings Lane opposite
      MEAL              tl>? turnstiles to await exit of supporters and prevent
        ter kick off    disorder.
      in gym




                        LEPPINGS LANE TUBN5TCLES

      Serial 19         Phas*> 1 (Before natch)

      PS                This serial will be located at Leppings Lane and ensure
 1)   PC                that or<*?rly queues form. They will assist other
 2)   PC                Serials at this location as required and in th* event
 3)   PC                of vehicles, coaches, etc. arriving, sjp»rvi&“ their
 4)   PC                unloading.
 5)   PC
      or                Phase 2 (During natch)
  f£
 8 ) PC                 This serial will be located in the Vfest Stand
 9) PC
10) PC
                        Phase 3 (After match)
                        At th? commencement of Phase 3 this serial will leave
                        the ground and take up a position in I>?ppings Lane
      MEAL              opposite tte turnstiles to await exit of Supporters
      After half time   and prevent disorder.
      kick off
      in gym.
                                 SUB SECTOR 9                   Inspector Senell/Selwood

                                Q C U C RESERVES
    Serial 20                   Phase 1 (Before retch)

    PS                          TTiis serial will act as a Reserve Serial and rerrain
1) PC                           within the Gymnasium unless direct otherwise.
2 ) PC
3) PC                           Phase 2 (During retch)
4) PC
5) PC                           As above
6 ) PC
7) PC                           Phase 3 (After retch)
8 ) PC
9) PC                           As above.
0 ) PC
   MRA

   At 12 noon in gym.



                                GROUND RESERVES
   S e r ia l 21                Phase 1 (Before retch)

                   Selwood     This serial will act as a Reserve serial arxj
  PS                           remain in the area adjacent
1)PC                           box between the South stand
2)PC                           terraces.
3)PC
i)PC                           Phase 2 (Curing retch)
5)PC
>)PC                           As above
’)PC
»> pc                          Phase 3 (After match)
>) PC
') pc ;                        As abcve

AL: After half trr*»
>9#                                   -



                               GROUND RESERVES
  S e r ia l 22        F1/F2   Phase 1 (Before retch)
   PS                          This serial will act as a Reserve serial and remain
 ) PC                          in the area between the South Stand and tte Spion
') PC                          kop unless directed otherwise.
 ) PC
 ) PC                          Phase 2 (Curing retch)
 ) PC
 ) PC                          As above
 ) PC
 ) PC                          Phase 3 (After match)
 ) PC
 ) PC                          As above
  MEAL
  After kick off in Gym
                                                                APPENDIX "C*
                        SUB SECTOR 10                     Inspector Cbote

                        PUBLIC OREER - MUXU3CCD ROM)

       Serial 23        Phase 1 (Before natch)
     PS                 PC's will patrol in pairs in Middlewood Road from Wads ley
  1) PC                 Lane to Crofton Avenue to maintain order and prevent any
 2) PC                  clash of supporters.   Direct supporters to side street
 3) PC                  parking and maintain security of business premises, paying
 4) PC                  special attention to local public houses and shops.
 5) PC
 6 ) PC                 Phase 2 (During natch)
 7) PC
 8 ) PC                 Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.
 9) PC
10) PC                  Phase 3 (After natch)
11) PC
12) PC                 On conrnencement of Phase 3, this serial will resume patrol
                       in location as above. Paying particular attention to shops
                       and supermarkets and prevent any clash of supporters.



                       PUBLIC OREER - MIDPLBPOD ROAD
      Serial 24        Phase 1 (Before natch)

      PS               PC's will patrol in pairs in Middlewood Road from Crofton
 1)   PC               Avenue to Winn Gardens to naintain order and prevent any
2)    PC               clash of supporters. Direct supporters to side street
3)    PC               parking and naintain security of business premises, paying
4)    PC               special attention to local public houses and shops.
5)    PC
6)    PC               Phase 2 (During natch)
7)    PC
8)    PC               Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane

                       Phase 3 (After natch)

                       On commencement of Phase 3, this serial will resume patrol in
                       location as above. Paying particular attention to shops
                       and prevent any clash of supporters.



                       PUBLIC OREER - MIDOLBOOO ROAD

      Serial 25    _   Phase 1 (Before natch)

   PS                  PC's will patrol in pairs in Middlewood Road from Wads ley
1) PC                  Lane to Minto Road to naintain order and prevent any clash
2) PC                  of supporters.   Direct supporters to side street parking
3) PC                  and maintain security of business premises, paying special
4) PC                  attention to local public houses and shops.
5) PC
>) PC                  Phase 2 (During natch)
7) PC
J) PC                  Refreshments at Claywheels Lane.
>) PC
)) PC                  Phase 3 (After natch)

                       On camenoement of Phase 3, this serial will resume patrol
                       in location as above^ paying particular attention to shops
                       and preventany clash of supporters.
                    SUB SECTOR 11                      Inspector Moore

                    PUBLIC GREER - HUXUHOQD ROAD

    Serial 26   C   Phase 1 (Before match)

     PS             PC's will patrol in pairs in Middlewood Road from Minto
 1) PC              Road to Hillsborough Precinct to maintain order and
 2) PC              prevent any clash of supporters, paying special attention
 3) PC              to shops and in particular licensed premises.
 4) PC
 5) PC              Phase 2 (Luring match)*
 6 ) PC
 7) PC              Refreshments at Ifcrmerton Hoed
 8 ) PC
 9) PC              Phase 3 (After natch)
.0) PC
                    On commencement of Phase 3, this serial will resune
                    patrol in location as above, paying special attention
                    to shops and licensed premises and prevent any clash
                    of supporters.




                    PUBLIC OREER - HTLLSBOROUOT PRECINCT

    Serial 27       Phase 1 (Before natch)
    PS              PC's will patrol in pairs in Middlewood Road from
1) PC               Hillsborough Precinct to Bradfield Road and from
2) PC               Bradfield Road to the Old Blue Ball Public House.
3) PC               Patrols will also be required in the Hillsborough
4) PC               Precinct, paying special attention to the supermarkets
5) PC               where looting could take place.
6 ) PC
7) PC               Phase 2 (During match)
8 ) PC
9) BC               Refreshments at Ha'rmerton Road.
0)W
1) PC               Phase 3 (After natch)
2) PC
3) PC               On ccrrmencement of Phase 3, this serial will resume
4) PC               patrol in location as above, paying particular attention
5) PC               to shops and to prevent any clash of supporters.
3) PC

   PS
                            SUB SECTOR 12                   Inspector Turner
                                                            Inspector Tbunend

                           PUBLIC OREER - PARKSIEE HQAD/CATCHBAR UtfC

  Serial 28                Phase 1 (Before natch)

   PS                      PC's will patrol in pairs in Parkside Road and
 ) PC                      Catchbar Lane to naintain order and prevent any clash
 ) PC                      of rival supporters, paying special attention to
i) PC                      shops and licensed premises. It is essential that
 ) PC                      vigilance is naintained on this road as it is the
 ) PC                      rrain route between either end of the ground.
 ) PC
 ) PC                      Phase 2 (During natch)
 ) PC
 ) PC                      Refreshments at Claywheels Lane, Traffic D»pt.
 ) PC
                           Phase 3 (After match)

                           On corrmencexnent of Phase 3 this serial will resvine
                           patrol in location as above, paying special attention
                           to prevent any clash of rival supporters.




                           PUBLIC ORDER - PBCSTON5 RQAD/LEPPINGS LMC

  S e r ia l 29            Phase 1 (Before natch)

                           This serial will be responsible for manning t!ie barriers
                           to be placed at the mouths of the following roads to
                           prevent access by supporters. It is essential that
                           access be prevented to all but residents. At similar
                           events in the past considerable damage has be*=n caused
                           by groups of supporters, both b e f o r e , during and after
                           the ga-ne.

                           1) Penistone Road North/Vere Road
                           2) Penistone Road North/Fielding Road
                           3) Lappings Lane/Vere Road
                           4) Lappings Lane/Fielding Road

                           Phase 2 (During natch)

                           Remain at locations given above to prevent supporters
                           who are unable to enter the ground gaining access to
 HEALS EXaring natch       these roads.
 Staggered at Claywheels
 Lane to ensure cover      Phase 3 (After match)
 for points in Phase 2
                           Renain intil all crowds have cleared and consent to remove tte
                           barriers is given by Sector Inspector. It is essential
                           that no vehicles be allowed into Leppings Lane until all
                           supporters have cleared the area.
                            PUBLIC CREHt - PEXLSTCNE HQftD/USPPPCS LANE

 Serial 30                  Phase 1 (Before match)

  PS                        This serial will be responsible for manning the barriers
UPC                         to be placed at the mouths of the following roads to
) PC                        prevent any supporters gaining access. It is essential
) PC                        that access be prevented to all but residents.   At
) PC                        similar events in the past considerable damage has been
) PC                        caused by groups of supporters both before, during and
) PC                        after the game
) PC
) PC                        1)   Penistone Road North/Bickerton Road
) PC                        2)   Leppings Lane/Bickerton Road
) PC                        3)   Leppings Lane/Leake Road
                            4)   Leppings Lane/Famdale Road

                            Phase 2 (During match)

                            Retrain at locations given to prevent supporters who are
                            unable to enter the ground gaining access to these roads.

                            Phase 3 (After match)
 MEALS During rratch
 Staggered at Claywheels    Remain until all crowds have cleared and consent to remove
 Lane to ensure cover       barriers is given by the Sector Inspector. It is essential
 for points in Phase 2.     that no vehicles be allowed into Leppings Lane until all
                            supporters have cleared the area.




                            PUBLIC ORDER - LEPPINGS LANE

 Serial 31                  Phase 1 (Before match)

  PS                        This serial will be responsible for manr.mg the barriers
I PC                        to be plac^ at the mouths of the following roads to
  PC                        prevent access by supporters:-

:a
» PC
                            1) Leppings Lane/Shenstone Road
                            2) Leppings Lane/Eskdale Road.
j PC
* PC                        (2 PC's on each road)
  PC
  PC                        The reraining PC's will patrol Leppings Lane in pairs to
  PC                        maintain order and prevent persons arriving at the
                            ground in coaches unloading except at the turnstiles.

                            Phase 2 (During match)

                            Rerrain at locations given above to prevent supporters who
                            are unable to enter the ground gaining access to the roads and
                            to maintain order.

                            Phase 3 (After match)

                            Remain until all crowds have cleared and consent to remove
 MEALS During match         barriers is given by Sector Inspector. It is essential
 Staggered at Claywheels    that no vehicles be allowed into Leppings Lane until all
 Lene to ensure cover for   supporters have cleared the area.
 points in Phase 2- -
                    SUB SECTOR 13                    Inspector Qraoe

                    KJBLIC CREHt - LEPPINGS I M G ROUNLABCUT
 Serial 32          Phase 1 (Before natch)
  PS               TCiis serial will be located at the roundabout at the
) PC               junction of Leppings Lane/Penistone Road North/fterries
) PC               Road. They will ensure that Liverpool sqpporters who
) PC               travel down Halifax Road/Penistone Road North from th»
) PC               motorway do not gain access to Herries Road or that part
) PC               of Penistone Road leading to the Spion Kop. They will also
) PC               ensure that Nottingham Forest supporters whose vehicles
) PC               will be parked in Herries Road and Penistone Road do not
) PC               gain access to Leppings Lane or Penistone Road North.
) PC
) PC               Phase 2 (IXirinq natch)
  PS
                   Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.
                   Phase 3 (After match)

                   Location as in Phase 1 to ensure that supporters
                   leaving the ground do not come into contort.




                   PUBLIC CRECR - IZPPBCS LANE ROUFCftBOUT
Serial 33    .   * Phase 1 (Before match)
 PS I                .'
 PC               This serial will have similar responsibilities as
 PC               outlined in the serial above in relation to segregation
 PC               of supporters before the match but will also have
 PC               responsibility for ensuring that t*y=> traffic island
 PC               remains clear of traffic to allow convoys of Liverpool
 PC               supporters coaches to round it to gain access to
                   their designated unloading/parking places. Unless
 PC               directed otherwise they will prevent such coactes gaining
PC                access into Leppings Lar*?.
PC
                   Phase 2 (Curing match)

                  Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.
                  Phase 3 (After natch)

                  At the end of the match they will prevent all traffic
                  travelling into Leppings Lane and that part of Penistone
                  Road leading from the ground until directed to allow
                  traffic to flow again by control.
                                 SUB SECTOR 14                  Inspector Indian

         ^                       PUBLIC OREER PA3HCL - PENISTONE ROM) NORTH

                 34              Phase 1 (Before match)
         —   —     _______   A          “ “
  PS                             This serial will be responsible for part of Penistone
! pc                             Road North from the traffic island at the junction with
) pc                             Leppings Lane to the Travellers Rest Public House.
  PC                             This road will be extensively used by Liverpool supporters
t PC                             en route from Wadsley Bridge Station and coach parking
i PC                             areas in Claywheels Lane and Penistone Road North/
> pc                             Halifax Road. They will maintain order and ensure
) PC                             that supporters do not possess items prohibited by the
) PC                             ground rules (Banners, etc., missiles, weapons or
  PC                             alcohol).
) pel_______________
                                 A) 2 Officers will be located at the top of Niagara
                                 Road to prevent access into this road by football
                                 supporters or any other unauthorised person who tries
                                 to gain access to the Niagara Police Sports Ground.

                                 B) Renaining officers will be located in pairs
                                 on static points at the kerb edge or, if necessary, on
    •                            the central reservation (dependant on the volume of
                                 traffic) to ensure public order.

                                 Phase 2 (During match)

                                 Refreshments at Claywheels Lane, Traffic D*pt.

                                 Phase 3 (After natch)

                                 Officers will be situated in locations as given for
                                 Phase 1.




                                 PUBLIC OREER PATRCL - PENLSTONE ROAD NCRTH

    Serial 35                          1 (Before natch)
                                 This serial will be responsible for the part of
    PS
                                 Penistone Road North from the Travellers Rest Public
)                                House to Wardsend Road North.   This road will be
)
                                 extensively used by Liverpool supporters en route from
)                                Wadsley Bridge Station and coach parking areas in
)
                                 Halifax Road. They will maintain order and ensure that
)
                                 supporters do not possess items prohibited by the ground
)
                                 rules (Banners, etc., weapons, missiles or alcohol). Officers
)                                will be located in pairs on static points at the kerb
)                                edge or on the central reservation (dependant on volume
)                                of traffic) to ensure public order.
)
                                 Phase 2 (During match)
                                 Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheeis Lane.

                                 Phase 3 (After match)
                                 Officers will be situated in the locations as given
                                 for Phase 1.
      ^                  S B SBCTCB 15                    Inspector Fine*

                         omm    receptich   - a j a w m a uwe

          36   A         Phase 1 (Before match)
PS                                    __________
                         This serial will supervise the unloading of
^                       Liverpool coaches in Claywheels Lane, pc's will ensure
ZZ                      that supporters leaving the coaches do not possess
It                      items prohibited by the gromd rules (Banners, etc
rc                      veapons. missiles) or alcohol. Once Claywteels is full this
                        serial will be relocated and assist serials 41 & 42 in Halifax
                        Phase 2 (During match)                                    Road

rc                      Refreshments at Claywteels Larv?, Traffic D?pt.
                        Phase 3 (After match)
PS
                        Supervise loading of supporters onto
                        coaches.




                       OQftCH RECEPTION - CLAYWHEELS LANE
Serial 37          A   Phase 1 (Before match)
PS                     This serial will supervise the unloading of
PC                     Liverpool coaches in Claywheels Lane. PC's will
PC                     ensure that supporters leaving tly? coactes do
PC                     not possess items prohibited by th? ground rules
PC                     (Banners, etc., weapons, missiles) or alcohol. Once Claywty>el£
PC                     is full, this serial will be re-located and assist serials 41
PC                     Phase 2 (During match)              & 42 in Halifax Road.
PC
PC                     Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheeis Lane,
PC
PC                     Phase 3 (After match)

PS]                    Supervise loading of supporters onto coactes.


                       NPTC;-

                       Claywheels Lane will be subject of "No parking"
                       cones for it's full length to allow Liverpool's
                       coaches to park - THESE MUST BE ENFORCED -
                       Barriers will also be available to prevent access
                       from Penistone Road.

                       Access rrust be allowed for persons workings at
                       the various premises including the hrewery and
                       bakery in Claywheels Lane which will be open on
                       this day.
                    SUB SECTOR 16                   Inspector   Scfcoley


                    PUBLIC ORDER - TRAIN RBCEPTION/HADSLEY STATION

Serial 38           Phase 1 (Before match)
                B
                    This serial will work in conjunction with Mounted
                    Officers to supervise Liverpool supporters leaving thy?
                    trains at Wadsley Station. They will marshall the
                    supporters and only allow them to leave when all
                    have left the station premises.   Where necessary
                    searches will be carried out to ensure that items
                    prohibited by the ground rules (banners, etc.,
                    weapons, missiles or alcohol) are not in their possession.

                    This serial will NOT escort supporters to the ground
                    but refrain static at this location.

                    Phase 2 (Curing natch)

                    Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

                    Phase 3 (After match)

                    Resume location at Wadsley Station to ensure order
                    is rraintained and queues form in a proper manner.




                    PUBLIC ORDER - TRAIN RBCEFTICN/WADSLEY STATION

Serial 39           Phase 1 (Before natch)
            B
 PS                 This serial will work in conjunction with Mounted Officers
 PC                 to supervise Liverpool supporters leaving the trains at
 PC                 Wadsley Station. They will marshall the supporters and
 PC                 only allow them to leave when all have left the station
                    premises.   Where necessary searches will be carried
 M                  out to ensure that supporters cure not in possession
 PC                 of items prohibited by the ground rules (banners, etc.,
 PC                 weapons, missiles or alcohol).
 PC
 PC                 This serial will NOT escort supporters to the ground
 PC                 but renain static at this location.

                    Phase 2 (During natch)

                    Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

                    Phase 3 (After natch)

                    Resume location at Wadsley Station to ensure order
                    is naintained and queues form in a proper manner.
                   MINI as RECEPTION - MARDSBP ROAD NORM
  Serial 40   ^    Phase 1 (Before retch)
   PS             This serial will supervise the unloading of Liverpool
 > PC             mini buses in Wardsend Road North. PC's will
!) PC             ensure that supporters leaving the coactes <k> not
 ) PC             possess items prohibited by the groind rules
■) PC             (Banners, etc., weapons missiles) or alcohol.
 ) PC
 ) PC             Phase 2 (CXiring natch)
 ) PC
 ) PC             Refreshments at Traffic Dept. Claywheels Lane.
 ) PC
 ) PC             Phase 3 (After natch)

                  Supervise loading of supporters onto mini buses.




                  NOTE: -

                  This road will be subject to "No Parking" cones and
                  only mini buses, etc. will be allowed to park.
                  Barriers will also be available for erection
                  at the entrance to this road to control entry.
              S B SECTOR 17                      Inspector   Robinson

              OQftCH RBCEPTIGH - HALTpax Brian
 Serial 41    Phase 1 (Before match)
   PS
              TMs serial will supervise the unloading of Liverpool
L) PC
I) PC         coaches in Halifax Road/Penistone Road North. PC's
I) PC         will ensure that supporters leaving the coaches cJd
i) PC         not possess items prohibited by the ground rules
>) PC         (Banners, etc., weapons, missiles) or alcohol.
   PC         Phase 2 (Curing match)
') PC
i) PC
             Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.
 ) PC
 ) PC        Phase 3 (After natch)

             Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches.




             POACH RECEPTION - HALIFAX ROM)
Serial 42    All duties will be identical to and work in
             conjunction with the serial above.
  PS
  PC
  PC
  PC
1 PC         Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywh~?ls Lane.
  PC
  PC
  PC
 PC
 PC
 PC

     +
              SUB SECTOR 18                    Inspector   BulliaBn

              PUBLIC OREER - HALIFAX ROM)
 Serial 43    Phase 1 (Before match)

   PS         This serial will patrol Halifax Road from Wadsley
 ) PC         Station to Southey Green Road. Officers will work
 ) PC         in pairs to maintain order, etc.
 ) PC
 ) PC         Phase 2 (During natch)
) PC
) PC          Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywteels Lane
) PC
) PC          Phase 3 (After natch)
) PC
a) pc         Patrol location outlined above.




             PUBLIC OREER - HALIFAX ROAD
Strati 44    Phase 1 (Before match)
  PS         This serial will patrol Halifax Road frar. South?y
) PC         Green Road to Browning Road. Officers will work
) PC         in pairs to naintain order, etc.
) PC
) PC         Phase 2 (During match)
) PC
  PC         Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.
I PC
) PC         Phase 3 (After match)
' PC
  PC         Patrol location outlined above.




             PUBLIC OREER - HALIFAX ROAD
Sefttl 45    Phase 1 {Before match)

             This serial will patrol Halifax Road from Browning Road
             to Deerlands Avenue. Officers will work in pairs to
             maintain order, etc.

             Phase 2 (During natch)

             Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.
             Phase 3 (After natch)

             Patrol location outlined above.



             NOTE;-   These officers will ensure that Liverpool
                      supporters travelling in private cars are
                      directed to park in side roads on adjoining
                      estates
                  SUB SHCTOR 19                Inspector    Bullas

                  PUBLIC OREO* - OMCH RECEPTION/SEARCH SQQM)

 Serial 46        Phase 1 (Before natch)
             HQ
  PS              TTvis serial will work in conjunction with Road Traffic
  PS              Officers on the A616 at Oughtihridge on the one-way
) PC              system to check at random coaches and 10101 buses
) PC              carrying Liverpool supporters.
) PC
) PC              Vehicles stopped will be checked to ensure passengers
) PC              are in possession of tickets, cure not under the
) PC              infli*;noe of alcohol or in possession of alcohol and
) PC              are considered fit to attend this event.
) PC
) PC              Where this is not the case, or where they are in
) PC              possession of alcohol or under it's infljence,
                  consideration should be taken regarding action under
                  the appropriate legislation or returning them to the
                  motorway.
                  All coaches/mini buses checked will have a
                  lat^l (issued to sector ccmranders) affixed to
                  tlv? windscreen prior to them being allov*?d to
                  leave.

                  Phase 2 (During natch)

                  Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

                  Phase 3 (After natch)

                  Reserve duties, as directed by control.
            SUB SECTOR 20                 Inspector Steele

            PUBLIC CREBR - 00*3* RSCEPTICW/SEARCH SQQM) - TMKHSLBf

Serial 47   Phase 1 rBefore match)

  PS        This serial will work in conjunction with Road Traffic
            Officers on the A61 on the Sheffield side of the
) PC
            Tankers ley motorway junction (Exit 36) to check at
) PC        random coaches and mini buses carrying Liverpool
) PC
) PC        supporters.
) PC        Vehicles stopped will be checked to ensure passengers
) PC        are in possession of tickets, are not under the influence
) PC        of alcohol or in possession of alcohol and are considered
) PC
            fit to attend this event.
) PC
) PC        Where this is not the case, or where they are in
            possession of alcohol or undex its influence consideration
            should be taken regarding action under the appropriate
            legislation or returning them to the motorway.

            All coaches/mini buses checked will have a label
            (issied to sector commanders) affixed to the windscreen
            prior to them being allowed to leave.

            Phase 2 (During match)
            Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

            Phase 3 (After matrch)
            Reserve duties as directed by control.
                            SUB SfaClXJfc 21                  Inspector   P Snith (E)
                            HOBIUg PATROL - CALL SIQi *TMOD O C 1

Serial 48                   Phase 1 (Before natch)
                       F
 PS                         This serial will patrol the Stocksbridge area,
 PC                         paying particular attention to licensed prenvises
 PC                         and to naintain order.
 PC
 PC                         Phase 2 (During natch)
 PC
 PC                         Refreshments at Deepcar Police Station, at 3prr>-3.45pm
                            Resune patrol 3.45pm.
                            Phase 3 (After match)

                            Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.




                           MDBILE PATRCL - CALL SI<K "TANGO TWO'

Serial 49                  phase 1 (B?fore natch)

PS                     F    TTiis serial will patrol the Deepcar/Ought ibridge
PC                         area, paying particular attention tolicensed
PC                         premises and to naintain order.
PC
PC                         Phase 2 (During natch)
PC
PC                         Refreshments at Deepcar Pol ice Station.    H=ai at 3.45pm-4.30pn
                            Patrol prior to 3.45pm.
                           Phase 3 (After natch)

                           Patrol in area as o u tlin ed m Phase l .




                           MDBILE PATOOL - CALL SION TANOD THREE'

ferial 50              F   Phase i (Before natch)

PS                         This serial will patrol the Wads ley/Middlewood area,
PC                         paying particular attention to licensed premises, to
1^*                        maintain order.
PC
PC                         Phase 2 (During natch)
PC
                           Refreshments at Claywheels Lane at 3pm.
            --------       Resume patrol at 3.45pm in area shown for Phase 1.

                           Phase 3 (After match)

                           Patrol in area as outlined above.
                SUB SECTOR 22                Inspector   Purdy (HQ)
       «

                MOBILE PAHPL - CALL SIGH TANGO FOUR*

S e ria l S I   Phase 1 (Before natch

  PS            Patrol Foxhill area, paying special attention to
) PC            licensed premises.
) PC
) PC            Phase 2 (During match)
) PC
) PC            Meal at 3.00pm at Claywheels Lane, Traffic D?pt.
) PC            Resune patrol at 3.45ptn Foxhill/Parson Cross area.

                Phase 3 (After match)

                Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.




                MOBILE PATROL - CALL SIGN "TANOO FIVE*

S e r ia l 52   Phase 1 (Before match)

  PS            Patrol Parson Cross area, paying special attention
                to licensed premises to maintain order.
) PC
) PC            Phase 2 (During match)
) PC
) PC
) PC            3.00pm patrol Parson Cross/Foxhill area.
                3.45pm Meal, Traffic Dept., Claywheels Larv?.
) PC
                Phase 3 (After match)

                Resune oatrol as outlined in Phas^ 1.




                M3BILE PATROL - CALL SIGN "TANGO SIX*

S e r ia l 53   Phase 1 (Before match)

 PS             Patrol Grenoside area, paying special attention to
 PC             licensed premises and to neintain order.
 PC
 PC             Phase 2 (During match)
 PC
 PC             3.00pm Meal - Traffic Dept., Claywheels Larye
 PC             3.45pm Resune patrol Grenoside.

                Phase 3 (After match)

                Resune patrol as outlined in Phase 1.
                                                                        AragQLX P"
                        SUB SECTOR 23                  In sp e c to r    ifeek (HO)

                       OQACH RECEPTION - HERRIES ROM) BUR cxstrsf/
                       REAR CAR PARK/HERRIES ROAD       -------
   Serial 54           Phase 1 (Before match)
                  E
    PS                 This serial will supervise the unloading of Nottingham
1) PC                  Forest Coaches at Herries Road Bus Garag?.    PC's will
2) PC                  ensure that supporters leaving tfr? coactes do not
3) PC                  possess items prohibited by the ground rules i.e.
4) PC                  banners, weapons, missiles or alcohol.
5) PC
5) PC                  Any over-flow will be directed to park on th? south
7) PC I                side of Herries Road South and Rawson Spring Road.
i) PC !
)) pc :                Phase 2 (EXjring natch)
)) PC !
                       Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywteels Lane.
                       Phase 3 (After match)

                       Supervise loading of supporters onto coactes.




                      CQfrCH RECEPTION - HERRIES ROAD BUS GARAGE/
                      REAR CAR PARK AND HERRIES ROAD ~
  S e r ia l 55       Phase 1 (Before natch)

                      This serial will supervise the unloading of Nottingham
                      Forest coaches at Herrins Road Bus Garay. PC's will
                      ensure that supporters leaving th? coac.Vs do not
                      possess items prohibited by th=> ground ml*s i.e.
                      banners, weapons, missiles or alcohol. Any over-flow will be
                      directed to park on the south side of hemes Road South and
                      Phase 2 (IXirinq match)                Rawson Spring Road.

                      Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywh~?ls Lan^.
                      Phase 3 (After natch)

                      Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches..


                      NOTE:-

                      Herries Road and Wards^nd Road will be subject
                      to "No parking" restrictions which will be strictly
                      enforced in relation to private cars.




                      SYPTE buses will park on Herries Road on tte
                      opposite side to their garage.
                       SUB SECTOR 24                 Inspector Aoaitage *E"

     m 1
                       BUS/OQMZH RECEPTION - HBOUES HCftD 9DDTO

   S e r ia l 56       Phase 1 (Before match)
                   E
                       This serial will ensure that Herries Road South remains
    PS                 clear of all parked cars to allow the unloading of SYPTE
U PC                   buses carrying Nottingham supporters. Coaches will
2 ) PC                 unload on tte North side of this road, having travelled
    PC                 along Penistone Road frcm the Midland Station.
») PC
5) PC                  Ttey will supervise unloading and ensure that supporters
S) PC                  are not in possession of items prohibited by the ground
n PC                   rules (Banners, etc., weapons, missiles or alcohol).
3) PC
>) PC                  They will also supervise the unloading of any Nottingham
0 ) PC                 ooacb?s who may be directed to unload and park on the
                       hard slx>uld?r in this road (South side) as an overflow
                       from other parking locations.

                       Phase 2 (During match)
                       Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

                       Phase 3 (After match)
                       Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches/buses.




                       OC«M RECEPTION - HERRHS RCftD 9CXTIH

   Serial 57           Phase 1 (Before match)

   PS                  This serial will be located at the junction of Herries
1) PC                  Road and Herries Road South to e n s u r e that Nottingham
2) PC                  coacfr?s arriving at this location are directed to the
3) PC                  car parking areas at SYPTE Bus G a ra g e m Herries Road.
4) PC                  Any overflow will be directed to park on the South
5)
6)«
7) PC
                       si<J? of Herries Road South and Rawson Spring Road.

                       Mini buses, vans, etc., will be directed to the parking
8 ) PC                 area in Rawson Spring Road.
9) PC
                       Tt»ey will ensure that passengers do not unload until they
   PS                  are in the appropriate parking area.

                       Ph^se 2 (During match)

                       Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

                       Phase 3 (During rretch
                       Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches.



                                Herries Road South will be subject to "No
                       N O T E :-
                       Parking" cones to allow Nottingham coaches to park.
                       TOE RESTRICTIONS WILL BE ENFORCED. Coaches will be
                       parked on the hard shoulder on both sides of this road.
             MINI BUS RECEPTION - RAMSON SPRING ROM)

 Serial 58   Phase 1 (Before natch)

     PS      This serial will supervise the unloading of Nottingham
             Forest mini buses in Rawson Spring Road.
I)   PC
O    PC      PC's will ensure that supporters leaving the coaches
i)   PC
             do not possess items prohibited by the ground rules
U    PC      (Banners, etc., weapons, missiles or alcohol).
3)   PC
>)   PC      Phase 2 (Ctering natch)
n    pc
i) PC        Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels La-*5.
») PC
)) PC        Phase 3 (After natch)

             Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches.




             NCfTE;-

             This road will be subject to "No Parking" ccn&s and only
             mini buses, vans, etc. will be allowed to park.
             Barriers will also be available for erect ion at the
             entranoe to this road to control entry.
                           SIB SECTOR 25                   Inspector   McDowell (HQ)


                          PUBLIC CREEK - HERRIES ROM)

  Serial 59               Phase 1 (Before match)
                HQ
    PS                    This serial will be responsible for patrolling
-) PC                     Herries Road (PC's in pairs) from the railway
>) PC                     viaduct to the Five Arches Public House, to
    PC                    naintain order and ensure that any parking
n PC                      restrictions are enforced. Direct Nottingham
                          Forest supporters in private vehicles to park
■>) PC
3) PC                     in locations in side roads.
i) PC
i) PC                     Phase 2 (During match)
    PC
)) PC                     Refreshments at Traffic Dept., ClaywheeLs Lane.

                          Phase 3 (After match)
   PS         Gaining
                          Patrol in the area outlined a b o v e to maintain
                          order.




                          PUBLIC CREEK - HERRIES ROAD
 Serial 60                Phase 1 (Before natch)
                  HQ
  PS                      This serial will be responsible for patrclling
) PC                      Herries Road (PC'S in pairs) from the Fiv=>
) PC                      Arches Public House to the traffic island at
) PC                      the junction with Moonshine Lane/Shirecliffe
) PC                      Road to maintain order and ensure that ar.y
) PC                      parking restrictions are enforced.
) PC
) PC                      Direct Nottingham Forest supporters in private
) PC                      vehicles to park in locations in side roe:5s.

                          Phase 2 (CXiring match)
                 ining)
                          Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

                          Phase 3 (After natch)

                          Patrol in the area outlined above to maintain orcter.
                          SUB StaChjft J?6                Inspector      byocs

                         PUBLIC ORES* - FPCLSTONE ROAD
 Serial 61               Phase 1 (Before match)
   PS                    PC's will patrol in pairs in Penistone Road from
 ) PC                    Parkside Road to Borough Road to maintain order and
’) PC                    prevent any clash of supporters. Direct supporters
i) PC                    to side street parking and rraintain security of
 ) PC                    business premises. Special attention to be given to the
 ) PC                    enforcement of parking restrictions on Penistone Road.
•) PC        ■B‘         Phase 2 (During match)
             ■
 ) PC
 ) PC        'E m        Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lar*?.
             ■
 ) PC
                         Phase 3 (After natch)
  PS         E‘
                         On commencement of Phase 3, this serial will
                         resume patrol in location as above and prevent
                         any clash of supporters.




                        PUBLIC CREB* - PBCCSTONE ROAD
Serial 62               Phase 1 (Before /retch)

 PS                 •   PC's will patrol in pairs in Penistone Road from
 PC                      Borough Road to Burton Street to nraintain orc^r
 PC                      and prevent any clash of supporters. Direct supporters
 PC                      to side street parking. Maintain security of
 PC                      business premises.

 3
 PC                 B
                        Phase 2 (During match)

 PC                 3   Refreshments at Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept.
 PC                 B
                        Phase 3 (After natch)
 PS
                        On commencement of Phase 3, this serial will resare
                        patrol in locations as above and prevent any clash of
                        supporters.
                           SUB SECTOR 27                Inspector     adson
         #
                          FCBILE PATROL - CALL SICK "TANQD SEVPT
Serial 63                 Phase 1 (Before match)
  PS         E"           Patrol Firvale area, paying special attention to
) PC         F            Lioensed premises.
) PC         t/T
) PC                      Phase 2 (Coring match)
) PC
) PC                      3.00pm Meal - Claywheels Lane.
) PC                      3.45pm Resune patrol Firvale/Southey Green area.

                          Phase 3 (After natch)

                          Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.




                          MJBILE PATROL - CALL SIGN "TANGO EJGffl™
     »
ferial 64                 Phase 1 (Before natch)
 PS          E            Patrol Southey Green area, paying special attention to
 PC          F            licensed premises.
 PC           R/T
 PC           ■a          Phase 2 (During natch)
             m
 PC
             m
 PC                       3.00pm Patrol Firvale/Southey Green area.
             m
 PC                       3.45pm Meal Claywheels Lane.

                          Phas*> 3 (After natch)

                          Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.




                          MOBILE PATROL - CALL SIGN "TANGO NINE*
ferial 65                 Phase 1 (Before natch)
PS                 F      Patrol Hillsborough/Langsett Road area, paying special
PC               R/T      attention to licensed premises.
PC               R/T
PC               HQ CID   Phase 2 (IXiring natch)
PC               m   m
PC               m   m    3.00pm Meal - Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept.
                          3.45pm resume patrol Hillsborough.

                          Phase 3 (After natch)

                          Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.
                  M3BILE PATROL - CALL SIGN TANGO TBJ*

Serial 66         Phase 1 (Before natch)

  PS         F    Patrol Qrflerton/Neepsend area, paying special attention
) PC         ■    to licensed premises.
* PC        R/T
) PC         ■    Phase 2 (During natch)
) PC         ■
1 PC         ■    3.00pm patrol (Xtflerton/Neepsend areas.
  PC         ■    3.45pm meal - Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept.,

                  Phase 3 (After natch)

                  Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.




  fl
                 r r iO T w v ii


 ISTAND:        ISTAND



 ENTRANCE

                       roREST^V*                                  tWERPOOl




                                                                             NORTH

                                                                             •BLDE*

                      SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FC ptc
                                   N ll.L S * O * 0 U C H   S M tF fK L D




 STAND          ISTAND



 ENTRANCE



                                                                             VEST

                                                                             ’BROWN'*




                     SHEFFIELD        WEDNESDAY FC. pie
                          h i i l S » 0 « 0 UG h S H ( f F i e l o




ISTAND:     I STAND:
                                                             lanji

                       FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
            ;             CHALLENGE CUP
ENTRANCE:
                         SEMI-FINAL
                 NOTTINGHAM v LIVERPOOL
                   FOREST                                                    LEPPINGS
                          AT HIULSftOROUQH STADIUM                           Lane
                       SATURDAY 9TH APRIL 1988                               •GREEN*
                            KICK-OFF 3pm




                    SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C.pic
                         MustOftOUGM. SN im u
                                                                          APPENDIX •£•
ISTAND              I STAND



ENTRANCE



                                                                                  KOP
                                                                                  •ORANGE*




                          SHEFFIELD      WEDNESDAY F.C. ptc
                                m iiu s » o to u c m SK irfiiLD




STAND              I STAND



ENTRANCE



                                                                                  SOOTH

                                                                                  •GREY*



         SlICffM


                         SHEFFIELD       WEDNESDAY F.C pic
                               H H L S » 0 * 0 UGH S H t F M l O




STAND                  STAND
                          O KJLOVt£C£>

                            FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                                                     ENTRANCE
                               CHALLENGE CUP
ENTRANCE
                                     SEMI-FINAL
                   j                              v      LIVERPOOL
                               AT HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM
                            SATURDAY 9TH APRIL 1988                               SOUTH
                                 KICK-OFF 3pm
                                                                                  UNCOVERED

                                                                                  •YELLOW*




                         SHEFFIELO WEDNESDAY F.C.ptc
                                 M L U M O flO U G H . SHEFFIELD
                                                         Appendix 'P'



CID General Sub Divisional Duties



Fl   DS                         I/C     8am - 8pm

     D6                                 8am - 8pm
     DC
     DC
     TDC
     DC
     DS                                Noon - Midnight
     DC
     DC
     TDC
     DC



F2   DS                                 8am - 8pm
     DC
     DC
     DC

     DS                               Noon - Midnight
     DC
     DC

     DC                                 6pm - 6am


     GROUND                           OUTSIDE GROUND - PICK-POCKETS

     DI Scaife                        Pc
     DS                               TDC
     DS                               TDC
     TDC                              Pc
     Pc
     DC
     DC
     DC
     DC
     DC



     PARKSIDE SECTION STATION

     DCI Addison
     DI Towell
     DS
     DC
     DC
                                                      ---    Appendix 'F*




    WADSLEY BRIDGE SECTION STATION

    DS
    DC
    DC
    TDC
    PC


THEFTS FRCM VEHICLES

Duties in relation to t!v?fts from motor vehicles.   The Officers will
be based at Parkside Section Station.

Group A


    DS
    A/DS
    DC
    DC
    DC
    DC
    DC
    PS



Group B
Based out at Wadsley Bridge Section Station, Halifax Road.

    DI     Garrett
    DS
    DS
    DC
    DC
    DC
    DC
    DC


All Officers to report to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
Gymnasium for briefing at 9.45am Saturday 9th April 1988.



PRISONERS
The following Officers will man a Criminal Investigation Department
post situated in the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Gy^nasiun and
deal with prisoners arrested for crime committed outside the ground:-

    DC
    DC
                                                     APPENDIX 'G'



                         DOG SECTION

Members of the Dog Section will be deployed as follows:


     DOG VAN                           AREA


        2                Wadsley Bridge Railway Station

        1                Leppings Lane Traffic Island

        1                Herries Road Coach Park
        X                Leppings Lane Turnstiles

        1                Penistone Road/Parkside Road

        1                Penistone Road/Bradfield Road

        1                Hillfoot Bridge
        1                Penistone Road to city centre

        1                Middlewood Road/Wadsley Lane
        I                Middlewood Road/Hillsborough Corner

        1                Middlewood Road/Deepcar
        1                Stocksbridge/Oughtibridge

        1                Tankers ley




In addition to the above, two handlers together with    explosives
dogs will parade at Sheffield Wednesday Football Stadium at 8.00
on Saturday 9 April 1988 to search the interior of the ground.
                                                                   AjppencUx




                          MDtKIHD SECTION


Members of the Mounted Section will be deployed as follows



      HORSES                          AREA



            6                         Leppings Lane

        10                            Penistone Road   Northtunstiles

            6                         Wadsley Bridge Railway   Station
            4                         Halifax Road *

            4                         Herries Road *


        30




        *       At Phase 3, two members of th? Mounted Section

                will be deployed in the Middlewood Road/

                Catchbar Lane area.    The remaining two will

                take up a position at Lappings Lane Traffic
                Island.
                                                                               AFFSfDIX «I«
              aemlnistraticn . control and custody staff , e t c .
#
ADMINISTRATION

Inspector Bennett

                      Radios




PROPERTY - LIVERPOOL                                       PROPERTY - NOTTINGHAM FOREST

PS                                                         PS
PC                                                         PC



PS                  Cones - Meals supervision (Ground)
PC

 nspector Lawson )                _ cia y w te e ls Lane
PS
PS




GROW© CONTROL                                              SECTOR DRIVERS

         Cnlvnrt                                           Chief Supt.          Insp. Broughton
PS I                                                       Sector 2           - PC
PC                                                         Sector 3           - PS
PC                                                         Directors Entrance) PC
pel      ,
         ______                                                              ) PC



CUSTODY (GROUND)                                           PRISCN BUSES

Police Roan                                                PS
                                                           PC
Inspector Croft                                            PS
PS                                                         PS__________
PS
PS                                                         PROCESS READER
PC
PC                                                         Inspector Bums
PC
PC
                                                                     vJ O-s-
                                                                tf   fc's.
                                                                         APPENDIX 'I*


PROCESS SUPERVISOR - INSPECTOR BURNS


PRISONER PROCESS (HRPS)                               PRISONER PROCESS (BOCLESH"ET-r>)
NOTTINGHAM FOREST                                     LIVERPOOL

Inspector Aicheson                                    Inspector Etteridge
DS                                                    OS
PC                                                    PC
PC                                                    PC
PC                                                    PC


PRISON BUS (HRPS)                                     PRISON BUB (BOCLESFTKTJ))
PS                                                    PS
PC                                                    PC




                          COMPLAINTS AGAINST THE POLICE



              Inspector B. Walker           Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                                            (Gymnasium)
              Inspector K. Walker           Hamnerton Road Police Station

              Inspector D. Riley            Ecclesfield Police Station
TRAFFIC POINTS                                      APPENDIX *J*




1   A61 - Grenoside traffic lights


2   Halifax Road/Kilner Way     TL


3   Halifax Road/Foxhill Road        TL


4   Halifax Road/Claywheels Lane          TL


5   Penistone Road North/Herries Road South    TL


6   Penistone Road/Parkside Road          TL


7   Penistone Road/Bradfield Road                    TW


8   Penistone Road/Neepsend Lane

    All other traffic lights will be covered by 'Dl' Officers




Police Sergeant            will ensure that traffic light keys are
available for issue to Officers nominated for these points. He will
also supply reflective jackets if required.
                                                     APPENDIX 'K*




  TRAINS
  1.   NOTTINGHAM FOREST
  Five special trains carrying Nottingham Forest supporters will arrive
  at Midland Station; the times will not be available until the week of
  the Semi Final and therefore will be given at the briefing.

  Each train has a capacity of 550.
  The fare for these special trains is inclusive of the bus fare to
  the ground.
  Sy T will run buses from the station to the ground using a route along
  Penistone Road and unloading   in Herries Road South; these buses will
  be under motor cycle escort.
  After the match a similar operation will take place to return
   Nottingham Forest supporters to the railway station, loading in
• Penistone Road North opposite the ground and using an identical route
  back to the station.
  Departure times will be given at the briefing.
  There is the facility to delay the trains in the event of extra time
  being played.

  2.   LIVERPOOL
  Two special trains carrying Liverpool supporters will arrive at
  Wadsley Bridge Station at times yet to be arranged;  these will be
  made available at briefing.

  Each train has a capacity of 550.
  Departure times will also be given at the briefing.
MpAgain there is a facility to delay the trains in the event ofextra
   time being played.
  As the support for Liverpool is widespread, it is anticipated that
  supporters will travel by service train from all parts of the country
  to Midland Railway Station. Arrangements have therefore been made for
  those arriving at Midland Station to be transported by SYT buses to the
  ground by a route separate from that used by Nottingham Forest supporters,
  travelling along Langsett Road, Middlewood Road and arriving at Leppings
  Lane where they will unload.
  At the end of the game, SYT buses will be available to return any
  person arriving in this manner back to the Midland Railway Station.
  These buses will be located in Penistone Road North on the 'to city*
  carriageway outside Beeley Wood Special School.
                                                                   Appendix 'L*



                                POACHES


LIVERPOOL

    1       All Liverpool coaches should leave the Ml Motorway at Exit 36
            (Tankersley) and travel via the A61 to designated parking areas.

   2        The geographical location of Liverpool, coupled with the
             countrywide support enjoyed by the Club, suggests that coaches
             could well approach the stadium by other routes, particularly
             the A616. If this is the case, then they must be brought to
             the designated coach parking area.

   3        Liverpool Executive Club coaches will be supplied with a red
            notice (Copy attached) to display in the windscreen and these
            will be permitted to unload at the ground. This facility will
            not be extended to any other coach for whatever reason.

   4        The Serials engaged on duty at Tankersley and Ought ibridge will
            operate selective stop and search procedures to ensure (A)
            Passengers have tickets, (B) they are not in possession of alcohol
            and (C) they are not drunk. When this has been done, each
            coach will have an adhesive sticker placed on the nearside of
            the windscreen and it will be allowed to proceed to the designated
            parking area.

   5        All coaches will be allowed to travel to tte ground without
            specific escort, although mentoers of the Road Traffic Motor Cycle
            wing will be providing overall mobile supervision. All coaches
            will be directed to the traffic island at Leppings Lane where,
            in the first instance, they will park in Claywheels Lane. Once
            this area is full then coaches will be directed to park on the
            'out lane' of the dual carriageway in Halifax Road, parking to
            caimence at the top of the dual carriageway and then work towards
            the stadium.

   6        All coaches will park before being permitted to set down passengers,
             thereby ensuring that the occupants know exactly where to return
             to on conpletion of the football match.

   7        Where it is discovered that passengers on a coach are not in
            possession of tickets, or are in breach of legislation concerning
             alcohol at Sporting events, then Ground Control will be informed
             for consideration as to returning such vehicles out of the Force
            area under escort.

   8        Where individual passengers only are involved who have consumed
            alcohol in such amounts that they are drunk, or are in posses­
            sion of alcohol, then they should be arrested and detained pending
             transport.

  NOTTOOIAH FOREST

   9        Nottingham Forest supporters who travel by coach will be encouraged
            to use the Ml Motorway leaving at Exit 34 (Tinsley). This aspect
            of the operation will be dealt with by 'D' Division officers and
             is the subject of a separate order.
Nottingham Forest Executive Club coaches will be supplied with
a white notice (Copy attached) affording the same facilities
as in Paragraph 3 above.

These coaches will be parked in the South Yorkshire Transport
Garage, Berries Road South and, if necessary, Rawson Spring
Road.
                                               Appendix "M*



          TRANSIT VANS - LIVERPOOL




Transit vans, etc. carrying Liverpool supporters will
be encouraged to travel via the M62 and Ml Motorways
leaving the latter at Junction 36 (Tankersley).
However, it is envisaged that such vehicles will also
approach the stadium from the Flouch (A616).

Such vehicles will be stopped and thoroughly searched
to ensure that they are not carrying alcohol and tte
passengers have not consumed the same to an extent
where they are drunk.

All passengers will be checked to ensure that they are
in possession of tickets.

After the search has been corrpleted an adhesive sticker
will be plaoed on the nearside windscreen to confirm
the search has been conpleted.

The vehicles will then proceed to the designated
parking area in Wardsend Road North where passengers
will alight and walk to the ground.

It is not feasible to attenpt to channel such \*?hicles
through one ’checkpoint" and therefore it will be tte
duty of all serials on duties outside tte stadijn to
monitor and check such vehicles and their occupants.

Should any vehicle arrive, without having been clv?cked
on the outskirts, which is found to be carrying
passengers without tickets or in breach of the
legislation relating to the carriage and consumption
of alcohol en route to sporting events, tten Ground
Control will be informed for consideration as to
returning the vehicle to the motorway for escort.
If necessary, the driver and passengers will be ctealt
with for breach of the relevant legislation by way of
summons or arrest, dependant on their individual condition.
                                                  Appendix 'H'


   TRANSIT VANS - NOTTINCHAM FOREST




Transit vans, etc. carrying Nottingham Forest supporters
will be encouraged to travel via the Ml Motorway leaving
the latter at Junction 34 (Tinsley)

Such vehicles will be stopped and thoroughly searcted
to ensure that they are not carrying alcohol and tte
passengers have not consuned the same to an extent
where they are drunk.

All passengers will be checked to ensure that they are
in possession of tickets.

After the search has been conpleted an adhesive sticker
will be placed on the nearside windscreen to confirm
the search has been conpleted.

The vehicles will then proceed to the designated
parking area in Rawson Spring Road where passengers
will alight and walk to the ground.

It is not feasible to attempt to channel such vehicles
through one "checkpoint" and therefore it will x thv?
duty of all serials on duties outside the stadium to
monitor and check such vehicles and their occupants.

Should any vehicle arrive, without having been ctecked
on the outskirts, which is found to be carrying
passengers without tickets or in breach of the legisla­
tion relating to the carriage and consumption of
alcohol en route to sporting events, tten Ground
Control will be informed for consideration as to
returning the vehicle to the motorway for escort.
If necessary, the driver and passengers will be dealt
with for breach of the relevant legislation by way of
summons or arrest, dependant on their individual
condition.
                                                                                                                  APPENDIX 'O '




                                     SFCFTING EVENTS (CONTROL OF ALCCHX) ACT 198S
                                        AS AMXDED BY TOE PUBLIC ORDER ACT 1986


     1.    VEHICLES

            (A)       I t i s an o f f e n c e f o r an o p e r a t o r t o k n o w i n g l y c a r r y a l c o h o l o r a l l o w i t
                      t o b e c a r r i e d on a p u b l i c s e r v i c e v e h i c l e o r m in i b u s / v a n o r t r a i n e t c ,
                      t r a v e l l i n g t o o r from a f o o t b a l l m a t c h .

            (B)      I t i s an o f f e n c e t o p o s s e s s a l c o h o l on a p u b l i c s e r v i c e v e h i c l e , o r m ini
                     b u s ' v a n , o r t r a i n e t c when t r a v e l l i n g t o o r fro m a f o o t b a l l m atch o r t o be
                     d r u n k on s u c h v e h i c l e .

            (C)      A C o n s t a b l e may s t o p and s e a r c h a p u b l i c s e r v i c e v e h i c l e , o r mini b u s / v a n ,
                     o r t r a i n e t c w here h e h a s r e a s o n a b l e g r o u n d s t o s u s p e c t a l c o h o l i s b e i n g
                     carried.

 2^        ENTRY INTO GROUND

            (A)      I t i s an o f f e n c e t o p o s s e s s a l c o h o l when e n t e r i n g o r a t t e n p t i n g t o e n t e r a
                     f o o t b a l l ground.

           (B)       I t i s an o f f e n c e t o e n t e r o r a t t e m p t t o e n t e r a f o o t b a l l g round when i n
                     p o s se s s io n of b o t t l e s , cans e t c (o r            p a r t o f ) w hich a r e cap a b le of ca u s in g
                     i n j u r y . T h i s i n c l u d e s d r i n k i n g g l a s s e s b u t n o t thermos      flask s.

           (C)      A C o n s t a b l e may s e a r c h a n y p e r s o n h e s u s p e c t s   i s a tte m p tin g to e n t e r th e
                    ground w ith a r t i c l e s m entioned.

 3.       CONDUCT IN GROUND

           It     i s a n o f f e n c e t o e n t e r , a t t e i r p t t o e n t e r , o r b e i n a f o o t b a l l ground when drank.

4-        SALE       OF ALCOHOL IN GROUND

           (A) A l c o h o l i c d r i n k may o n l y be s o l d i n t h o s e p a r t s o f t h e g r o u n d d e s i g n a t e d
 £             w h ic h w i l l be o u t o f vie w o f t h e p i t c h .       A l c o h o l may n o t be taken o u t o f
 w             desig n ated a re a s.

           (B)     Any C o n s t a b l e i n u n i f o r m may c a u s e a b a r i n a f o o t b a l l g ro u n d t o c l o s e i f
                   h e b e l i e v e s t h e c o n t i n u e d s a l e o f a l c o h o l i s d e t r i m e n t a l t o good o r d e r o r
                   pu b lic sa fe ty .

5.        PVROTECHMCS

          I t i s an o f f e n c e t o p o s s e s s f i r e w o r k s , smoke bombs e t c , when i n o r e n t e r i n g /
          l e a v i n g a f o o t b a l l ground.

6.        PUVCRS

          In a d d i t i o n t o t h e powers t o s e a r c h , a C o n s t a b l e may a r r e s t any p e r s o n c o r n u t t i n g
          o r who h a s c a n n i t t e d a n o f f e n c e u n d e r t h e A c t .
                                                                APPENDIX *P*


                                   PARKING RESTRICTIONS

  NO PARKING CONES
  No parking cones will be placed in the following locations prior to 7.00 am on
  Saturday 9 April 1988 by civilian staff under the direction of PoLice Sergeant
  102 Fidler:
  1. Halifax Road - out of city lane from Parson Cross Road to Cowper Avenue

  2.   Foxhill Road - out of city side from Halifax Road to Parson Cress Road

  3. Wardsend Road North - both sides

  4.   Penis tone Road - from Claywheels Lane to Railway Bridge - both sides

  5. Claywheels Lane (including one way system) fran Penistone Road to Limestone
     Cottage Lane. (Both sides)

  6. Niagara Road - both sides

  7. Leppir.gs Lane - both sides
  8.   Herries Road - frcm Penistone Road to Wordsworth Avenue - both sides

  9. Wardsend Road - both sides

 10. Herries Road South - both sides

 11. Galsworthy Road
 12. Rawson Spring Road - both sides

 13. Parkside Road - frcm Penistone Road toCatchbar Lane -
     one side only - alongside park

 14. Catchfcar Lane frcm Parkside Road to Leppings Lane
      One side only - alongside school
£l5.   Middlewood Road - one side only (alongside park) frcm Parkside Road to
       Hawksley Avenue
 16. Penistone Road - both sides from Leppings Lane island to Neepsend Lane

 17. Liversey Street - one side from Penistone Road carpark entrance
                                                                                       Appendix *Q*


                                   RCXTTE SIGNING


LIVERPOOL COACH AND CAR ROUTES

1      M1-A61       to b3 placed in location by Road Traffic

2      A57-A628 Hayfi^lds crossroad-D^rbyshir^ to indicate football traffic
                is to follow. A628 to t** placed out by Road Traffic during
                night of 8 April 1988.

3      A628/A616 to ty=> placed in location by D=epcar Officers.

Additional signing will be repeaters at intervals on the route.



NOTTINGHAM FOREST COACH AND CAR ROUTES
A ll Nottingham Forest v e h ic le s w i l l use a route from the motorway, arrivin g at
B right Sid** Lanp.         At th is p o in t, cars w i l l be d ir e c te d along Sutherland S tr e e t,
Gower S tr e e t, Brunswick Road, Nursery S treet to Neepsend Lan*3.

Coaches and Vans will travel via Upwell St., Firvale, and Herries Road to the
Ground.

SIGNING

1      Route split sign                                           Owler Lane

2      Coach routA sign                                           Herries Road/Barnsley Road

3      Directional sign                                           Barnsley Road/Pitsmoor Road

4      Directional sign                                           Pitsmoor Road /Rutland Road

5       Directional sign                                          Rutland Road/Neepsend Lane

6       Directional sign                                          Neepsend Lane/Rutland Road

7      Coach route sign                                           Herries Road/Shirecliffe Rd Island

8      Car route sign                                             Herries Road/Shirecliffe Rd Island

Additional signing will be repeaters at intervals.

All signs must be in position by 8.00am.    The signs have movable arrows and when
placed must be facing oncoming traffic with the arrow pointing in the appropriate
direction to follow the routes given above.

Signs will be placed out by civilian staff responsible for parking cones.



                                          * * * * * * * * * * *
                                               APPENDIX 'R'




              SPECIAL CONSTABULARY DUTIES



Special Constables will be on duty in connection with this
event to supplement the regular Officers. They will in
particular be involved in connection with the control of
traffic away from the immediate vicinity of the ground.

They will parade at 9.45 am in the gymnasium for briefing
and take up their duties as soon as possible.

Refreshments will be available in the gymnasium during the
match.

Radios will NOT be issued to members of the Special Constabulary,
except supervisory ranks.



                        DUTIES


(a)   Herries Road - encourage and supervise parking in side
      road on Longley, Norwood and Shirecliffe estates by
      Nottingham Forest supporters.

(b)   Langsett Road - encourage and supervise parking in area
      between Langsett Road and Infirmary Road by Nottingham
      Forest supporters.

(c)   Neepsend Lane - encourage and supervise parking in area
      around old gas works by Nottingham Forest supporters.

(d)   Halifax Road - encourage and supervise parking in side
      roads on Parson Cross/Foxhill estates by Liverpool
      supporters.

(e)   Middlewood Road - encourage and supervise parking in
      side roads on Marlcliffe and Wisewood estates by Liverpool
      supporters.
                                                                                                                    APPENDIX        'S '-



                                                         GROUND REGULATIONS


 1.    U n a u th o r is e d p ersons a r e not p e r m itte d to               e n t e r upon th e f i e l d o f p l a y .

 2.    The c l i m b i n g o f f l o o d l i g h t p y l o n s , s t a n d s   o r o t h e r b u i l d i n g s i n t h e ground i s
       fo rb id d en

3.    The c o n s u m p t i o n o f i n t o x i c a t i n g l i q u o r s i s p e r m i t t e d o n l y i n a u t h o r i s e d p l a c e s
      and i n a c c o r d a n c e w i t h t h e S p o r t i n g E v e n t s ( C o n t r o l o f A lco h o l E t c ) Act 1 9 8 a

4.    F i r e w o r k s , smoke c a n i s t e r s , b o t t l e s , g l a s s e s , c a n s , f l a g s , b a n n e r s , p o l e s and
      o t h e r s i m i l a r a r t i c l e s o r c o n t a i n e r s i n c l u d i n g a n y t h i n g w hich c o u l d o r m ig h t b e
      u s e d a s a weapon, a r e n o t p e r m i t t e d w i t h i n t h e g r o u n d , and any p e r s o n i n p o s s e s s i o n
      o f s u c h a n a r t i c l e o r c o n t a i n e r may be r e f u s e d e n t r y o r e j e c t e d fre e , t h e g r o u n d .

5.     Under no c i r c u m s t a n c e s i s i t p e r m i t t e d t o th ro w any o b j e c t o n t o t h e p i t c h .

6.     Any p e r s o n who f a i l s t o com ply w i t h i n s t r u c t i o n s from a s t e w a r d may be e j e c t e d from
       th e g r o u n d .

f     Any p e r s o n who r e m a i n s i n a          gangway may be e j e c t e d from th e g r o u n d .

8.    The C l u b r e s e r v e s t h e r i g h t t o r e f u s e a d m i s s i o n t o o r e j e c t any p e r s o n         who
      r e f u s e s t o be s e a r c h e d by a P o l i c e O f f i c e r .

9.    The C l u b r e s e r v e s t h e r i g h t    f o r i t s s e r v a n t s an d a g e n t s t o remove from t h i s g ro u n d
      any p e r s o n who d o e s n o t c o r p l y w i t h Ground R e g u l a t i o n s and w i t h t h e R u le s an d
      R e g u l a t i o n s o f The F o o t b a l l A s s o c i a t i o n and The F o o t b a l l League o r u h ose p r e s e n c e
      on t h e Ground i s o r c o u l d r e a s o n a b l y be c o n s t r u e d a s c o n s t i t u t i n g a s o u r c e o f
      d a n g e r , n u is a n c e o r annoyance to o th e r s p e c t a t o r s .
                                                ^ppenduc 'T'




              MAPS




(i)     Division of stadiun


(ii)    Liverpool routes and parking areas


(iii)   Sector 2


(iv)    Nottingham Forest routes and parking areas


(v)     Sector 3


(vi)    Overall parking areas (Sectors 2 & 3)


(vii)   Location of mobile units (Tl-10)
 o n e i i m i u       w e u t i t t s u a y    r. u                                          Police
                                                                                            M o om     ^         xv
                                                                           Rrst-Aid R o o m \\ /       \
      H i l l s b o r o u g h      G r o u n d
                                                                                                           k
                                                                                                           \ oV'Zi.VO

                                                                                                             * ’t-N'o   *
                                                                             Qynrnask/m
                                                                                                             •\^            77-88
                                                     J«WJev                                                                   73-76
                                                                                                                              5 5-72
                                                                                                                                          *1°. y k .\* V*
                                                                                                                                                   * / ' /
                                                                                                                                                             c.
                                                                                                                                                              W
                                                                   >:r'';Ak)ttrw ^ i w y
                                                              ^          ^ ‘ • tote,...ffiiv




                                       m   .                                                                                                          49-5
                            1-16                                                                                                                      43-41




                                                                         Playr a
                                   M■
                                    * . I-##
                                        ;t ft
                                                                         Tunm l
A w a y Fans Entrance
  and Enclosures


                                           19-22                       SOUTH STAND
          Police Control
                                                                                                                 37-42
                                                   0 tnelml   23-28


       KjEY
                                                              Dlrmctort Entrmncm                           NOTTINGHAM FOREST SUPPORTERS
       runuxrn r.<? . . . rrrrn

                                                                                                                                C.l.o. Malta 17 / *9
T A N K E R S LLCY
                tY
                                 appendix 'Kiii)1




                                HALIFAX ROAD




                                     J




VADSLEV BRIDGE

        British Ro>l
       Wodsiey Bridge


                        >   «    i'*.'T>J,*]»;«,»;«».




          0
                                                            (             SEMI FINAL 1988 '

                                                         MOTTS FOREST ROUTES AND PARKING AREAS

                                                                                                 n o r t h



     N1 AGAR A                                                                                                 NSLEY
       Ground                                                                                                  ADUCT
                                                                                                             Junction 3<


                                                                                  □                             SOUTH

                                   S H I FF I f I D    WFONtSOAY     HC




                                                                                    Fir vole

                            Coach Parking
                            SYPTE Garage and
                            Iterries Road South




To Man c he s t er                                    Car parkiq§)



                     CSirparking                                /
                     Owierton




                                                                                                                           TWit
                                                                   ,fy Ctntr*                         South Yorkihirt
                                                                                                              plans   ot
                                       S M   TUiAL 1966                      ATi'rJUULA 'HTr
                                  wffwia s - HDTHMGHAM FOHEST



                                                                        N o tts F b rest
                                                                        Coach Park



                         s
                         “Q    btai


                                                                              N otts F b re st
                                                                      ^L .    Coach and M ini bus
                                                                      ^0'     p a rk .




               n
    LtHNOX »OAO—

                              Hilljboroujh Pork
                ^   13
                                                       .c                Stodi
                &

"rxrAKo „04£)




           4,

%
       %


                                                                                    <rA
                                                                                           Q ,




                                                         >?N
yffe
           V 1                                                  - e                              Tj
                                                    j ATTEKEttX «?(▼!)*           j
      TA CUP s m    FINAL - PAHKUW AfiEAS




                                                                  ■+oztx

           BBIbU.




                                            Notts




                                                          l#«ai
§6
                                                           3

                                                                           *••.*L# »
        WaJWO




                S5i
 r*
          m




5

    TAD
                                                             APPENDIX ’U'




                         SCHEDUI£ OF TOTAL MANPOWER



               Ch Supt      Supt      Ch Insp         Insp    PS      PC

GROUND            1          1          3             10      27      241

CONTROL ETC                  1                        9       16      25

PUBLIC ORDER                 2          4             20      44      346

MOBILES                                               4       10      60

CID                          1          1             3       9       29

KE^VE                                                 1       3       30



                  1          5          8             47      109     731

                                                      _      _       _
                                 •F’ DIVISION


FOOTBALL DITTY:     SEMI FINAL                         DATE:     9 APRIL 1988

                        LIVERPOOL - y - NOTTS FOREST


                                  SERIAL NO


                       DETAILS OF OFFICERS


      Sergea

      1 PC I                                           JBSyOT

      2 PC                                             -Bg'OT

      3 PC                                             43SVOT

      4 PC                                             »?OT

      5 PC                                             ^OT

      6 PC                                             d®?OT

      7 PC

      8 PC

      9 PC                                             -9F/CTT

       10 PC                                           -Bf/OT

                                                        D T
                                                r
       INCIDENTS AND OOWENTS REGARDING DUTY ^INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
       ME>BERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHOW OVERLEAF


       Signature o f Sergeant in charge


       THIS FDFW MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
       IN CHARGE POLICE ROOM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GROUND

               fa                                       C5V"

       \Z>.^L                                           csv
                                                         C S V
                                                         C 5 T

                                                         O T .

        n . ^
                                                         crv:.
                                                           C5v:
                                    •F' DIVISION

                                                        DATE:        9 APRIL 1988
    FOOTBALL DUTY;    SEMI FINAL

                           LTVERPOOL -v- Num'S

                                      SERIAL NO
                                               I
                          details o f o ff ic e r s


                                                        ^pfvcrr
          Sergeant   PS

          1 PC
                                                         ptior
          2 PC
                                                         yt/or
          3 PC
                                                         d//or
          4 PC
                                                         pt/ar
          5 PC                                     rO
                                                         ifi/or
          6 PC
                                                         y t / err
          7 PC
                                                         p fy err
          8 PC
                                                        yi/ai
          9 PC
                                                         a r/c rr
          10 PC



          INCIDENIS AND CEMENTS REGARDING DITTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
          ME>BERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHOWN CVERLEAF


           Siqnature of Sergeant in charge         --

           ■n n s FORM MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED^ IN TO THE SERGEANT
           IN CHARGE POUCE BOOM PRIOR TO LEAVING TOE GROUND




%
             r




\                  T)YIv/K?W\ KJ ^ V L O V A O C ^
                                                         /




        ?L




    ?
         \J^\WT\\^(r                &rtX?v;yv^       .

             W v       P -    ‘
                                                                            M^
                                  *F* DIVISION

                                                           CATC:     9 APRIL 1988
FOOTBALL DITTY:    SEMI FINAL
                          LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOKEST

                                   SERIAL NO


                          DETAILS OF OFFICERSTHF’IiJYED


                                                           •^T/GT
      Sergeant
                                                           3P/OT
       1 PC
                                                           «P/G T
       2 PC
                                                           m/or
       3 PC
                                                           4X /O T
       4 PC
                                                           m /crr
       5 PC
                                                           «70T
       6 PC
                                                           asp/or
       7 PC
                                                            W /G T
       8 PC
                                                            «*/OT
       9 PC
                                                            W /G T
       10 PC



        D C H B H S AND                               JJESST0               “



        Si^ature of Sergeant in charge         1. O   pS
                                                 o    PS                1

        THIS FORM MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TOTME SERGEANT
        IN CHARGE FOUCE ROOM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE QWJND
                         ^                        — i.   S T i A rO ^
£.3£e-re.&                            s o ^                  _    foul,

                        <v>\ •        £
i4>         ^~i • 1^
                                                             6-r
                        /VrJ D


Pc-i,       ________



                   £dlMefcP«*><-                 S ^P fb £ ^£ s    <ZSMO^ex>
  Ic O O
                       S .o -'v V V       S T A t^ D               Pc_ACe^
  f<<OM
                       (WPo£-                ,


  3~r^J           L e P P i ^ ^                                           a °l
                                                                     3 . iS'   p   H
      P s
                                          •F' DIVISION


FOOTBALL DUTY;         SEMI FINAL                         EME:      9 APRIL 1988

                              LIVERPOOL - v - NOTTS

                                            SERIAL NO


                             DETAILS OF OFFICERS


     Sergean                                              ^rfVOT

     1 PC                                                 JQ/OT

     2 PC                                                 D^/OT

     3 PC                                                 bp/OT

     4 PC                                                 pq'/OT

     5 PC                                                 DR’/OT

     6 PC                                                 B^/OT

     7 PC                                                 pff/OT

     8 PC                                                 ^C/OT

     9 PC                                                 cpr/crr

     10 PC                                                Dfr/or



     INCIDENTS AND OTMENTS REGARDING DUTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
     MEMBERS OF SERIALS ETPC) MUST BE SHCWN CVERLEAF


     S ig n a tu r e o f S e rg e a n t in c h a rg e (


     THIS FUFW MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO TOE SERGEANT
     IN CHARCE POLICE ROOM PRIOR TO LEAVING TOE ORCUND
                               'F* DIVISION

PDOTOATJ. DUTY;   SEMI FINAL                        DATE:    9 APRIL 1988

                      LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST

                                SERIAL NO


                     DETAILS OF OFFIOBSJ^OYE D


      Sergeai                                       UT/&

      1 PC                                          f£/OV

      2 PC                                         -Ctt/OT

      3 PC                                          &/OY

      4 PC

      5 PC                                          -rtyor

      6 PC                                          f$/VT

      7 PC                                            /err

      8 PC                                          J^/OT

      9 PC                                          Jrt/OY

      10 PC                                         ^i’/OT




      INCIDENTS AND COMMENTS REGARDING DUTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
      *E>BERS OF SERIALS ETPC) MUST BE SHOWN WERLEAF______


      Sigpiatune of Sergeant in charge   ... _________________ !•••


      THIS FOfW MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
      IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GROUND
                                    •F' DIVISION


FOOTBALL DITTY:        SEMI FINAL                       DATE:    9 APRIL 1988

                           LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST




                          DETAILS OF OFFI


      S e rg e a n t                                    #yor

      1 PC

      2 PC
                                                                     '0^
      3 PC

      4 PC

      5 PC                                                       b^y'r?^c

      6 PC                                              <m/crr

      7 PC                                              m /or

      8 PC                                              m/or

      9 PC                                              It/or

      10 PC                                             M /o r



      DCIDE2WS AND COMMENTS REGARDING DUTY (INCLUDING
      MEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHOWN

                                                                     /& ■
      Siyiature of Sergeant in charge
                                             £     T
      THIS FOFW MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THEl SERGEANT
      IN CHARGE POLICE ROOM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GROUND
J             fr )   \

     kn/r &rn£y          UMLfr
    Coerc^y    Jltcc&     ^ 0    r£/&S>
                               •F1 DIVISION


FOOTBALL DUTY:    SEMI FINAL                        EATE:   9 APRIL 1988

                      LIVERPOOL -v - NOTTS FOREST

                                SERIAL NO


                     DETAILS OF OFFICERS


      Sergeant                                      ET/OT

                                                    ET/OT
      1 PC
                                                    ET/OT
      2 PC
                                                    ET/OT
      3 PC
                                                    ET/OT
      4 PC
                                                    ET/OT
      5 PC
                                                    ET/OT
      6 PC
              n                                     ET/OT
      7 PC
                                                    ET/OT
      8 PC
                                                    ET/OT
      9 PC
                                                    ET/OT
      10 PC



      INCIDENTS AND CXMffiNTS REGARDING DUTY (
      MEM3ERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHOW


      Signature of Sergeant in change    ..V


      THIS POFM MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE
      IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GRCUND
                                 •F' DIVISION


roOTOAT-t- DITTY:   SEMI FINAL                       DATE:      9 APRIL 1988

                        LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST

                                  SERIAL NO

                       DETAILS OF OFFI


       Sergeant                                      •P/OT

       1 PC                                          sr/or
       2 PC                                          •sr/or

       3 PC                                          ■ t/ot

       4 PC                                          ■f/OT

       5 PC                                          w/crr

       6 PC                                          ■r /o r

       7 PC                                          m /   or

       8 PC                                          «*/cr

       9 PC                                          W/OT

       10 PC                                         *»/OT



       INCIDENTS AND OCMMBNTS REGARDING DUTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
       MEM3ERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHCWN OVERLEAF


       Sicjiature of Sergeant in charge                        Is-



       THIS FOFW MUST BE (XMPLETCD AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEAhTT
       IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GRCUND
•^ v \o                (vi'p    a               —^ ^ ertcri       fo G u c ^   cstv P 6^ -    (K T -

 ^K^&^tiaXc   c&V              Q^n'JGt      ?*>-'                       0s-i>) K -

 O f i t £ J&crrrt.&J'T                     CrWr9 ^^5                  G f ' J ^ '-V         JeW'/loJtr
0-


 f|U$L«VJ            O K J O            M                                      ^    C 3>1

 u W 'S A f^     5 ' i |( ‘^''‘ia'-S        « ° ' rrt*   ^ l<rJ    ^           '£ *'9         ^
  (^sO^.       -rtU.S           Wvfeft        l+A) -Its ^         HiMl^-1 H e u i ^ j ) -TtW^><TtH'£

                 ■   f-M            1
   ^Cj-<f-«S~u*fti-

     v    it--ss-
                                •F' DIVISION

FOOTBALL DUTY:   S M    FINAL                        CATE:   9 APRIL 1988

                        LIVERPOOL -V- NOTTS FOREST




                       DETAILS OF OFFICERS




                                                       X




     6 PC



     8 PC

     9 PC

     10 PC



     INCIDENTS AND OOMENTS REGARDING DUTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
     MEMBERS OF SERIALS E7PC) MUST BE SHOWN CVERLEAF


     Sicjiature of Sergeant in charge    — J


     THIS FCm MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
     IN CHARGE POLICE ROOM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GROUND
                               •F' DIVISION


FOOTBALL DITTY:   SEMI FINAL                        DME;      9 APRIL 1988

                       LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST

                                SERIAL NO

                      DETAILS OF OFFICERS


                                                    m/pf

                                                    ur/srf

                                                    DT/OT^

                                                    DT/OT



                                                    OT/pr^

      6 PC                                          jprtyor

                                                    jpioi

                                                    prfyor

                                                    DT/fl^

       10 PC                                        y(/oi



      INCIDEJ/IS AND OOWENTS REGARDING DITTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
      l-EMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHCMN CVERIEAF


       Signature of Sergeant in charge


       THIS FORM MUST BE OCMPLEIED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERC33ANT
       IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GROUND
-   V7-
                               •F* DIVISION

FDOTBALL DITTY:   SEMI FINAL                       DATC:       9 APRIL 1988

                      LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS

                                SERIAL ND

                     DETAILS OF OFFICERS


      Sergeant                                     DT/ptf^

      1 PC                                         UT/Jjf

      2 PC                                         nr/jzrf

      3 PC                                         UT/0T

      4 PC                                         VT/&Y

      5 PC                                         m/sd

      6 PC                                         ur/prf

      7 PC                                         D T /p f'

      8 PC                                         UT/efT

      9 PC                                         DydT

      10 PC                                        nr//fr



     INCIDENTS AND OCMffiNIS REGARDING DITTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
     MEM3ERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHOWN OVERLEAF


     Signature of Sergeant in charge
                                              V

     THIS FOR-! MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO TOE SERGEANT
     IN CHARGE POLICE R3CM PRIOR TO LEAVING 1HE GROUND

                                 c-r

     a                          o-r
    J2r
     '•4.                       o<
                                i> r
t*
                              •F* DIVISION


FOOTBALL DUTY:   SEMI FINAL                        CATE:      9 APRIL 1988

                      LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST

                               SERIAL NO

                     DETAILS OF OFFICERS


      Sergeai                                      S^/OT
                                                     ore
      s
      1 PC

      2 PC                                         0 /c r r

      3 PC                                         tfiov

      4 PC                                         b t /ot


      5 PC                                         #f/OT

      6 PC                                         jjpr/crr

      7 PC                                         #/OT

      8 PC                                         gE/crr

      9 PC                                         eff/OT

      10 PC                                        5F/OT
                                                     <t*T
      i1 &
                                                      o-r
      U ?C
      INCIDENTS AND OCHMENTS REGARDING DUTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
      MEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHCWN CVERLEAF


      Signature of Sergeant in charge                          %


      THIS FOFW MUST BE CCMPI^IED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
      IN CHARGE POLICE BOOM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GRCM©


       '■l)'
*
                                     'F* DIVISION


    PQOTBAU- DlfTY:   S M    FINAL                    DATE:     9 APRIL 1988

                            LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS

                                      SERIAL ND

                            DETAILS OF OFFICERS


          Sergeant                                    0T/OT

          1 PC                                        ■W/OT

          2 PC                                        ^T/OT

          3 PC                                        fjr/OT

          4 PC

          5 PC                                        QT/OT

          6 PC                                        ^r/crr

          7 PC                                        Jp^/OT

          8 PC                                        ffr/crr

          9 PC                                        pt/vi

          10 P<                                       rf/crr
          l! II                                       J)r<tI •


          INCIDENTS AND a>MEWTS REGARDING DUTY (INCLUDING ARKfcSTS BY
          ! ® B E R S OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SP^Kf^rox.PAr


          Signature of Sergeant in charge


          THIS FORM MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
          IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GRCUND
*
                                    •F' DIVISION


      FOOTBALL DUTY:    SEW FINAL                        DATCt     9 APRIL 1988

                            LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS^FOREST




                           DETAILS OF OFFI


             Sergeant

             1 PC

             2 PC

             3 PC

             4 PC
                                                         m m
             5 PC

    Pci 12   6 PC

             7 PC
                                                         crr/crr
             8 PC
                                                         DT/OT
             9 PC
                                                         DT/OT
             10 PC




             INCIDENTS AND OOMEJJTS REGARDING      (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
             hOBERS OF SERIALS FTC) MJST BE        CVERLEAF
                                                         <7
                                                         S*
             Signature of Sergeant in charge


             •nns ¥om must be (Xmpletted and handed in to toe sercxant
             IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GKCUND
A
                                   •F’ DIVISION


    FOOTBALL DITTY:   SEMI FINAL                        DATEt     9 APRIL 1988

                           LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST

                                    SERIAL NO


                          DETAILS OF OFFICERS


          Sergeant                                      UT/fift

          1 PC                                          pf/OT

          2 PC                                          DT/jpfT

          3 PC                                          /**/OT

          4 PC                                          ^rr/crr
                                                        ^BT/OT
          5 PC

          6 PC                                          fft/OT

          7 PC                                          m/S*

          8 PC                                          ur/jp

          9 PC                                          pr/crr
                                                         wvot
          10 PC



           INCIDENTS AND COMEJ/TS REGARDING EUTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY



           Siy^ature of Sergeant in charge   ..


           THIS FOfW MUST BE GCMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
           IN CHARQS POLICE ROOM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GRCX*©
                                     A

                  .ftia   =a_>— 3“

             vJ
c^rc*-*— ■
                                •F’ DIVISION


FOOTBALL DITTY:   SEMI FINAL                          DATE:     9 APRIL 1988

                       LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS F

                                  SERIAL ND

                      d e ta i l s o f officers emp



                                                      •W/OT

                                                      Ttf/OT

                                                      BT/OT

                                                      W/OT

                                                      -flt/OT

                                                      OT/«r

                                                      W/OT
       6 PC
                                                      BE/OT

                                                      W/OT
       8 PC

       9 PC                                           OT/^

       10 PC                                          UTT&



       INCIDEKTS AND OOWENTS REGARDING DITTY (INCLAJDING ARRESTS BY
       MEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHCWN WERLEAF


       Signature of Sergeant in charge


       THIS FORM MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
       IN CHARGE POLICE ROOM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GROUND
                               K      is
                                             yQ

                      O/yy^A       <q t <l



                 sa
    ■«   <   «




i
                               •F' DIVISION

FOOTBALL DITTY:   SEMI FINAL                        DATC:      9 APRIL 1988

                       LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST

                                SERIAL ND 1

                      DETAILS OF OFFICERS W4PLP
                                              1
      Sergeant                                      A/OT

      1 PC                                          tf/crr

      2 PC                                          M ’/OT

      3 PC                                          ^fT/OT

      4 PC                                          ft^/OT

      5 PC                                          tfr/crr

      6 PC                                          tfr/crr

      7 PC                                          Vft/OT

      8 PC                                          &r/(JT

      9 PC                                          p f/c rr

      10 PC   J                                     tft/o r




      INCIDENTS AND COMMENTS REGARDING DITTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
      MEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE S H O W CVERLEAF


      Sicj-kature of Sergeant in charge

      THIS PORU MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
      IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GROUND
                              •F' DIVISION


KX7IBALL DUTY:   SEMI FINAL                         CATC:       9 APRIL 1988

                      LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS

                               SERIAL NO

                     DETAILS OF OFFICERS EMPLOYED


      Sergeant                                      mm
      1 PC                                          UT/&

      2 PC                                          DT/<3£

      3 PC                                          m /m

      4 PC                                          UT/Qff

      5 PC                                          tt/OT

      6 PC                                          er/or
      7 PC                                          m/m

      8 PC                                          c rr/d *.

      9 PC                                          &/or

      10 PC                                         w   /o t




      INCIDENTS AND CCMMENTS REGARDING EUTY (INCLiJDING ARRESTS BY
      MEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHCMN OVERLEAF


      Signature of Sergeant in charge
                                                          I


      THIS FOR-! MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO TOE SERGEANT
      IN CHARGE POLICE ROOM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GROUND
A   fSj u x A
                                                             1




                              •F' DIVISION


                 SEMI FINAL                        DATE:     9 APRIL 1988
FXTCBALL DUTY:
                      LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST


                               SERIAL NO


                     ORTAILS OF OFFICERS EMP


                                                   DT/OT
      Sergec
                                                   err/err
      1 PC
                                                   err/err
      2 PC
                                                   err/err
      3 PC
                                                   err/err
      4 PC
                                                   err/err
      5 PC
                                                   DT/OT
      6 PC
                                                   err/err
      7 PC
                                                   crr/crr
      8 PC
                                                   err/err
      9 PC
                                                   DT/OT
       10 PC



       INCIDENTS AND CO-MENIS REGARDING DUTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
       ME>BERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SCHN OVERLEAF


       Signature of Sergeant in charge


       THIS FOfW MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
       IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GROUND
                                   'F' DIVISION

FOCrrBALL DITTY:    SEMI FINAL                                DATC:      9 APRIL 1988

                          LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS

                                    SERIAL NO

                         DETAILS OF OFFICERS          LOVED


       Sergea                                                 yf/ar

       1 PC                                                   prfycrr

       2 PC                                                   j £/ot

       3 PC                                                   j/t/ct

       4 PC

       5 PC                                                   prr/or

       6 PC                                                   pft/ar

       7 PC                                                   pr/<JT

       8 PC                                                   j/r/c rr

       9 PC                                                   err/err

       10 PC                                                  y r/c rr




       aciDorrs    and o o m e k t s recording duty   (incujding    arrests by




       Signature of Sergeant in charge "


       THIS FOfW MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO TOE SERVANT
       IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GRCUND




                               ?    T    '   °
4
*-
      :
          (3. L-
                   A
                       f*                              ^ ~ N



                            ..     ^rc
                                                                \
     fcKl
\
                                 -£— i

                                 C— --
                                         o k o i V ^ — /<_A-,
                                                                    A
                                              •F' DIVISION


            FOOTBALL DITTY:   SEMI FINAL                           DATC:    9 APRIL 1988

                                      LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST

                                               SERIAL NO
                              —   O    1
T Z , < /                             DETAILS OF OFFICERS


                                                                   T3Q7OT

                  1 PC,                                            Dt/OT

                  2 PC                                             W/OT

                  3 PC                                             Tff/OT

                  4 PC                                             WC/OT

                                                                   ■HT/OT

                  6 PC                                             W/OT

                  7 PC

                  8 PC

                  9 PC                                             T3H7OT

                                                                    EH7OT



                   INCIDENTS AND OOMENTS REGARDING DUTY (INCLUDING ARREST^,
                   MEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE p r w rWFRTJAF


                   Signature of Sergeant in charge


                   THIS FOR*! MUST BE OCMPLfTTED AND HANDED IN TO TOE SERGEAJ/T
                   IN CHARd POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING TOE GROW®
 0




       ^   ok*''r ~
(far
                                          •F' DIVISION


FOOTBALL DUTY:         SEMI FINAL                               DATE:      9 APRIL 1988

                              LIVERPOOL -v- fOTTS FOREST

                                              SERIAL NO


                             DETAILS OF OFFICERS

                                                               J JS /O T
      Sergeant
                                                               jyr/crr
      1 PC
                                                                J0f/O T
      2 PC
                                                               ja t/o r
      3 PC
                                                                 u r/o r
      4 PC
                                                                 u r/o r
      5 PC
                                                                 u r/o r
      6 PC
                                                                 u r/o r
      7 PC
                                                                 UT/OT
      8 PC
                                                                   DT/OT
      9 PC
                                                                   UT/OT
      10 PC



      INCIDEOTS AND COMEJ/IS REGARDING DUTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
      MO-BERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHCHN CVERLEAF--------


      S ig n a tu re o f S e rg e a n t i n   c h a rg e
                                                           /   T
      THIS PDFM MUST BE CCMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
      in c h a r s : p o l ic e rocm p r io r to lea v in g th e grcund
                                   •F* DIVISION

FOOTBALL DITTY;    SEMI FINAL                       DATE;    9 APRIL 1988

                            LIVERPOOL -V- NOTTS

                                    SERIAL NO

                           DETAILS OF OFFICERS
                   V




                                                    UT/CfT


                                    \
                           )
      Sergec
               4


                       V




                                        t
      1 PC                                          ur/tJk

      2 PC                                          DT/OV

      3 PC                                         *WT/CTT 'N-T'Z.

      4 PC                                         ■ST/or    y   /A

      5 PC „                                        OT/Wt

      6 PC                                          WE/C7T v/<£.

      7 PC                                          DH/0T '*/'

      8 PC                                         T»/0T

      9 PC                                         Tff/(JT V / 4

      10 PC                                         l^nycrr v / <
      n Cc
      il f<                                        >   :
                                                       t
      INCIDENTS AND COMENI5 REGARDING DITTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
      fOBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHOWN OVERLEAF


      Signature of Sergeant in charge       ..


      THIS FOf9i MUST BE OCMPUE7TED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
      IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GROUND
* 2       A ~ ? y .    a   y



      V//0 ( Y , ^             U-7C.           ■—


      S     P Pol     TV/Q              ~n~c ~



          / /~7l/OLt~S'^\        f *7
                                                    Au/'y'   sfyf
            /*   ______________________
            /




                           4 i y ^    <— > /

                               A^K.
                                  •F* DIVISION


FOOTBALL DITTY:     SEMI FINAL                       DATC:      9 APRIL 1988

                          LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS

                                    SERIAL NO


                        DETAILS OF OFFICERS


      Sergean                                        pf/OT

      1 PC                                           prior
                                                     J *7 O T
      2 PC

      3 PC                                           srr/vT

      4 PC                                           &r/OT

      5 PC                                           ur/or

      6 PC                                           m/m

      7 PC                                           m/&f>

      8 PC                                           m/m.

      9 PC-                                          DT/er

      10 PC                                          dt /^t




      INCIDENTS AND COMEJfTS RE5GARDING DUTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
      MEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHOWN CVERLJEAF


       S ig n a tu r e of Sergeant in charge   ...              |........

      THIS FOFM MJST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
      IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GROUND
                              •F* DIVISION


FOOTBALL DUTY:   SEMI FINAL                      DATE:     9 APRIL 1988

                      LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS

                               SERIAL NO

                     DETAILS OF OFFICERS


     Sergeant                                     OT/^T

      1 PC                                        UIJOT

      2 PC                                        ur/qr

      3 PC                                        DT/£fT

      4 PC                                        UT/Op

      5 PC                                        OT/er

      6 PC                                        DT/Q5P

      7 PC                                        DT/gJT

      8 PC                                        UT/^JT

      9 PC                                        DT/OT

      10 PC                                       DT/OT




      INCIDENTS AND COMETHS REGARDING DUTY (                 IS BY
      MEMBERS OF SERIALS EMC) MUST BE SHOW


      Signature of Sergeant in charge


      THIS FORM MUST BE OCMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
      IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING TOE GRfXWD
                                •F' DIVISION


POOTCBALL DITTY:   SEMI FINAL                     DATE:        9 APRIL 1988

                       LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS

                                 SERIAL ND

                      DETAILS OF OFFICERS


      Sergeant                                     UT/&

      1 PC                                         OT/«

      2 PC                                         m   /   0




      3 PC                                         Drr/#

      4 PC                                         DT/^

       5 PC

       6 PC                                        DT/^

       7 PC                                        crr/c^

       8 PC                                        UY/0T

       9 PC

       10 PC                                       DTT/OT




       INCIDENTS AND OOMENIS REGARDING DUTY (INCIDDjNG ARRESTS BY
       MERCERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE 9JCM4


       Siyiature of Sergeant in charge    .

       THIS FORM MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
       IN CHARCE POLICE ROOM PRIOR TC L£AVLNG THE GKXJND
                               •F' DIVISION

                                                   DATE:    9 APRIL 1988
FOOTBALL DITTY;   SEMI FINAL
                      LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS

                                SERIAL NO


                     EETAILS OF OFFICERS


      Serg
                                                   UT/OT
       1 PC

      2 PC

       3 PC
                                                   UT/OT
       4 PC

       5 PC
                                                   W/OT
       6 PC
                                                    UT/OT
       7 PC
                                                    UT/OT
       8 PC
                                                    UT/OT
       9 P<
                                                    UT/OT
       10 I




       INCIDENTS AND COWENTS REGARDING DOW ( ^ L U D ^ 0 ARRESTS BY
       MEMBERS OF SERIALS EMC) MUST BE SHCWN OVERLEAF


        Si^ature of Sergeant in charge


        THIS FORM MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SEK5EAWT
                  roScE ROOl PRIOR TO 1£AVIWG TOE GROUND
                                'F' DIVISION

FOOTBALL DITTY;    SEMI FINAL                       DATE;      9 APRIL 1988

                        LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS

                                 SERIAL ND

                       DETAILS OF OFFICERS


       Sergeant                                     VT/&T

       1 PC                                         VT/&f

   I   2 PC                                         UT/&T

       3 PC                                         crr/grr

   { 4 PC                                           U T /0f

       5 PC                                         u r/c rf

    i 6 PC                                          ur/ye

       7 PC                                         v r /y c

       8 PC                                         D T /0f

       9 PC                                         ut/q6

    . 10 PC                                         U T /&




       INCIDENTS AND COMMENTS REGARDING DITTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
       FEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHOWN OVERLEAF


       Signature of Sergeant in charge '               - --------

       THIS FORM MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
       IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GRCUND
            i . \
                           \
X




           n.       s . £*>

S'
H




     • -        ^      /       .4
            s       . • -£'    '<
                              *F' DIVISION


FOOTBALL DUTY:   SEMI FINAL                        CATE:      9 APRIL 1988

                      LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST

                               SERIAL NO

                     DETAILS OF OFFICERS


      Serg                                         UT/orf

      1 PC                                         m/pr

      2 PC                                         m/ pr

      3 PC                                         p r/c rr

      4 PC                                         m/yf

      5 PC                                         m/pf

      6 PC

      7 PC                                         pf/ar

      8 PC                                         O T/gf

      9 PC                                         j/fvc rr

      10 P                                         m/yf



      DCIEEKIS AND OCMMENTS REGARDING DUTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
      MEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHOW.CVERLEAF


      Signature o f Sergeant in charge


      THIS FDfM MUST BE OCMPLfmSD AND HANDED IN TO
      IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING TOE GRCUND
                               •F' DIVISION


FOOTBALL DITTY:   SO U FINAL                       DATE:    9 APRIL 1988

                      LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST

                                SERIAL

                     DETAILS OF OFFT


      Sergeant                                     ITT/OT

      1 PC                                         DT/PF

      2 PC                                         UT/Cff

      3 PC                                         DT/pr

      4 PC                                         DT/OP-

      5 PC                                         UT/&T

      6 PC                                         UT/GfF

      7 PC                                         DT/OT

      8 PC                                         UT/Gff

      9 PC                                         DT/J0T

      10 PC                                        DT/OT



      INCIDENTS AND COMSNIS REGARDING DUTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
      MEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHOW CVERLEAF


      Siyiature of Sergeant in charge

      THIS FOR-! MUST BE OCHPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
      IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GRCUND
                              'F' DIVISION

FOOTBALL DUTY:   SEMI FINAL                        DATC:        9 APRIL 1988

                      LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST

                               SERIAL NO

                     DETAILS OF OFFI


     Sergeant                                      p r /o r

      1 PC                                         JH7C7T

      2 PC                                         J2TT/OT

      3 PC                                         pf/OT

      4 PC                                         pfr/OT

      5 PC                                         #f/C7T

      6 PC                                         fft/OT

      7 PC                                         erfyor

      8 PC                                         rfr/crr

      9 PC                                          p f/c rr

      10 PC                                        jr f/c r r




      INCIDENTS AND COMMENTS REGARDING DUTY (D^gQ|DING ARRESTS BY
      SOBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHCWN CVERLBAF


      Signature of Sergeant in charge
                                             *7-
      1HIS FOR-! MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO TOE SERQSANT
      IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING TOE QOJND
                              •F' DIVISION

                                                    CATE:     9 APRIL 1988
FOOTBALL DOTY:   SEMI FINAL
                      LIVERPOOL -V- NOTTS FOREST

                               SERIAL NO

                     DETAILS OF OFFICERS EMPLOYED




                                                    DTj@)

                                                    DT/6f)

                                                    UT}

                                                    urtgrj
                                                    ut/S)
                                                    ut /S^

                                                    DT/fi)
                                                    e rr©

                                                    (urfcp
       9 PC
                                                     dtt/ot




       INCIDENTS AND COMENTS REGARDING DUTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
       MEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE S O W CVERIZAF


       Signature of Sergeant in charger


       THIS FDfW MUST BE GCMPLJETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
       IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING TOE GRCUND
                               *F* DIVISION

FOOTBALL DITTY:   SEMI FINAL                       PETE:       9 APRIL 1988

                      LIVERPOOL -V- NOTTS

                                SERIAL ND

                     DETAILS OF OFFICERS


      Serge*                                       4HW

      1 PC                                         *7OT

      2 PC                                        4^/OT

      3 PC                                         f t/c r r

      4 PC                                         pt/ar

      5 PC                                         jft/CfT

      6 PC                                         tr/or

      7 PC                                         0?/crr

      8 PC

      9 PC                                         U
                                                   T/T o SZo Ar /6
                                                     0
      10 PC                                        crr>€&-        —    11




      INCIDENTS AND OCMOfTS REGARDING DUTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
      MEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHOWN CVERLEAF


      Signature of Sergeant in charge


      THIS FDR-! MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
      IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING TOE GROUND
                               •F* DIVISION


FOOTBALL DUTY:    SOCI FINAL                        DATC:      9 APRIL 1988

                       LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST

                                SERIAL NO

                      DETAILS OF OFFICERS


      Serge*                                        W/OT

      1 PC

      2 PC                                          DT/«T

      3 PC                                          DT/0*

      4 PC                                          DfT/0^

      5 PC                                          Dr/ar

      6 PC                                          Dr/ejp

      7 PC                                          mf*t£

      8 PC                                          m/9p

      9 PC                                          m /o p -

      10 PC                                         DT/OT



      INCIDENTS AND CEMMEJJTS REGARDING DITTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
      MEM3ERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHCWN CHEKLEAF


      Signature of Sergeant in charge                  &
      THIS FO»4 MUST BE CCMPI£TED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERCXANT
      IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GKXJND
                               •F' DIVISION


FOOTBALL DLTTY:   SOfl FINAL                        CATC:      9 APRIL 1988

                      LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST

                                SERIAL NO

                     DETAILS OF OFFICERS EMPLOYED


      Serge.                                        -OT/OT

      1 PC                                         —OT/OT

      2 PC                                          ^W/OT

      3 PC                                         ^JST/OT

      4 PC                                          JH/OT

      5 PC                                          •OT/OT

      6 PC                                          jEP/orr

      7 PC                                          S R I or

      8 PC                                          £f»l&T

      9 PC                                          DT/0T

      10 PC                                         DT/ST



      INCIDENTS AND COMMENTS REGARDING DUTY (INCUUDING ARRESTS BY
      MEWERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHOW^VERLEAF


      Signature of Sergeant in chargt^
                                              77
      THIS FOKM MUST BE OCMPLEUD AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
      IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO L£AVXNG THE O O N )
                              •F' DIVISION


FOOTBALL DUTY;   SEMI FINAL                        DATE:        9 APRIL 1988

                      LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST

                               SERIAL NO

                     DETAILS OF OFFICERS


      Sergear                                          DT/OT

                                                       DT/OT
      1 PC

      2 PC                                             DT/OT

                                                       DT/OT
      3 PC
                                                       DT/OT
      4 PC

      5 PC                                             DT/OT

      6 PC                                             DT/OT

      7 PC                                             DTT/OT

      8 PC                                             DT/OT

                                                       DT/OT
      9 PC

      10 PC                                            DT/OT




      INCIEEJfTS AND OOWENTS EflBGARDING DUTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
      JOCERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHCHN CVERLEAF


      Signature of Sergeant in charge
                                                   /
      THIS FORM MUST BE CCMPL£7H2) AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
      IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GHXJND
                                  'F* DIVISION


FOOTBALL DITTY;      SOCI FINAL                               9 APRIL 1988

                         LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS

                                   SERIAL NO

                        DETAILS OF OFFICERS OTPLOY


       Serge*                                         DT/OT

 ^      1 PC                                          DT/OT

  ^     2 PC                                          DT/OT

  ^     3 PC                                          DT/OT

        4 PC                                          DT/OT

  ^     5 PC                                          DT/OT

     S' 6 PC                                          DT/OT

  ^     7 PC                                          DT/OT

        n   ty^                                       DT/OT T"/ZAa,s
        O K.

        9 PC                                          DT/OT

        10 PC                                         DT/OT



        INCIDENTS AND OCM4EJH5 REJGARDING IXTTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
        MEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUSTJBEL.5M0WN CVERLEAF




        THIS FORM MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
        IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GROM)

             I fed                                Fo/z.
                               »F' DIVISION


FOOTOALL DITTY:   SEMI FINAL                         DATE:     9 A PRIL 1 9 8 8

                       LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST

                                SERIAL ND

                      DETAILS OF OFFICERS EMPLOYED


      Sergean                                        DT/gif

      1 PC                                           W/OT

      2 PC                                           &/OT

      3 PC                                           WS/OT

      4 PC                                           f$t/crr

      5 PC                                           &/or

      6 PC                                           Vp/UT

       7 PC                                          &/<JT

      8 PC                                           m /m

       9 PC                                          dt/ m

       10 PC                                         &/ot



       INCIDEJ/TS AND OOhMENTS REJGARDING DITTY {INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
       MEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST HE SHCWN CVERLEAF


       Signature of Sergeant in charge    ...

       THIS FORM MUST BE CCMPLEHD AND HANDED IN TO TOE SERGEANT
       IN CHARGE POLICE ROOM PRIOR TO LEAVING TOE GROW®
                               •F* DIVISION


FOOTBALL DUTY:    SEMI FINAL                         DATE:     9 APRIL 1988

                      LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST

                                SERIAL NO
                                              2n
                      DETAILS OF OFFICERS EMPLOYED


                                                     DT/gfi

                                                     UT/P?'
                                                     crr/gHr

                                                     DT/pr

      4 PC                                           m/or'



      6 PC                                           ur/pr'

      7 PC                                           DT/QR''

      8 PC                                           UT0 f

      9 PC

       10 PC
                                                     DT/gf



      INCIDENTS AND OTMENIS REGARDING DlfTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
      ICM9ERS OF SERIALS ETTC) MUST BE SHCWN O/ERLEAF


       Signature of Sergeant in charge


       THIS FOR-! MUST BE CCMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERCEANT
       IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GROJND
                               •F' DIVISION


FOOTBALL DITTY:   SEMI FINAL                         DATE:     9 APRIL 1988

                                        S FOREST
                      LIVERPOOL -v- Ncnrs

                                SERIAL NO


                      DETAILS OF OFFICERS EMPLOYED


      Sergeant                                       tfr/or

      1 PC                                           u>f/crr

      2 PC                                           ur/a

      3 PC                                           u r/eft

      4 PC

      5 PC                                           u r/o r

      6 PC                                           u r /&

      7 PC                                           u r/# r

      8 PC                                           uv/fft

      9 PC                                           uv/</r

      10 PC                                          ur/fft



      INCIDENTS AND CO^ENTS REGARDING CUTY (DdJJDING ARRESTS BY
      MEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE S H O W CNERLEAF


      Signature of Sergeant in charge


      THIS POW! MUST BE OCMPIirilJJ AND HANDED IN TO U'ft®
                                                        , SERCEAhTT
      IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GRCUND
                               •F* DIVISION


FOOTBALL DITTY:   SEMI FINAL                            DATE:     9 APRIL 1988

                       IJTVERPOOL -v- Nu'l'l’S FOREST

                                 SERIAL NO

                      DETAILS OF OFFICERS


      Serge                                             ^/OT

         PC                                             ••SF/CT

         PC                                             ^T/OT

         PC                                             ^F/OT

         PC                                             %e/cr

                                                        ^tt/OT
       5 PC
                                                        B^/CT

       7 PC/                                            -E570T

       8 PC                                             B8VCT

       9 PC                                             DT/CT

       10 PC                                             DT/CT



       INCIDBWS AND COMEUTS REGARDING EUTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
       FEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHOtfJ fVERIEAF


       Sigp^ature o f Sergeant in charge


       THIS FORM MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO TOE SEM2SANT
       IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING TOE QRCUND
                               »F' DIVISION


FOOTBALL DUTY:    SEMI FINAL                         CATC:     9 APRIL 1988

                      LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST

                                SERIAL NO

                      DETAILS OF OFFICERS EMPLOYED


      Sergeant                                                           i   ( J>T

      1 PC                                           -WP/CT

      2 PC                                           «f/0T

      3 PC                                           q £/ot

      4 PC                                           DT/OT

      5 PC                                           jrfr/OT

      6 PC                                           (DT/CjP

      7 PC                                         ,/^T/OT^

      8 PC                                         ^OT/OT^'

      9 PC

      10 PC                                           DT/OT




      INCIDENTS AND OOMENTS REGARDING I                          rs BY
      ME>BERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE 9


      Signature of Sergeant in charge


      THIS FORM MUST BE GCMPLETCD AND HANDED IN TO TOE SERGEANT
      IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING TOE GRCUND




                 ;>
                                   a ? DIVISION

                                                       DATE: 9 APRIL 1988
FOCrraALL DUTY:       SEMI FINAL
                          LIVERPOOL -v- tun's FOREST

                                    SERIAL NO


                         DETAILS OF OFF!


      Sergeant                                         mm
                                                       m/p
      1 PC
                                                       Dr/gf
      2 PC
                                                       DT/9^
      3 PC

      4 PC        4
                                                       misp/
                                                       W/oi
       5 PC

       6 PC
                                                       m /&

       7 PC                                            m /fff

       8 PC
                                                       m/&r
                                                       jr/crr
       9 PC

       10 PC                                            m /pr


a      INCIDENTS AND COMMENTS REGARDING DOTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
       MEM3ERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHOWN OVERLEAF


       Signature of Sergeant in charge

       THIS F O W MUST BE OCMPLETTD AND HANDED IN TO TOE SERCXANTT
       IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING TOE QOJND
                              *F' DIVISION

                                                    WVTC:      9 APRIL 1988
KOIBALL DUTY:    SEMI FINAL
                      LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST




                     DETAILS OF OFF1


     Serge                                          UT/

                                                   >*&£/crr
      1 PC
                                                         t
                                                    crr/fcq;
      2 PC
                                                    mTsq;
      3 PC
                                                   Nwc/crr
      4 PC
                                                    crrTtsr
      5 PC
                                                    'tsycrr
      6 PC
                                                    Ick/ot
      7 PC

      8 PC
                                                     DT/OT
      9 PC

      10 PC                                          DT/OT




      DCIDEJflS AND COWENTS RE3GARDING DOTY {INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
      MEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHCWN OVERLEAF

                                                                      L
      Signature of Sergeant in charge

      THIS P0R“! MUST BE OCMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO TOE SERGEANT
      IN CHARGE POLICE ROOM PRIOR TO LEAVING TOE QOJND
                                "be/Ukc       Vv<T
                               •F' DIVISION      °

FOOTBALL DUTY:   SEttI FINAL                      CATC:       9 APRIL 1988

                      LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS P

                                SERIAL NO

                     DETAILS OF OFFI


      Sergeant                                    Drr/pr-

      1 PC                                        dtt/o t -

      2 PC                                        drr/gp-

      3 PC                                        crr^p-

     4 PC                                        JSP70T

     5 PC                                        #»t/ot

     6 PC                                        Jff/Ol

     7 PC                                        JX/OT

     8 PC                                         ur/09-

     9 PC                                        jwcrr

     10 PC                                      ^fnor



     INCIDENTS AND OOMENIS REGARDING DITTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS
     hE>BERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHCWN OVERLEAF


     Signature ol Sergeant in charge


     THIS FDfM MUST BE OCMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO TOE SERGEANT
     IN CHARGE POLICE ROOM PRIOR TO LEAVING TOE GROUND
                             •F* DIVISION


FOOTBALL DUTY:   SBC FINAL                          DATCt      9 APRIL 1988

                      LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST

                              SERIAL NO

                     DETAILS OF OFFICERS nmi/jiED


      Sergeanl

      1 PC                                          ■ 9 ®
      2 PC

      3 PC

      4 PC                                          (jg)m

      5 PC                                         (m^B

      6 PC
      7 PC

      8 PC                                         (vfex

      9 PC

      10 PC                                          dt /ctt




      INCIDENTS AND OCMMEJWS REGARDING DUTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
      MEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHCWN OVERLEAF


      Signature of Sergeant in charge /

      THIS POFM MJST BE OCMPLETTD AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
      IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING TOE GKXff©




     l.                         & f
                                •F’ DIVISION

                                                     DATE:     9 APRIL 1988
FOOTBALL DUTY:   S M    FINAL
                       LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST^

                                 SERIAL N M

                       DETAILS OF OFFICERS


      Sergeant
                                                     _gr/crr
      1 PC
                                                     IJF/OT
      2 PC
                                                     $T/CT
      3 PC
                                                     Q t/ot
      4 PC
                                                     jSJVCT
      5 PC
                                                     DT/CB
      6 PC
                                                      SF/crr
      7 PC
                                                     ^f/CT
      8 PC
                                                     'l&'/cr
       9 PC
                                                      tf?/OT
       10 PC



       INCIEEJWS AND COMEJ/IS REGARDING DUTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
       MEMJERS OF SERIALS ETTC) MUST BE SHCWN CVERLEAF


       Signature of Sergeant in charge

       THIS POFM MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
       IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GROUND
              W
                     i   a   <Og    o     1
                                                                 it

                                   •F' DIVISION


FOOTBALL DOTY:    SEMI FINAL                        DATE: 9 APRIL 1988

                         LIVERPOOL - v - NOTTS

                                    SERIAL NO

                     DETAILS OF OFFICERS EMPLOYED


     Sergea                                       Cot/ot>

     1 PC                                         C u t / err)

     2 PC

     3 PC                                         ( u r /o r )

     4 PC                                         (m y o r)

     5 PC

     6 PC
     7 PC

     8 P5                                           crr/crr^

     9 PC                                           DT/OT

     10 PC                                          DT/OT




     INCIDENTS AND COMMENTS REGARDING DITTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
     MEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHOWN WERLfeftF


     Signature of Sergeant in charge

     THIS FOffr! MUST BE OCMPLETYD AND HANDED IN TOi^IHE
                                                    THE SERGEANT
     IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GROUND
                    II
                         ~T7\ K)C;0              ^


                                • F ' DIVISION


FOOTBALL DUTY:   SEKI FINAL                             DATE:        9 APRIL 1988

                         LIVERPOOL - v - NOTTS FOREST

                                  SERIAL NO




      Sergeant
                     DETAILS OF OFFICERS EMPI
                                                        T
                                                        m/crr
                                                                     Qfjt
                                                                     O^CO
                                                                                     o f f



      1 PC                                              m/or         o so to        /S 0 &
                                                        s r/o r       eqoo          l^ o r o

      3 PC                                              m/crr         0 9 cro        igcTO

      4 PC                                              'f T / O T    ORCTD         t%<5 0

      5 PC                                              ik/or         o^cro
      6 PC                                              Jfi/or           c ro       I °tcrO
      7 PC                                               ur/or

      8 PC                                               ur/or

      9 PC                                               ur/or

      10 PC                                              ur/or



      INCIDENTS AND OOMENTS REGARDING DUTY (INCliJDING ARRESTS BY
      (■EMBERS OF SERIALS E7TC) MUST BE SHCWN CVERU5AF


      Signature o f Sergeant in charge
                                                                         Ph

      THIS FORM MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
      IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GROW®
                  ( I                        If                / j/s fe c -rifc   5*
                        f ftdGo       ~5 >

                                'F' DIVISION

FOOTBALL DITTY:    SEMI FINAL                          DATE:    9 APRIL 1988
                         LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST




                        DETAILS OF OFFICERS EMPLOYED


      Sergeant                                         DT/OT

      1 PC                                             DT/OT

      2 PC                                             DT/CT

      3 PC                                             DT/OT

      4 PC                                             DT/OT

      5 PC                                             DT/OT

      6 PC                                             DT/CT

      7 PC                                             DT/CT

      8 PC                                             DT/OT

      9 PC                                             DT/CT

      10 PC                                            DT/OT



      BNCLDE2/TS AND COMEWIS REGARDING DITTY (INCLipING ARRESTS BY
      MEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHOWN 0--


      Signature of Sergeant in charge                              fs


      THIS FOFW MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
      IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GROUND
                                *F* DIVISION

POOTBAIJ. DL7TY:   SEMI FINAL                        DATE:     9 APRIL 1988

                       LIVERPOOL -v- NJTTTS FOREST

                                 SERIAL NO


                      DETAILS OF OFFICERS EMPLOYED


      Sergeant                                       JXF/(JT

       1 PC                                          Jff'/OT

      2 PC                                           JX/OT

       3 PC                                          SfT/OT

      4 PC                                           JJT/OT

       5 PC                                          U f/O T

       6 PC                                          p rfo r

       7 PC                                          DT/OT

       8 PC                                          DT/OT

       9 PC                                           DT/OT

       10 PC                                          DT/OT



      INCIDENTS AND OOMENIS REGARDING DOTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
      ME7CERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHCWN OVERLEAF


       Signature of Sergeant in charge

       THIS P0R4 MJST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERCZANT
       IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GROUND
                              •F' DIVISION

FOOTBALL DUTY:   SEMI FINAL                        DATE:      9 APRIL 1988

                     LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST

                               SERIAL

                    DETAILS OF OFFICERS EMPLOYED


     Serge<                                        ■^5'OT
     1 PC                                          ^/OT

     2 PC                                          DT/eSP

     3 PC                                          DT/^P

     4 PC                                          DT/C^

     b PC                                          DT/jflp*

     6 PC                                          DT/^

     7 PC _______________________                  DT/OT

     8 PC                                          DT/OT

     9 PC                                          DT/OT

     10 PC                                         DT/OT



     INCIDENTS AND COMENTS REGARDING DITTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
     MEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHOWN (VERLEAE


     Signature of Sergeant in charge

     THIS FOiW MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO TOE SERGEANT
     IN CHARGE POLICE ROOM PRIOR TO LEAVING TOE GHCUND
                                             'F' DIVISION


FOOTBALL DITTY:        SEMI FINAL                                  DME;        9 APRIL 1988

                              LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST

                                              SERIAL NO
                                                           5   3
                             DETAILS OF OFFICERS EMPLOYED


      Sejpgea                                                      m /o r

      1 PC                                                         m / err

      2 PC                                                         •/o r

      3 PC                                                         ■r /c r r

      4 PC                                                         m/crr

      5 PC                                                         m /o r

      6 PC                                                         m /o r

      7 PC                                                         u r/o r

      8 PC                                                         u r/o r

      9 PC                                                         u r/o r

      10 PC                                                        u r/o r



      INCIDENTS AND OOMENTS REGARDING DITTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
      MEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHO** rVERIflAF


      S ig n a tu re o f S e rg e a n t in    c h a rg e


      THIS FOFM MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO TOE SERGEANT
      IN CHARGE POLICE R X M PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GROUND
                                          •F' DIVISION


FOOTBALL DITTY:        SEMI FINAL                           DATE:         9 APRIL 1988

                              LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST




                             DETAILS OF OFFICERS EKPU3YED


      Sergeant                                              (DJ^OT

      1 PC                                                  mjKJTJ

      2 PC                                                  ur(or)

      3 PC                                                  urfad

      4 PC                                                  DT(OT

                                                             o t( o t )
      5 PC

      6 PC                                                   urj(&r)

      7 PC                                                   otVo t

      8 PC                                                   DT(OT

      9 PC                                                   DT/@

      10 PC



      INCIDENTS AND OOMENTS REGARDING DITTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
      MEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHCMN O&RIEXF


      S ig n a tu r e o f S e rg e a n t in c h a rg e


      THIS FORM MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
      IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GRCUND
                                *F* DIVISION


FOOTBALL DUTY:     SEMI FINAL                            DATC:    9 APRIL 1988

                        LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST




                       DETAILS OF OFFICERS EMPLOYED


      Sergeant                                           DT/OT

      1 PC                                               DT/OT

      2 PC                                               DT/OT

      3 PC                                               DT/OT

      4 PC                                               DT/OT

      b PC                                               ETT/OT

      6 PC
      7 PC

      8 PC J
      9 PC    ^

      10 PC                                              DT/OT



      INCIDENTS AND OOMENTS R E G A R D I N G DITTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
      SOBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHCWN CVERL£AF


      Signature of Sergeant in charge


      THIS FUR-1 MUST BE OCMPL£TED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
      IN CHARGE POLICE RDCM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GRCUND
                                 *F' DIVISION


FOOTBALL DUTY:      SEKI FINAL                        DATE:    9 APRIL 1988

                        LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST

                                  SERIAL NO

                       DETAILS OF OFFICERS EMPLOYED

                                                      UT/fft

                                                      UT/4T

      2 PC                                            UT/QT

                                                      UT/W

                                                      m/fa

                                                      m /fa

      6 PC                                            mm
                                                      m /m

      8 PC                                            m/01
      9 PC                                            M/m

      10 PC                                           DT/OT




      INCIDENTS f                               INCliJDIFCKARRESTS
      MEMBERS OF                                VERLEAF    \


      Sicyiature of Sergeant in charge

      THIS FOR*! MJST BE CCMPLEHD AND HANDED IN TO    3
      IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GROUND
                               *F* DIVISION

FPOTOALL EX/ry:   SEMI FINAL                         DATE:     9 APRIL 1988

                       LIVERPOOL -V- NOTTS FOREST

                                SERIAL ND

                      DETAILS OF OFFICERS EXPLOVED


      Sergeant                                       Drr/asr

      1 PC                                           D^/OT

      2 PC                                           CB'/OT

      3 PC                                           Eft/OT

      4 PC                                           9*/ot

      5 PC                                           UV/99

      6 PC                                           Hr/or

      7 PC                                           DT/tfU'

     8 PC                                            crr/wk

     9 PC                                            mux

      10 P8 f.                                       fofOY



      INCIDEJ/TS AND OOWENTS REGARDING DUTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
     MEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHOWN CVERLEAF


     Sicjnature of Sergeant in charge

     THIS FORM MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
     IN CHARGE POLICE ROOM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GROUND
                                         •F' DIVISION


FOOTBALL DUTY:         S M     FINAL
                                                            DftTE:    9 APRIL 1988

                              LIVERPOOL -V- NL/1TS FOREST

                                           SERIAL NO

                             DETAILS OF OFFICERS EMPLOYED


      S e rg e a n t
                                                            tp/<JT
                                                            J^/OT
      1 PC

      2 PC                                                  #/OT

      3 PC                                                  J0 "/OT
                                                            J&/VT
      4 PC i

      5 PC                                                  Xf/OT

                                                            &fOT
      6 PC
                                                            P*/OT
      7 PC
                                                            CjP/OT
      8 PC
                                                            j^/OT
      9 PC
                                                            Hft/ar
       10 PC       -



       INCIDENTS AND CO-MENTS REGARDING DOTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
       MOBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHOWN OVERLEAF


       S ig n a tu re o f S e rg e a n t in c h a rg e                   ft.
       THIS FORM MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
       IN CHARGE POLICE ROOM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GROUND
                               •F' DIVISION


FOOTBALL DITTY:   SEMI FINAL                        DATE;      9 APRIL 1988

                      LIVERPOOL -V- NOTTS FOREST

                                SERIAL ND

                     DETAILS OF OFFICERS EMPLOYED


      Sergeant                                      sdT/OT

      1 PC

      2 PC                                          jrf/OT

      3 PC                                          jrf/OT

      4 PC                                           ptf'/or

      5 PC                                           pf/<JT

      6 PC                                           VT/J2f{

      7 PC                                           UT/tf

      8 PC                                           m/pi

      9 PC                                           DT/CT

      10 PC                                          DT/CT



      DCIDEOTS AND OOMEJ/TS REGARDING DUTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
      MEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHOWN OVERLEAF

                                                                      A
      Signature of Sergeant in charge

      THIS FOfW MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO TOE SERCEANT
      IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING TOE GROUND
              *72,
   f /O   S




•*■ ■

                     r€
                                    •F* DIVISION

FOOTOAIJ- DITTY;       SEMI FINAL                        DATE:      9 APRIL 1988

                           LJVERPQOL -v- NOTTS FOREST

                                     SERIAL ND


                          DETAILS OF OFFICERS EMPLOYED


      Sergeant                                           J3f/OT

      1 PC                                               ■J^/OT

      2 PC                                               iff/OT

      3 PC         i                                     g t/c rr

      4 PC       /                                       J&W

      5 PC       J                                       ptfor

      6 PC                                               vr/OT
                 t


      7 PC       <                                       #/or

      8 PC                                               DT/OT

      9 PC                                               DT/OT

       10 PC                                             DT/OT




      INCIDENTS AND OOWEJ'TIS REGARDING DITTY (DOAJDING ARRESTS BY
      MEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE g C M N CVERLEAF


       Signature of Sergeant in charge


       THIS P0W1 MUST BE OCMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
       IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING TOE GROUND
                              •F* DIVISION


FOOTBALL DOTY:   SEMI FINAL                         DATE;       9 APRIL 1988

                      LIVERPOOL -V- NOTTS FOREST

                               SERIAL NO


                     DETAILS OF OFFICERS EMPLOYED


      Sergeant                                      J0T7OT

      1 PC                                          &f/OI

      2 PC                                          J*f/OT

      3 PC                                          pf/OT

      4 PC                                          prfar

      5 PC                                          jE rf/a i

      6 PC                                          jrdoi

      7 PC                                          pf/or

      8 PC                                           crr/erT

      9 PC                                           DT/0f*

      10 PC                                          DT/OT



      INCIDENTS AND GOMENTS REGARDING DUTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
      MEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHCWN WERLEAF

                                    '
       Signature of Sergeant in charge L--------------- ---
                                                                  (I
       THIS FORM MUST BE OCMPL£TED AND HANDED IN TO TOE SERGEANT
       IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING TOE GROUND
                                •F' DIVISION


FOOTBALL DUTY:    SEMI FINAL                            DME:     9 APRIL 1988

                       LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST

                                 SERIAL NO


                      ncr&TTg   n r DFFTm ?S EMPLOYED


                                                        BC/OT



                                                        m /o r

                                                        wr/orr

                                                        DT/orr




                                                        wr/orr

                                                        W/OT

                                                        DT/OT




      INCIDENTS AND OOMENTS REGARDING DOTY (                 ARRESTS BY
      MEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHCWN                      11


       Signature of Sergeant in charge


       THIS FOR-I MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO
       IN CHARGE POLICE ROOM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE
                               •F* DIVISION

                                                        OWE:       9 APRIL 1988
FOOTBALL DLTTY:   SQG FINAL
                       LIVERPOOL - v - MJ1TS3 POKfcST
                                              FOREST


                                SERIAL NO
                                            6     3
                      in?TATIS OF OFFICERS EMPLOYED



      Serge
                                                        #yor
                                                        v ff/o r
       1 PC
                                                        Br/crr
       2 PC
                                                        R®/orr
       3 PC
                                                        CT/orr
       4 PC

       5 PC
                                                        ifr/crr
       6 PC
                                                        WfCtr
       7 PC
                                                        d t /o t
       8 PC
                                                        d t /o t
       9 PC
                                                        OT/orr
       10 PC




        INCHOn-S AND COMMENTS REGARDING EUTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY



        Signature of Sergeant in charge

        THIS FORM MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
        IN CHARGE POLICE ROOM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GRCXJND
                                   •F' DIVISION


                    SEMI FINAL                                       DATE:   9 APRIL 1988
football   DUTY-.
                        LIVERPOOL -v -


                                                                                   /S
                       DETAILS o f o f f i c e r s e m p l o y e d


      Serge

           PC

           PC

           PC

           PC

           PC

           PC

           PC



           PC




       INCIDENTS AND OOMENTS REGARDING DOTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
       Mfl-BERS OF SERIALS ETC) MLJST BE SHCWN OVERIEAF


       Signature of Sergeant in charge


       THIS FORM MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
       IN CHARGE POLICE ROCM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GRCUND
                                    n
                                          \


I f *                                             A




   y U ^      JUSJ^J ^              ■*^A

                .   ./         ■ n        £**+ C
                                               l>*>Su*

  h J .   £              -   A t   (* * * * & £   <v‘ * AU“ ''> O * * ^ - • ^ Y/ '



'•^t       U A M e u ^ .     y t m                                         V   ^     A   ^   ~


                    c&-*£*y




                                             A
                               ■F* DIVISION


FOOTBALL DOT:     SEMI FINAL                         PATE:     9 APRIL 1988

                      LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST

                                SERIAL NO

                      DETAILS OF OFFICERS EMPLOYED


      Sergeai                                        CT/OT

      1 PC                                           ff’/OT

      2 PC                                           ®/OT

      3 PC                                           pr/or
                                                      J
      4 PC                                           qt/oT
      5 PC                                           #   vot


      6 PC                                           cr/or

      7 PC                                           DT/OT

      8 PC                                           DT/OT

      9 PC                                           DT/OT

      10 PC                                          DT/OT



      INCIDENTS AND COMENTS REGARDING DUTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
      MEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE £JO<N OVERIEAF


       Signature of Sergeant in charge

       THIS FOW4 MUST BE GOMPJJETTED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
       IN CHARGE POLICE ROOM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GROUND
                               'F* DIVISION

PJCTTBALL DUTY:   SEMI FINAL                           DATEs^ 9 APRIL 1988
                      LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST

                                                   £


                     DETAILS OF OFFICERS EMPLOYED


      Sergee                                           Sf/CT

      1 PC                                             ■ea^OT

      2 PC

      3 PC                                             -b t /ot

      4 PC                                             JefFfOT

       5 PC                                            =0 F/OT

       6 PC                                            -WOT

       7 PC                                            «/OT

       8 PC                                             DT/OT

       9 PC                                             DT/OT

       10 PC                                            DT/OT



       INCIDENTS AND CXMffiNTS REGARDING DUTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
       MDBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHOWN OVERLEAF

                                          ,   \


       Signature of Sergeant in charge            ............. ......


       THIS FOFM MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
       IN CHARGE POLICE ROOM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GROUND
                              »F» DIVISION


FOOTBALL DUTY:   SEMI FINAL                         DATE;   9 APRIL 1988

                      LIVERPOOL -V- NOTTS FOREST

                               SERIAL NO


                     DETAILS OF OFFICERS EMPLOYED




      2 PC



      4 PC




      8 PC                                          DT/OT

      9 PC                                          DT/OT

      10 PC                                         DT/OT




      INCIDENTS AND COMENTS REGARDING DUTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
      MOCERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHCMN OVERLEAF


       Signature of Sergeant in charge

       THIS F0H4 MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
       IN CHARGE POLICE ROOM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GRCXJND
                                                                f i t i -
                                           *F* DIVISION


             FQOIBALL DUTY:   SEMI FINAL                            DATEs 9 APRIL 1988

                                   LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST

                                            SERIAL NO

                                  DETAILS OF OFFICERS EMPLOYED

                                                                    DT/OT

                                                                    4^/OT

                                                                    DT/OT

                                                                    DT
                                                                    DT/OT    0
                                                                    DT/OT    if

                                                                    ^OT

                                                                    0 /OT
                                                                -   ^fT/OT

    <^4-cA          9 PC                                            TS/ot
£

                    10 PC                                           {^/OT

                                                                     c m

                    INCIDENTS AND GOMENTS REGARDING DUTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
                    MEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MUST BE SHCWN OVERLEAF


                    Signature of Sergeant in charge


                    THIS FORM MUST BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERCEANT
                    IN CHARGE POLICE ROOM PRIOR TO LEAVING TOE GROW®




             *   r c c

             J   Q lY t

                                                                                         A
d )         2

        ^              /= 7 <s^                        <~sl/4     ^      & o A          >    /

        ^0<L€h^if<> .                  ^ s ty 'e ^ c k X * a -** /c k c u l y&A jfe o .


^)                 o^csi^L& ^ i                                        ■*&-/     &      ^   /        ^    y       y   ^

            tc.         ©■*-.                                              A*ir(X^it



5)     /J/'&Aa, ?7'&- ck-</ (5i> AJ-i-^&S-< ' & - & & & . of
       yp'S-C^t                                 //U2^t/]/Lf l /&-/'      */l/1                                -


^} /^{^v                  ^ /ti9 ^ c.'C < / -^ur           mi o   f7u z*~ c(     3*0        tsd A-c^c
                            e^                       <>!<?} .                        jfcs            <9^/tCcus>

      rt& ~ /         /^ p C ^ A jG e S -& 4               C-A9ti^CdC <^$\                       £       &*~r              e*d(

                                                       oo-t^c^c/ T&z-t-7                                              '~^£x<t ‘=2

      Crh       sO C4A*1 +1* . e rz ^ d           -S^lj2^4ZX3h**<<p4             c f.                                          ^



                           -------- W
                                    ---------

                           4^ j 2S - a
