D.L. S E L L E R S & C O . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                                                                             T99/1 567
           I EEDS CROWN COURT
A

                                                                             Combined Court Centre,
                                                                             Oxford Row,
                                                                             Leeds.

                                                                           Wednesday. 22nd December 1999




                                                                 Before:

C                                               THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE HOOPER




                                                                REGINA




                                                            DAVID DUCKENFIELD

                                                            BERNARD MURRAY




           MR ALUN JONES QC and MR J LEWIS appeared on behalf of the Prosecution.

           MR W CLEGG QC and MR P ISAACS appeared on behalf of the defendant
           Duckenfield.

           MR M HARRISON QC and MR S MYERSON appeared on behalf of the defendant
           Murray.



G                           Transcript of the Palantype notes of Sellers Legal Services Ltd
                            High Holborn House, 52-54 High Holborn, London WC1A 6RL




                                                               PROCEEDINGS
D.L. S E L L E R S 8c C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




B




C




D




E




F




H
D.L . S E L L E R S 8c C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                                                                       Wednesday 23rd December 1 999


A                                                             RULING


    MR JUSTICE HOOPER: I first of all give my reasons for the ruling I made on

    Monday.
B
           Mr Clegg QC, objects to the admissibility of answers given by the defendant,

    Mr Duckenfield, to the Taylor Inquiry and to the statement in writing made by him

    to the Inquiry. He submits that the evidence is inadmissible on the grounds of

C public policy at common law. At the conclusion of the submission, I ruled against

    it.      That submission was heard before a number of other submissions, also

    concerning the admissibility of this evidence. Had this first submission succeeded,

D then witnesses would not have needed to come to court. Mr Clegg's submissions

    are set out in paragraphs 2.4, 2.5, and the first sentence of 2.6, which I now cite.

                 "2.4 The Taylor Inquiry was established with the following terms of
                 reference

E                            'To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday
                             football ground on 15th April 1989 and to make
                             recommendations about the need of crowd control and
                             safety at sports events.

                 2.5 It is axiomatic that in the circumstances of the Hillsborough
p                Disaster it was in the wider public interest that all witnesses should
                 be free to give their evidence with candour and that the overriding
                 public interest in seeking to prevent a possible recurrence of the
                 disaster far outweighed the interests of the prosecutor in this trial.

                 2.6 Were evidence given by witnesses to such an Inquiry to be
                 admissible against them in criminal proceedings then one of the prime
^                objectives of the inquiry might be eliminated."

    If there was such a public policy rule, then it would apply to any subsequent civil
D.L. S E L L E R S 8c C o . / W. LL O Y D W O O D L A N D




    and criminal proceedings. I asked Mr Clegg whether the rule of public policy would

    apply if a witness had been reminded of the privilege against self-incrimination and
A
    had continued to give evidence upon which the prosecution wished to rely at some

    subsequent trial. He seemed to accept the rule of public policy would not preclude

    the admission of that evidence. The only authority to which Mr Clegg could point
B
    was a passage in a decision of Mr Justice Turner in a case called Alcindor and

    Others, a decision he gave at the Old Bailey on 11th June of 1990. That case

    involved the sinking of the Herald of Free Enterprise in Zeebrugge harbour on 6th

C March of 1987 and the manslaughter charges that arose out of it. Shortly after

    the sinking an Inquiry was opened under the provisions of the Merchant Shipping

    Act.          That Inquiry concluded with the publication of the report.               Police

D investigations subsequently started in December 1987.                It was unsuccessfully

    submitted on the part of all of the defendants that the prosecution was an abuse

    of process. During his ruling, Mr Justice Turner said,

                "It should of course be stated that if a public inquiry is to fulfil the
E              reasonable expectations of those who have caused it to be set up,
                and indeed the legitimate expectations of the wider public, that the
                candour in the witnesses who are called to give their evidence is to
                be encouraged. If witnesses, or potential witnesses are conscious
                that w hat they may say at an Inquiry may subsequently be used
                against them one of the prime objectives of the Inquiry might be
p              eliminated, either by the witnesses withholding that required candour
                or alternatively by not coming forward in the first instance."

    I was told that subsequently the prosecution decided not to rely upon the answers

    given by defendants to the Inquiry.

^        Mr Jones QC, for the prosecution, who appeared in that case, told me that the

    case against the defendants come to an end part way through the prosecution
D.L. S E L L E R S & C O . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




     case and before the time at which any such answers would have been put into

  evidence. It seems clear that the passage is obiter and it must be doubtful whether
A •
  or not the matter was fully argued. Indeed, on page 23 of the transcript of the

     decision, there is a reference to the fact that Mr. Carman QC might advance in the

     future an argument that the admissions made in the course of the formal
B
     investigation should be excluded under section 78 of the Police and Criminal

     Evidence A ct 1984.

          Mr Jones in his skeleton argument opposes the submission made by Mr Clegg.

c He draws my attention to the fact that both in the Bloody Sunday Inquiry, being

     conducted under the Chairmanship of Lord Saville of Moodigate and in the

     Lawrence Inquiry, under the Chairmanship of Sir William Macpherson of Clooney,

D the witnesses were given an undertaking that their evidence would not be used

     to their prejudice in any criminal proceedings, other than for perjury.    Mr Jones

     submits that no such undertaking would be necessary if Mr Clegg was right.

          I agree w ith that submission. Although Mr Clegg drew my attention to cases
E
     concerned with the privilege against self-incrimination, I do not see how they help

     in deciding the issue as to whether or not it would be against public policy to

     permit any answers given during an Inquiry to be used in subsequent civil or
F
     criminal proceedings. Reluctant as I am to depart from anything said by Mr Justice

     Turner, albeit obiter, I am firmly of the view there is no such rule of public policy

     as that for which Mr Clegg argued.

            I now give my reasons for the ruling I announced late yesterday afternoon,

     namely that the statement made by



                                                            3
 H
D.L. S E L L E R S 8c C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




     Mr Duckenfield for the purposes of the Inquiry and the answers to questions put

     to him during the Inquiry, are in principle admissible, subject to any further
A
     argument as to that part of the answers which underpins count 5 and relates to

     an alleged lie.                I shall deal with that matter, if it is necessary to do so when I

     consider the validity of count 5. That will only arise should the application to stay
B
     the proceedings on the ground of abuse, which I'm hearing starting on 4th

     January, should fail.

         Mr Clegg submits that a statement made by Mr Duckenfield on about 5th May

C of 1989 and the answers he gave, starting on 24th May of 1989 at the Inquiry

     into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster, are inadmissible by virtue of section 78 of

     the Police and Criminal Evidence A ct 1984. Section 78 provides,

j)              "(1) In any proceedings the Court may refuse to allow evidence on
                which the prosecution proposes to rely to be given if it appears to the
                Court that, having regard to all the circumstances in which the
                evidence was obtained, the admission of the evidence would have
                such an adverse effect on the fairness of the proceedings that the
                Court ought not to admit it."

E
     The defence having put before me sufficient credible evidence to raise an

     argument that the admissibility of the evidence would be unfair, I approach the

     issue on the basis that the prosecution must satisfy me on the balance of
F
     probabilities that the admission of the evidence would not have such an adverse

     effect. I add that in any event I would have reached the same conclusion had the

     burden been the higher one of being sure.

^         During the trial within a trial I heard oral evidence from three witnesses: David

     Brummel (whose witness statement will be found at tab 12, of the bundle entitled,
D.L. S E L L E R S 8c C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




    'Defendant's skeleton submissions and witness statements re admissibility and

    related documents'); Sir Andrew Collins (who was leading counsel to the Inquiry
A
    and is now a High Court Judge, tab 9); and Mr William Charles W oodward QC

    (who was counsel to the South Yorkshire Police in the Inquiry, tab 10).                              Mr

    Duckenfield               chose           not to         give evidence.   Mr Duckenfield   was   a Chief
B
    Superintendent at the time and was in overall charge of the policing on the day.

    He had

    become a police officer in 1960.

C             Mr Jones QC, for the prosecution, sought to put into evidence three

    documents. For reasons which I have separately given, I ruled that that evidence

    was inadmissible in the form in which he wished to put it before the Court.

D         I start w ith the statement made on or about 5th May of 1989. Following the

    disaster on 15th April of 1989, Lord Justice Taylor was asked to preside over the

    Inquiry. He was assisted by the West Midlands Police. Understandably, everything

    was done extremely quickly at that stage. The Inquiry opened on 15th May, one
E
    month after the disaster. On the evidence which I have heard, it appears that Mr

    Duckenfield handed the statement to the West Midlands Police. That police force

    then handed it to the Treasury Solicitor, w ho provided it to Mr Collins; as he then
F
    was, to help him in the preparation of his opening. Sir Andrew said that in his

    opinion, having regard to the contents of the statement and the circumstances at

    the time, Mr Duckenfield probably prepared the statement himself w ith o u t legal
P
    advice. I shall so assume. It is submitted by Mr Clegg that in the absence of a

    solicitor, in the presumed absence of any warning against self-incrimination and



                                                                      5
H
D.L. S E L L E R S & CO. / W, L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




    bearing in mind the passage of

    Mr Justice Turner in the Herald of Free Enterprise case, to which I made reference
A
    in my earlier ruling, the admission of this evidence would have such an adverse

    effect on the fairness of the proceedings that I ought not to admit it.

         Bearing in mind that Mr Duckenfield was a very experienced and senior police
B
    officer when he made this witness statement, and must have known w hat use

    could be made of it, I can see no justification at all for saying that its admission

    would have such an adverse effect on the fairness of the proceedings that I ought

C not to admit it.

           I turn to the answers which he gave before Lord Justice Taylor.                      Mr Clegg

    makes a number of submissions, which are helpfully summarised in paragraph 3.2

j) and following of his skeleton argument.                             He submits first that, amongst the

    following factors which he says are relevant is (1) the defendant was not

    represented at the Inquiry.                           Mr Woodward QC represented the South Yorkshire

    police, not any individual officer: "M y approach from the outset was that David
E
    Duckenfield and Bernard Murray were simply witnesses and not my clients." The

    passage, as cited by Mr Clegg, comes from the witness statement of Mr

    Woodward. It seems clear that both Mr Collins and Lord Justice Taylor thought
F
    that Mr Woodward was representing the police officers. The evidence for that can

    be found in the witness statement of Mr Justice Collins at tab 9 at page 389. In

    paragraph 3 will be found these words, "throughout the course of the Inquiry there

    was no doubt in my mind, and I'm sure Lord Justice Taylor shared this view, that

    the police both as a Force and individual officers, were represented by Mr
D.L . S E L L E R S & C O . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




    Woodward QC, instructed by Hammond Suddards." A reference can also be made

    to the transcript for the first day, namely, 15th May. On that first day submissions
A
    were being made by Mr Brown QC regarding the possible representations of the

    Police Federation. Lord Justice Taylor, at page tab 9, page 398, asked whether

    he thought there was going to be a conflict of interests between the Federation
B
    and the South Yorkshire Police, to which Mr. Brown said he simply did not know.

    Lord Justice Taylor w ent on to say, "M y approach has been that when

    applications were made last month that I would always be open to further

C applications if the evidence went in a way which suggested somebody's interests

    ought to be represented and was not being up until then. I'm reluctant to allow

    representation, as it were, on the speculative chance that there might develop a

D conflict."             In tab 9, page 402, Lord Justice Taylor, according to the transcript,

    asked Mr Woodward whether he saw any conflict as at present, to which Mr

    W oodward replied, "I rose because of the wording in the letter suggesting that

    there might be. It seems to be not on the horizon at the moment." That reference
E
    to the letter there is, I assume, a reference to what has been called in this hearing

    'the Salmon Letter' to which I shall return. I shall come back to this topic later.

    Mr Clegg submits that another relevant factor in support of his submission that the
F
    evidence ought to be excluded was, "He was not sent a Salmon letter and was not

    sent a copy of the one sent to the police." The Salmon principles are helpfully set

    out in the skeleton argument submitted by the prosecution. The relevant principles
p
    are 2 to 6 and read as follows:

                2. Before any person who is involved in an inquiry is called as a
                witness he should be informed of any allegations which are made
D.L. S E L L E R S 8c C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                against him and the substance of the evidence in support of them.

                3. (a) He should be given an adequate opportunity of preparing his
A              case and of being assisted by legal advisers.
                   (b) His lecjal expenses should normally be met out of public funds.

                4. He should have the opportunity of being examined by his own
                solicitor or counsel and of stating his case in public at the inquiry.

B              5. Any material witnesses he wishes called at the inquiry should if
                reasonably practicable, be heard.

                6. He should have the opportunity of testing by cross-examination
                conducted by his own solicitor or counsel any evidence which may
                affect him.

C On 9th May of 1989 a letter was sent by Mr Brummell, the Treasury Solicitor

    assigned to the Inquiry. That letter will be found set out in full in tab 9, pages 395

    to 396. The letter was sent to Hammond Suddards and sets out w hat was then

P believed to be the main general criticisms which appeared so far from the evidence

    available to the Inquiry. From the evidence I have heard I draw the inference that

    Mr Duckenfield was shown it or made aware of its contents. As I understood

    what Mr Clegg was saying, he did not dispute that that was a proper inference
E
    that could be drawn. The prosecution case is that the defendant is guilty of

    manslaughter because, having correctly decided to order the opening of the gates,

    he failed thereafter to take the allegedly necessary and simple steps of closing off
F
    access to the already allegedly over full pens, 3 and 4. It was in those tw o pens

    that the injuries were caused which led to the 96 deaths. There is evidence that

    Mr Duckenfield received further details relating to him personally. Even if he had

^ not received any further details it seems clear to me, having regard to the contents

    of the Salmon letter, and in particular the contents of paragraphs 2 and 3 in so far



                                                             8
H
D.L . S E L L E R S & CO. / W. LL O Y D W O O D L A N D




     as these charges are concerned, that Mr Duckenfield must have known w hat it

     was that was concerning the Inquiry, namely not preventing persons from entering
A
     the already overcrowded pens 3 and 4.

         The transcript for day six reveals that Mr Woodward was expressing a concern

     about the position of individual officers. This transcript will be found in three loose
B
     pages with which I was provided.                     He submitted to Lord Justice Taylor that it

     would be appropriate that officers should have notice of individual matters against

     them, thus giving them an opportunity to either put their minds at rest or have

C various matters considered. See G on the first page of that three page document.

     Lord Justice Taylor states, see the second page,

                "As far as specific points of criticism, if there are any, are concerned,
               this is not a civil case in which every allegation has to be pleaded.
£)             The general nature I think of the expected points of possible criticism
               has already been indicated in letters which have been written by
                Counsel for the Inquiry. Insofar as it is possible to be more specific
               at any stage no doubt that can be done between counsel and if in the
                last resort something crops up during the course of the evidence of
                a witness, or indeed after he has finished, which makes it desirable
                he should be recalled to have an opportunity of dealing with it, that
E              will be done. That is, I hope/the best way we can proceed."

     Finally, on the third page of that same short transcript,

     Mr Collins is recorded as saying this,

F              "I have already told my learned friend",

     that must be Mr Woodward,

                "I have done that exercise, and he will receive specific matters in
                relation to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield. At the moment I have
                not done it in respect of any other officer but since Mr Duckenfield
^              is intended to be either next or next but one and will probably take
                a considerable time, he may have a slight breathing space."

     The transcript, to be found at tab 3, page 51, records
D .L . S E L L E R S & C O . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




    Mr Woodward as saying during the evidence of Mr Duckenfield,

                "We have been given indication of the allegations that are to be made
A               against this particular officer and against the police in particular."

    It appears, therefore, that Mr Duckenfield did have the more detailed allegations,

    albeit that he would have received them orally from Mr Woodward. I see no merit

B in this ground.

         I turn now to the grounds put forward by Mr Clegg and summarised in 3.2(iii)

    of his skeleton argument, namely, 'He was not cautioned when he gave evidence.'

    Mr Clegg said in argument that he had meant by that, of course, not warned or
C
    not told that he had a privilege against self-incrimination. I deal with this matter

    along with the other matters to be found set out in paragraphs 3.3, 3.4, 3.5, 3.6,

    3.7 and 3.8 of the skeleton argument, which read as follows:
D

                "3.3 It was the view of Andrew Collins QC and Lord Justice Taylor
                that they,

                  "did not believe that there was a realistic         prospect   of   a
                manslaughter prosecution being        brought."

                As a consequence Duckenfield was not cautioned when he gave his
                evidence.

                3.4 There was a failure to afford Duckenfield the protection of five
                of the cardinal principles established by Lord Salmon. [Nos. 2-6]

                3.5 It is submitted that the failure to caution the defendant or afford
                him the protection of the Salmon principles renders the admission into
                evidence of his answers unfair.

                3.6 Further it is submitted that in the circumstances of this case
                Duckenfield once giving evidence to the inquiry was in practice
                required to answer (he had not been told that he could not answer).
                Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights guarantees
                him a 'fair' trial. The effect of the Inquiry was to offend his right
                against self-incrimination. Saunders v. UK 1994 18 EHRR 2 3 . Re


                                                              10
H
D.L. S E L L E R S & C O . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                Arrows Ltd (No. 4) Hamilton and Others v. Naviede 1 995 1 CAR 95.

                3.7           It is the same principle that requires a judge in civil proceedings
A              to warn a witness that he need not answer questions that may
                incriminate him and the same privilege that entitles a party to civil
                litigation to refuse to give discovery of documents in like
                circumstances. Rank Film Distributors Ltd v. Video Information Centre
                1982 AC 4 5 .

g              3.8 The defendant may elect to give evidence in support of this
               submission but no witness statement will be served.

          I start then with the failure to advise Mr Duckenfield of the privilege against

    self-incrimination. It is clear under the law that there is no duty to advise a witness

C but it is custom and practice so to do. Although Mr Woodward was, I accept, not

    acting for Mr Duckenfield, Mr Woodward became concerned about his position.

    Mr W oodward explained that out of a sense of fairness. Although Mr Jones in

    cross-examining Mr Woodward was critical of Mr Woodward on this matter, it

    seems to me that Mr Woodward behaved in a way that one would have expected

    of leading counsel.                              By the opening of the Inquiry, a private summons had

    been taken out charging someone or somebody with manslaughter.                              I have no
E
    more details other than the recollection of Sir Andrew Collins. It is clear from the

    evidence there was much talk behind the scenes of manslaughter charges

    following the Inquiry. Feelings were running very high at this time.                        It will be
F
    remembered that blame had been attached to the supporters by at least some

    newspapers. There probably also was a feeling of hostility towards the police for

    w hat may well have been seen as an attitude of denial of responsibility on their

^ part.

         I turn to Mr Woodward's witness statement, tab 10. In paragraph 10 at page
D .L . S E L L E R S & C O . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




     4 he mentioned that the "sights" of others might have been on individual officers.

     In paragraph 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19 and 20 he sets out the background to an
A
     Inquiry that he was to make of Mr Collins. Those paragraphs read as follows:

                 13. At some point between 15 May 1989, which was when the
                 evidence to the Inquiry first began, and 24 May 1989 when David
                 Duckenfield started his own evidence to the Inquiry, I raised with
B                Andrew Collins the question of whether David Duckenfield should be
                 cautioned with regard to the question of possible criminal
                 prosecution. The question of cautioning was in my mind at that time.
                 My concern was that David Duckenfield was not represented at the
                 Inquiry, that there were murmurings amongst the Liverpool camp of
                 a prosecution of him for manslaughter and that he ought to be
                 advised of his entitlement when being invited to give evidence to the
C               Inquiry. I cannot say exactly when it was between 15 May 1989 and
                 24 May 1989 that I raised this with Andrew Collins. I cannot recall
                 whether it was with specific reference to David Duckenfield or to
                 police witnesses generally.
                 My raising of the issue with Andrew Collins would have been
                 purposeful and fairly formal as I did not know Collins at the Bar. The
£>              issue of cautioning witnesses was in the legal air at that time. This
                 was after the Herald of Free Enterprise case when talk of
                 prosecutions was in the air. I made a point of raising this matter with
                 Collins. I wanted to have Lord Justice Taylor's view. Collins was my
                 route to Taylor unless I raised it publicly in the course of the Inquiry.

                 14. I have a recollection of Lord Justice Taylor saying that he would
E                reconsider further individual representation if any individual requested
                 it. No individual would need to seek representation unless a finger
                 was pointed at him. No individual officer had been named in the
                 "Salmon letter".

                 15. I do not recall w hat I actually said to Collins when I first raised
F               the matter with him or whether I broached the subject generally or
                 w ith regard to specific people. My concern would have been for
                 those who by that time appeared to be the principal actors. When I
                 first raised the matter with Collins I had seen enough to cause me to
                 be concerned, and that includes what I had made of the material
                 which I had seen and the incandescence of the Liverpool camp. In
                 raising the matter with Collins I had hoped to get feedback from Lord
                 Justice Taylor and his view. I may have been given Collins' view but
                 I had had no proper answer as to Lord Justice Taylor's view.

                 16. When I had raised with Collins my concerns about the possible
.. S E L L E R S & CO. / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




           need to caution Duckenfield in relation to his evidence before he
           commenced on it, on the basis of risk of potential prosecution for
           manslaughter, Collins had been quite dismissive of my concerns. I
           have no doubt that I told him that I was not acting for David
           Duckenfield but that I felt that Duckenfield should get some legal
           advice. I felt that Duckenfield, being about to give evidence in the
           witness box without representation or advice, was like a lamb going
           to slaughter and that he needed to be advised about getting legal
           advice.

           17. I therefore felt a need to write a note to Andrew Collins asking
           him whether he had managed to speak to Lord Justice Taylor on the
           question of prosecutions as I wanted Lord Justice Taylor's views
           given a prospect of manslaughter charges arising.          I have no
           recollection now of how much time had passed between my initial
           raising of this matter with Andrew Collins and my writing the note to
           him. I would have written the note to him before 24 May 1989
           which is the date when David Duckenfield started his evidence to the
           Inquiry.

           18. I have retained the original note. My handwriting on the note
           reads as follows:-

                       "A n d re w - did you manage to speak to PT on the
                       question of prosecutions."

           Although I did not refer specifically in the note to manslaughter it
           would have been obvious to both of us that this is w hat I was
           inquiring about. We had mentioned manslaughter in our earlier
           discussion.

           19. I had passed the note across to Andrew Collins in the Town Hall
           in the currency of the sitting. I needed an answer and I thus far had
           not received one. I gave the note to him myself. We were only
           sitting a matter of feet away from each other. I was not interested
           in hearing again w hat Collins thought. I cannot recall a verbal
           exchange between us at the time that I passed the note to him but
           there m ust have been one. Collins' view was that I was worrying
           over nothing. The effect of w hat Collins was telling me was that I
           had nothing to w orry over as the law was not like that. This was
           what Collins had told me when we had discussed the matter earlier.
           I wanted to know the view of Lord Justice Taylor. I did not ask
           Collins for his own view although this is w hat I had received
           previously.

           20. I eventually received written reply from Andrew Collins on the
D.L . S E L L E R S & CO . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                same piece of paper on which I had sent him my note. His reply
                reads, "Yes - he said that (since because in part of his view of the
                unreality of suggesting manslaughter) he would leave it to you to
A              raise the issue if you thought it necessary". I did not get this answer
                straight away. I do no recall exactly when I received the answer. I
                might have got it back on the same day that I had written my note.
                I might have got it back after the interval or the break for lunch on
                the same day. My impression was that Collins did go away and talk
                to Lord Justice Taylor before giving me his reply. My impression of
g              the reply from Collins was that it was quite plain w hat the Inquiry
                was not going to do. I took Collins' reference to "the issue" to be
                whether what the witnesses would say might incriminate them. I
                trusted what the Inquiry would not do. Lord Justice Taylor had a job
                to do but he knew that I was enquiring not about what he would do
                but about a wider scope of the consequences of a witness
                incriminating himself.
C
    In paragraph 21 he said that he knew that there would be further proceedings and

    claims for damages. He did not know at that time that David Duckenfield would

    eventually be prosecuted for manslaughter, "But I felt that this would not be an
D
    end of the matter."                      In paragraphs 24, 25, 26, 27, 29 and 30, Mr Woodward

    wrote as follows:

                24. I remember David Duckenfield. He seemed to be ill. He was
                pale. I did not know him from before although I would have met him
E               before at Snig Hill. He struck me as very odd, as behaving oddly.
                There was something about him. He seemed "shot to pieces". I
                have an image of a man who was not with it. I got this impression
                from a combination of his appearance, his demeanour and his
                responses. I have no clue as to what time of day this meeting took
                place although something tells me that it was round about midday.
F
                25. I was seeing David Duckenfield because I was concerned for him
                in that he was not legally represented and he was clearly a target for
                criticism in that he was being substantially blamed by the media and
                the Liverpool group for all that had happened and he had clearly
                played an important part in w hat had happened.

                26. As he was not represented I had a concern for his position,
                given the atmosphere on the part of the Liverpool people, and I
                thought that someone should talk to him if Lord Justice Taylor was
                not going to give him a warning, as he was not. It seemed to me
D.L. S E L L E R S & C O . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                that this matter would not end with the Inquiry.

               27.           I told David Duckenfield and those present of my concerns and
A             the query that I had raised w ith Lord Justice Taylor. I told him that
               I did not represent him and that I could not advise him of his own
              personal position, and that my concerns for him were such that I
              thought that he should get legal advice. I may have asked him how
              he was, whether or not he had had legal advice and whether or not
              he was having any medical treatment. I may have told him that he
B            did not have to give evidence and that if he was going to get legal
              advice it should be before he started giving evidence. He seemed to
              w a n t to get on with it. I cannot recall what else was said. My
              purpose was to see him and to tell him to get legal advice.

               29. I have no precise recollection of how long the discussion was.
              It was a short discussion, between 10 and 15 minutes perhaps. My
C            approach to him was motivated by personal fairness. I was not
              professionally required to speak to him. I am not sure how he
              actually received my advice. He gave me the impression that he just
              w anted to get in the witness box and get it over w ith and I do not
              know whether he actually understood the implication of w hat was
              concerning me. That is why I emphasised that he should seek some
D            independent legal advice. My impression was that he had not
              previously had any independent legal advice. It was unclear to me
              what advice he might already have had or from whom he might have
              had it.

              30. I am fairly sure that at the time of my conversation w ith David
_            Duckenfield I had the cnrd w ith me, on which I had written my note
              to Collins and on which he had written his reply. I think I might have
             show n it to Duckenfield. I would certainly have told Duckenfield
              about w h a t I had raised w ith Lord Justice Taylor and I would have
             told him that the gist of Lord Justice Taylor's response was that a
              prosecution for manslaughter was unlikely.

F

    In evidence, Mr Woodward said that in giving advice to

    Mr Duckenfield he told him that there was a whisper of manslaughter charges in

£ the air. He said to him that he thought that in the circumstances, he, Duckenfield,

    ought to have his own legal advice about it. The drift of what he was saying was,

    'I don't think it will end here so that he should have his own independent advice
D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. LL O Y D W O O D L A N D




    about his position.'                    The effect of w hat he was saying to Mr Duckenfield was,

    'This is not a guarantee', by that meaning the contents of the note which Mr
A
    Collins had sent him.                      Mr Woodward went on to say that he was saying to Mr

    Duckenfield that he should get advice. He went on to say that he did not know

    whether Mr Duckenfield did, in fact, get any advice. Mr Woodward said that he
g
    got the impression that he wanted to get on and have it done with, accepting that

    it was a surprise. He said that he thought that whilst Mr Duckenfield was hearing

    what I was saying he seemed to w ant to get on with it and to, "Not mess about

C w ith lawyers."                     Although there is reference to the condition in which Mr

    Duckenfield found himself, there is nothing to suggest that he did not understand

    the advice that he was being given by Mr Woodward. So although it is true to say

£>Mr Woodward was not representing Mr Duckenfield, notwithstanding w hat Lord

    Justice Taylor and Mr Collins may have thought, it is clear to me that at this vital

    point Mr Woodward was giving him the sort of advice that a lawyer would give,

 who could not himself give the advice, but that it was right that someone else,
E ■
    another lawyer, should do so. It seems clear to me that

    Mr Woodward was, in the best traditions of the legal profession, giving Mr

    Duckenfield disinterested advice and I reject entirely the criticisms made of Mr
F
    Woodward by Mr Jones in his cross-examination. Indeed, I could not understand

    them.

         There is no evidence from Mr Duckenfield whether he did or did not seek any

    further advice as to why he decided to give evidence following his conversations,

    as recorded by Mr Woodward.                            Sir Andrew Collins describes the events which
D.L. S E L L E R S & CO. / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




    led up to the note to which I have referred in paragraphs in his witness statement.

    I turn first of all to paragraph 4, which will be found at tab 9 at page 390. That
A
    reads:

               "In terms of the protection of potential witnesses, I did not have any
               power to give any undertaking to any party seeking protection from
               prosecution. Had any party suggested such an undertaking I would
               have consulted Lord Justice Taylor and contacted the Attorney
B
               General. I consider that had any undertaking been given it would
               have been in very limited terms. At the time these preliminary matters
               were being considered I did not consider that there could be charges
               of manslaughter brought against any individual from the South
               Yorkshire Police Force. I did not consider that there was sufficient
               evidence for the bringing of any such charges"


    In evidence he said that his view, that there was not sufficient evidence for the

    bringing of any charges, was a view that did not and had not changed.               In

D evidence he said also that if there had been a reasonable fear that manslaughter

    charges might have arisen, then they would have gone to the Attorney General for

    the kind of undertaking to which I referred in the ruling I gave earlier. Sir Andrew

    Collins said he thought that it was usual practice to take that course because it
E
    was important to have all the evidence necessary to conduct the Inquiry properly

    rather than have persons claiming the privilege against self-incrimination and thus

    possibly denying the Tribunal important and relevant evidence.
F
             In paragraphs 13, 14 and 15 he sets out the background to the note.

    Paragraph 14 merely sets out the contents of the note to which I have already

    made reference. In paragraphs 13 and 15 he states:


                "13. At some stage prior to Mr Duckenfield giving evidence to the
                Inquiry, which I now understand to be 24 May 1989, I believe that
                I was approached by Sir William Woodward QC, leading counsel on


                                                          17
H
D.L. S E L L E R S & C O . / W. LL O Y D W O O D L A N D




               behalf of South Yorkshire Police. Although I do not recall the
               meeting, I have now been shown a note detailing an exchange
               between Mr Woodward and myself.              I confirm that it is my
A              handwriting on the note and it is apparent from that note that Mr
               Woodward wanted me to speak w ith Lord Justice Taylor on the
               question of criminal prosecutions of individuals. I do not recall when
               the note was made but it seems likely that it was made prior to Mr
               Duckenfield giving evidence to the Inquiry.

B              15. Although I do not recall speaking to Lord Justice Taylor it is
                apparent from the writing on the note that I must have done. I
                believe that neither Lord Justice Taylor nor myself thought that any
                criminal charges were going to arise out of the Hillsborough disaster.
                The note records that I have indicated to
                Mr Woodward that Lord Justice Taylor had considered that the
                prospect of manslaughter charges was "an unreality". I meant to
C              indicate to Mr Woodward that if he was concerned about the
                possibility of manslaughter charges he should raise w ith Lord Justice
                Taylor that possibility and what should be done about it. The aspect
                of cautioning a witness prior to giving evidence was never raised by
                Mr Woodward during the Inquiry. I am sure, however, that if in the
                course of giving evidence, a witness was incriminating himself or
£>             herself in terms of criminal charges Lord Justice Taylor would have
                raised the issue of cautions with the representatives of the particular
                witness concerned out of his sense of fairness."

     In paragraph 16 he said,

               "If I had felt that any witnesses were laying themselves open to a
E              criminal charge, I would have raised the issue of cautioning. I did not
               so with David Duckenfield or any other officers because I did not
               believe that there was a realistic prospect of a manslaughter
               prosecution being brought against them, a view which I knew was
               shared by Lord Justice Taylor."

F
     In paragraph 19 he said,

                "During the course of the Inquiry, there was never at any time any
                suggestion that there was inadequate protection for witnesses. I had
                no reason to believe that the legal representatives of each witness
                were not a proper protection for those witnesses. At no time did I
                consider that there was a need to caution any witness in relation to
                their evidence, on the basis of risk of any potential criminal
                prosecution."
D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




      Mr Clegg submits that, putting the note aside, then this evidence, the evidence of

      the answers to the Inquiry, must be inadmissible under section 78 because if either
A
      Lord Justice Taylor or Mr Collins had perceived the risk of prosecution then they

      would have gone to the Attorney General and, as a consequence, the answers

      which Mr Duckenfield gave would not have been admissible in any subsequent
g
      trial. He submits that that is sufficient in itself to make these answers inadmissible

      under section 78. However, one has to bear in mind that Mr Duckenfield was, as

      I say, a very senior police officer who had been in the Force since 1960.

C Secondly, the note makes it clear that it was left to Mr Woodward to raise the

      issue if he thought it was necessary. As we have seen in the witness statement

      of

j-j   Mr W oodward, the contents of the note were drawn to the attention of Mr

      Duckenfield. Thirdly, I have already set out the advice which Mr Woodward gave,

      making it clear that it was a matter for Mr Duckenfield himself. We have heard

      nothing from
E
      Mr Duckenfield, as I have said before, given the very sensible advice which he was

      receiving. I do not know how he reacted to that or, indeed, do not know what he

      did. In one sense,
F
      Mr Duckenfield was perhaps in the greater possession of the facts than the Inquiry

      may have been. He knew that, assuming the prosecution to be right, he had lied

      about how the gates had been opened.                  He was later to accept that he had

^ wrongly blamed the supporters for the deaths (see transcript 26th May, page 31

      set out at tab 3, 224). Having regard to the matters which I have just outlined,
D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




      I take the view that it could not be stated that this evidence is inadmissible under

      section 78.
A
           I finally and briefly turn to numbers 2 to 6 of the Salmon principles. I take the

      view that in so far as number 2 is concerned, Mr Duckenfield was informed of the

      allegations which were being made against him and, albeit that he may not have
g
      known the substance of the evidence in support, he was the officer in charge on

      that day. He had made the decision that the gate should be opened and he would

      know from the letter that he received, if not from any further communication, the

C thrust of the criticisms against him. It is right to say that he did not have his own

      lawyer but that has to be seen in the context of the view taken by Lord Justice

      Taylor and Mr Collins that there would not be any manslaughter prosecution and

j-j   the advice given to Mr Duckenfield by Mr Woodward. The other three matters

      seemed to be not to be relevant. The issues which I have to decide today, namely

      the admissibility of the answers that he gave to questions posed, even if there was

      some breach of the Salmon principles it would not be sufficient, in my judgment,
E
      to make this evidence inadmissible under section 78.

            In conclusion, I am quite satisfied that this evidence is admissible for the

      reasons I have given.                                 ___________________
F




G




                                                            20
H
