                                                                                      MIR.15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                           Date and time raised         3 f (o ( f a         Number



T itle _     l*5$sn
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yp<7No ___
                                                                4 i\i—
                                                                                                             Receiver




                                                                                                             Indexer
Document registered/iiadoxocl-QS indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                         Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions

                                                                                                         7st7
                                                                                                             Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken




Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                         l\ ^bl•I'


                                                      Lancs

                                                       20 April 1989




Dear Sir

A few days have now passed since the disaster at Hillsborough but the images
are still strong, almost too strong, and I believe I should add my small piece
of observation to the enquiry before there is any opportunity for the images to
fade or the memory become confused.

11 was seated in the Liverpool section of the North Stand in row 38, seat 72 via
gangway H and gained entrance via the Leppings Lane end of the stadium at
approximately 2.20pm. At that stage there was no build up of spectators outside
the ground, no evidence of drunken or other unruly behaviour and the police were
well able to perform their random searches of spectators. All was well in the
main stand but well before kick-off time, and as early as 2.30pm, it was
apparent that the wing sections of the Leppings Lane terracing were considerably
under populated compared with the central section. That inbalance of population
must have been obvious by 2.30pm to any steward, or other groups, charged, with
crowd control. ~       ” ~~   .. ... .....      .......... — ............

However, from my seat I was unaware of the extent of the problem until the
spill over on the playing area and watched with mounting disbelief to the
increasing number of casualties. Help for these people was being provided by
firemen, the police, stewards, St Johns ambulancemen but principally by the
spectators themselves who constructed makeshift stretchers from perimeter
advertising materials. At about 3.25pm, maybe slightly later, I was relieved to
see the entry of substantial additional police resources who marched, military
style, on to the pitch from the opposite end to Leppings Lane. To my horror
however these officers were deployed to face the whole length of the population
of the North Stand, for what reason I am still unable to comprehend for the
occupants of the North Stand were in no danger nor indicated they were a threat
to others. This deployment took place, and was maintained, while untrained
spectators from the Leppings Lane section acted as first aiders, comforters and
stretcher bearers to the injured. Quite why policemen, with at least a minimum
of first aid experience, did not augment the army of untrained helpers baffles
and frankly hurts me still. This deployment of police was not visible in the
television images I have subsequently seen and must not be confused with the
other line of police spread across the centre of the playing area, (presumably
to prevent any chance of angry, hurt or confused spectators from the
Leppings Lane terraces from venting their frustration on the opposing fans.
Other than a very few isolated incidents no significant evidence of that
behaviour appeared to surface).
This baffling deployment was compounded by a later apparent decision to bring
on to the playing area a team of police dog handlers and their canine charges.
They also entered the stadium by the opposite end to Leppings Lane where by this
stage many of the injured, dead and dying were being laid. Seeing people on the
playing area, the dogs responded in presumably the way they are trained which is
to 'encourage' a pitch clearance by aggressive barking etc at the 'offenders'.
Naturally, the dogs in the circumstances of almost total pitch occupation by
spectators were difficult to restrain by the handlers but their insensitive
deployment will linger with me, but more importantly with the injured, and may
have been the final images of some of the dying. In my opinion, that was and is
unforgiveable.

There are many questions to be answered and mine are far from being the most
significant, but can I ask you to bring the contents of this letter to the
appropriate bodies to consider:-


      a. Why was no action taken as early as 2.30pm to redress the inbalance
      in the wing sections of the Leppings Lane terracing with that of the
      centre section?

      b. Why was the order given to the later arriving group of policemen to
      'guard' the North Stand instead of helping with the treatment of
      casualties?

      c. Why was the order given to deploy the police dog handlers to that
      section of the playing area were many of the injured and dead had been
      removed to?


Yoytrs faithfully
