LILLYAN AKRCD, POLICE CONSTABLE 3198, B1 ROYSTON




On Saturday 15 April 1989 I commenced duty at 8 am at Barnsley Police
Station and was transported together with Sergeant Swift, Serial Sergeant,
PCs Hooson, Tattershall, Phillips, Packer,. MacKenzie, Cooper and Taylor.
Taken to West Bar Police Station at 9 am attended briefing in the gym
at West Bar. After briefing walked down to Midland Station, Sheffield
to take up duties as Serial 16, control of fans alighting from trains
at station.  Fans divided into two exits from station. Continued
with these duties until approximately 2.30 pm when together with rest
of Serial was transported to Hillsborough Ground by a public transport
which had been laid on by South Yorkshire Passenger Transport.

At approximately 2.45 pm the bus went via the Lepping Lane end of
the ground and at this time I noticed that the roadway and nearby
adjacent roads were filled with a very large crowd of fans. This
caused the bus to slow down, and I commented to other officers that
this seemed a very large crowd so near to the kick-off time.

Alighted from the bus on Penistone Road end and entered the ground via the
main Police access road.

Together with rest of the serial went into the gymnasium and at this
time we were preparing to take our meal. We had only been in the gym
for a matter of one or two minutes when we were informed by Sergeant Swift
that we were required to go to the track in front of the West Stand.
At this time we were not aware of why we were required to attend.

I walked onto the track, walked past the North Stand and round the track
side to the West Stand. At this time the two teams were on the pitch
so we walked to the West Stand and saw that there was a large crowd
   Sections 3 and 4. Did not pay any particular attention to other
sections of the stand. At this time I was unaware of any emergency.
I saw that the crowd were surging forward towards the front of the fencing
of the stand, but took this to be just normal actions of the crowd at
any big game.  I turned to face the crowd and saw fans crushed up against
the barriers. Many appeared to be in deep distress and totally crushed
against the barrier. Many further in the crowd shouting "We're being
crushed, open gates".

I then saw that people at the front of the crowd were going blue in
the face and were apparently unconscious, only being kept up by the
weight of people at each side. I shouted for people to try and ease
back, but they were unable to do so. Went to Gate 4, directly behind
the goal with PC Hooson and Sergeant Swift and the gate was opened.

The crowd began to surge to the gate and together with Sergeant Swift
and PC Hooson I began to pull people out of the crowd. Many were in
panic and many were ignoring our instructions and just climbing over
people who had already stumbled. Saw three men trapped by their legs
laid on top of one another at the base of the gate and was unable at
first to release them due to the weight of the crowd pushing against them.
Eventually managed to free them and pull them onto track.  By this time
there was a large number of fans already on the track and pitch, many
looking for friends and shouting.  Many were shouting at the Police
to try and get more fans out.  I went back to the gate to try and evacuate
more people, one man repeatedly tried to return to the crowd through
the gate, impeding our attempts to get people out, and he had to be
physically held away. This man had been pulling at Police Officers,
including myself as he tried to fight his way back into the crowd.

One man from the crowd jumped over people trying to get out of the gate
and as a result caught my head with his feet and knocked me to the ground.
I returned to my feet and continued with my efforts to release people.

I saw a gap appearing towards the rear of the stand and I shouted for
people to go back, but this was ignored.  I shouted for them to look
round and see that there was room at the back, but this was also ignored.
As the crush eased, together with other officers, I went into the Stand
via torn fencing and I saw the body of a young woman laid on the ground.
With other officers I carried the woman out of the stand and onto the
track. She was blue in the face and did not appear to be breathing.
Together with other officers I attempted to give rescussitation, kiss
of life and heart massage. The woman appeared to be in her mid-twenties
and was wearing black trousers and a red top. Joined by two men, who
stated they were doctors. They examined the woman for signs of life
and then informed me that she was dead.

I looked around and saw that numerous other bodies were on the track
at this time, together with a large number of fans and large numbers
of the Emergency Services.  I was knelt on the ground at the side of
the woman when a man came to me, looked at the woman and became very
distressed.  He stated that the woman was his wife and he gave the name
of Steve Jones.  Because of his distressed state he was left with t h e '
body of his wife and another Liverpool fan who was assisting him.

I then went to assist other officers pulling bodies onto the pitch.
I then saw the body of a young boy, aged approximately 12 years, wearing
a light bomber type jacket. He was laid on the pitch at the rear of
the goal.  I went to assist another officer to carry the body of the
child down the pitch towards the exit between the North Stand and Spion Cop.
I was relieved by another officer who took over the body of the child.

I went back to the West Stand and covered a body laid on the pitch behind
the goal with my anorak.  I was then joined by Sergeant Swift, who told
us to remain where we were.  By this time the majority of the bodies
had been carried away either by fans or the Emergency Services.

Together with Sergeant Swift and other officers from our Serial, walked
back down the pitch to the gym and all were totally exhausted.  All
the Serial appeared to be shocked and after regaining our composure
we were taken to Claywheels Lane where we were given cups of tea.

Shortly after 6 pm we were returned back to our Divisions, transported
by a driver from Claywheels Lane. Our transport being left at West
Bar.                                -------------------
H   j   ft




                                              - 3 -


             As a result of trying to evacuate people from the stand I received straining
             to my arms, bruising to both legs and a large bruise and swelling at
             the back of my left hand and bruising to the top of my left arm.

             Although Hillsborough is not situated in the Division where I normally
             work, I have performed duty at the football ground on a number of other
             occasions and I have in fact performed duty at the 1988 semi-final at
             this ground between the same teams.  I did not think that this match
             would be any different from the ones I have previously worked on, which
             had always run smoothly, although I did think that the large group of
             fans outside the turnstiles at Lepping Lane prior to our entry into
             the ground appeared to be larger than normal, but I am unable to say
             for what reason this might be.  Even so, at this stage I did not anticipate
             what took place a short while after.
