                                                                                         MIR.15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                   Date and time raised                        Number   ^ 13=75 "
Title              &                                                         yjgllT
(Include source and any document number if relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action         Yes^N^            ^ /to          X/^L
                                                                                                               Receiver



                                                                                                               Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised                     .
                                                                                                           Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions


                                                                                                               Indexer
Indexed as indicated^a^     ^     ^   \ ]   a^    q

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken


                                                                                                    T~
                                                                                                               Indexer        ;a!i>
Further action No(s)                                                                    I ..- -


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                    L/Vtfipoot




                                             "2 %'J U       fip r Z i




                              S u~



    (      ->*... . m'
r                                                                   ~n«.
                                       —   j w . . _ T4«_                  ,
        .......... —     y<*z££
                                  ~r
               H illsborough : P ersonal s ta te m e n t



                                     Li ver po ol .




         I,along with three friends,set off for the m atch a t approximately 11.35
a.m. Learning from our experience of traffic problems the year before,we decided
we were going to Sheffield via the M62 and the A612 in order to avoid congestion
on the A57.
         This decision proved to be the right one as,apart from a brief hold-up on
the M62 ,we m ade good time and reached Sheffield around 1.50 p.m. We were
able to find a parking space by the ground,and duly parked the car and com­
menced walking.
         W e had in our possession three North Stand tickets and one for the Lep-
pings Lane terracing,and it had already been decided I would take the latter.
W hen we reached the turnstiles in Leppings Lane th a t were our admission points
at about 2.30 p.m . ,complete chaos reigned as fans swarmed around in confusion
and frustration. I,for one,was staggered th at turnstiles serving three major parts
of the ground (North Stand,W est Stand and terracing) were confined to such a
small area.
         I left m y friends trying to gain admission to the North Stand
turnstiles,outside of which was a fearsome crowd,and entered the small courtyard
th at contained the Leppings Lane terrace turnstiles. I was m et by an even more
fearsome,and fearful,crowd of fans struggling to get in. Many fans had their tick­
ets above their heads,there being no room for hands to fit into pockets. A consid­
erable num ber of people,especially young children and women,were finding the
crush unbearable,and were screaming with fear. Some fans who were able to do so
had climbed up onto the wall dividing stand turnstiles from terrace
turnstiles,deciding enough was enough.
         Despite these warning signals,because it was approaching kick-off time,I
joined the mass of people trying to enter the ground. (I can hardly call it a
’queue’). Never has a decision been so quickly regretted. I was quickly absorbed
into the heart of the crowd and ,despite being a ’veteran’ of football crushes over
the years,I honestly feared for my life. Luckily,somebody in front of m e fought his
way back out of the melee,and I was pushed by him free of the turmoil. Counting
m y blessings,I stood at the side of the scramble,and hoped I m ight gain admission
later when things had settled down.
          The police outside the ground th at were supposed to be directing the
operation were either incapable or unwilling to address the dangerous congestion.
Prim arily,there .seemed to be too few police officers present to control the situa­
tion. The police th at were there stood aside from the desperate crowd,and
appeared to be praying for divine intervention. I only saw two m ounted policemen
who were worthy of credit,actually doing something positive to try to alleviate the
crowd pressure. But paradoxically,because their actions were so desperate,and they
were hopelessly out-num bered,they were actually increasing the danger to the fans
because of the wildness of horse movement. Also,belatedly,at about 2.50 p.m .
,there was an a tte m p t by some officers and stewards to close the outer gates lead­
ing to the small courtyard. However,this a ttem p t had little chance of success; fans
just entering the courtyard thought they were being denied access to the ground
and resisted the gate closure. Communication had completely broken down.
          I,being on the sidelines watching events unfold,had decided I d idn ’t care
whether I saw the m atch or not. However,at about 2.55 p.m. ,my chance to enter
the ground, painlessly,, came. Because I was uninvolved in the crush outside the
turnstiles,I was one of the first people to see the police signal th at an ’exit’ gate
had been opened to the extreme right of the turnstiles. As Ientered               this
gate,there was no a tte m p t by police or stewards to check m y ticket,which is still
intact. W hen I entered,the flow of fans was a trickle. I can only assume this
’trickle’ became a ’to rren t’.
         Leaving the ’exit’ gate behind and entering the main p art of the
stadium ,the only possible entrance to the terracing seemed to be via a short tu n ­
nel. There were no police or stewards at the m outh of this tunnel indicating other­
wise. Similarly,there were no obvious ground markings directing fans to other
entrances to the terraces.
         After leaving the tunnel I found myself directly behind the goal,at the
rear of the terracing, At this tim e,about 2.57 p.m. ,this part of the ground was
already jam packed with people. However,although extremely uncomfortable,there
was still some room to m anoeuver,and I m ade my way into the heart of the
crowd. But a t about 3 p.m. there was a sudden surge,I found myself near the
front of the enclosure,and the previous room to manoeuver had become a battle
for room to breathe.
        T he crowd was totally static now. Panic and screaming ensued,as people
were crushed constantly against crash barriers,perimeter fencing and each other. I
myself had been in bad crushes and dangerous situations in grounds m any times
before so,using th a t experience,I decided to ju st stand and hold on. However two
aspects of this situation were greatly alarming to me,and unknown in my past
experience. Firstly,the sheer relentlessness of the pressure upon me. Other crushes
I had been in had had some relief a t intervals in them. Secondly,I had never seen
fans around me in a crush whose complexions had taken on such a strange
crimson-blue colour.
           Fans were now openly pleading with police officers,stewards and St.
Jo h n ’s am bulancem en on the other side of the perimeter fencing to get them out.
The response was to either stand there motionless and silent or to bark futile com­
mands to the fans such as ’’Push back!” . How could anyone push back when there
was hardly room to move your arm s or even to draw breath? The fans were also
                                          - 3 -


screaming for the perimeter fences to be dragged dow n,but there was no response
to these pleas from the police. The only response came from fans who had them ­
selves scaled the fence to reach the other side ,and were now pathetically trying to
rip down the fencing by themselves,unaided and with no equipment.
          At this time ,3.10 p.m. ,the m atch had been stopped. People climbing the
fence to free themselves were clambering over fellow fans. I,fearing for my
life,decided to do the same,if given th e chance. T he horror of knowing your pres­
sure on the fans trapped against the fencing was contributing to their suffering
was unbearable. However,when I was given a tiny bit of space I decided to use it
to reach forward and gain a foothold on the perimeter fence. To do this,I had to
clamber over the fans who were most vulnerable in this terrible crush. But when I
had got my foothold I was able to surm ount the fence to the safety of the pitch.
          On reaching the other side,I staggered,winded,to the corner of the ground
by the North Stand. It was then I could see the police and stewards had opened
the small gates in the fencing. But,in th at crush,if you were three yards away
from the narrow gate you m ight as well have been three miles away. I could also
see th at the wing of the terracing by the North Stand was relatively empty.
    Although my experience of the crush suggested there would be fatalities,I was
strangely,and as it turned out,m istakenly reassured by the apparent inactivity of
the police around the pitch. Many were ju st standing around,and a cordon of off­
icers had been set up on the halfway line to prevent the supposedly potential
threat of trouble between the rival fans. After 3.10 p.m . this threat obviously did
not exist,as Nottingham Forest fans began to realise the gravity of the situation.
If only those officers in the centre of the pitch had had the same realisation. But I
was reassured : if the police don’t think the situation is serious, then my reaction
to the crushing must have been totally over the to p,m ustn’t it? T h a t’s what I told
myself.
         It was only when I saw fans ripping advertising hoardings to make
stretchers did I begin to realise the full extent of the horror. As the bodies started
to get carried away,and feeling helpless myself,I left the ground and just stood
stunned outside,as radios transm itted the m ounting casualty toll.
          During the two hour journey back to Liverpool,as my stunned disbelief
began to tu rn to anger,I tried to consider rationally the questions th a t recurred in
my mind.
•   1.) How was the absolute turmoil outside the turnstiles allowed to build up?
     At the corresponding fixture last year our tickets were checked by police well
    before we reached th e outer gates leading to the turnstile courtyard. This
    year,crowds were ju st allowed to converge on the turnstiles unchecked.
•   2.) W as it the right decision by the police to open the ’exit’ gate and allow
    fans to pour into the ground? The congestion outside the ground was
    undoubtly reaching danger point,but even at 2.55 p.m. ,the situation could
    have been safely handled w ithout opening any ’exit’ gates if the police had
    had greater numbers and the will to solve the problem. Transferring this
     ’problem ’ from outside to inside the ground suggests the police were faced
    with the need to control a hostile crowd,and could do so better inside the
                                        - 4 -


    stadium . To me,this never seemed the nature of the ’problem ’. Safety should
    have been more im portant than control. P u ttin g back the kick-off time
    would have helped to ensure safety.
•   3.) Once inside this gate,why were no stewards or police directing the fans to
    the wing sections of the terracing,and hence avoiding entry to an already
    congested middle section? This question is,I believe,the crucial one. For,no
    m atter w hat other hum an errors were m ade or how the ground design was
    found wanting,the fact remains th a t the fatal crush could have been avoided
    if half-a-dozen officials had blocked entry to the tunnel leading to the central
    section of the terracing.
•   4.) Once the crushing became apparent in the central section,why were the
    police inside the ground so slow to respond? Large numbers of officers were
    standing motionless on the pitch,even when, the fans began to climb over the
    fencing to avoid the crush. In fact,some officers initially made definite
    attem p ts to stop fans scaling the perimeter fencing to escape; only later did
    they change their response and helped to pull fans free. For too long,it
    appeared th e police reg«arded the fans actions as am ounting to an attem pted
    pitch invasion. F urther evidence of this was th e totally wasted police
    resources in the cordon along the half-way line.
•   5.) W as there enough communication between the police in the control box
    inside the ground and the officers on d u ty outside the turnstiles? Surely
    somebody in the control box could have seen th a t the centre section of the
    terracing was overcrowded,while also observing,via th e use of outside surveil­
    lance cam eras,that thousands of fans were still waiting to enter the ground,
    (and possibly the centre section).
•   6.) W hy didn’t th e emergency services respond quicker? It seemed an eter­
     nity before the first ambulances arrived. I assume this was because there was
     a delay in alerting the am bulance service of th e serious situation. Again,this
     seems to point to a m isjudgem ent of the gravity of the circumstances by the
     authorities on the spot.
•    7.) W hy did we witness the sight of untrained Liverpool fans having to carry
     injured and dead people away on makeshift stretchers m ade from dismantled
     advertising hoardings. How can a m ajor football ground,used to accommo­
     dating large crowds,have such spartan medical facilities? Hillsborough
     seemed to have no emergency plan to deal with a crisis like th a t practised by
     Liverpool F.C. at Anfield. In fact,the use of the tannoy system at Hillsbor­
     ough only served to confuse (eg. asking distressed and shocked supporters
     who had escaped the crush on the terraces to get off the pitch!). The early
     arrival of the fire tenders with appropriate cutting equipment to be used on
     the perimeter fencing m ight have led to some lives being saved. As it was,the
     fire engines arrived when most of the damage,in term s of casualties,had been
     done.
            I hope this evidence will be duly acknowledged by those conducting the
inquiry. I m ay be ju st a ’hum ble fan’,no ’expert’ on policing,ground design etc.
However,one fact remains very relevant. The so-called ’experts’ weren’t trapped
                                       -5-

in the m idst of th a t crowd; I was. I have ju st related my experience of the
horror,and my collected thoughts after th a t experience. It should be made clear 1
have no ’axe to g rind’ against any group or organization. All I want are the causos
of th e disaster to be identified,and steps taken to ensure it can never happen
again.
