                                                                                             MIR



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and time raised            i t h k (   9 M &                 Number


Title                                           lA J L o f $ U > f? (S ^d JjL               .r c j l u a o s j
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)                                   /          (/


Receiver's instructions — urgent action —          _ j r^S U U H
                                                                                                                                Receiver
                                                        J


                                                                                                                                Indexer
Document regi^ered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                           Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions

                                                                                                                           ^ ' O G
                                                                                                                                Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of Actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                                 sio

                                                                                                                           &
                                                                                                          i!-;;
                                                                                                                           i t>3\
                                                                                                                                Indexer
Further action No(s)

          . JC*- -J _tI -         n«;oo M^naoor tn onrinr<!P other Document Master Number Form
                                                                            FR14 (5,3.91)
                                                                                            WGA01
                                                                                            (8.90)




                                   West Midlands Police

TO         Dr S.L. POPPER, H.M. Coroner                        REF
STN/DEPT

                                                               REF
FROM       Detective Superintendent BEECHEY
STN/DEPT                                                       TEL/EXTN

                        LETTER OF 3RD JANUARY 1991                                                       *3
SUBJECT                                                        DATE        5th March, 1991
           INDIVIDUAL QUERIES



           In respect of the above and your memo of 13th February 1991, concerning queries
           regarding James Gary ASPINALL, Paul MURRAY, Nicholas Peter JOYNES and Colin
           Mark ASHCROFT, the following enquiries have been made.

           JAMES GARY ASPINALL
                                                                                                     s
           Checks have been made of all the photographic and video material and no further
           visual evidence relating to the time between 1527 hours and 1545 hours in
           regards to James could be found.

           PAUL MURRAY

           You have already indicated that Police Sergeant FOX will be called to give
           evidence. The only photographs that Police Sergeant FOX is shown on is PR5/32
           and video MAP9 both of which show Paul MURRAY being carried across the pitch.

           NICHOLAS PETER JOYNES

           The young Doctor mentioned has never been identified.     Mr THOMAS is being
           called to give evidence at the Inquest.

           COLIN MARK ASHCROFT

           Mr and Mrs ASHCROFT have be'en contacted and have informed us that their Social
           Worker is going to help them regarding their request but thank you for the
           offer of assistance.




           S. BEECHEY
           Detective Superintendent
                             OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR                 MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                        WATERY STREET
                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                        SHEFFIELD
                                          (West District)
                                                                        S3 7ET
STEFAN L. POPPER, LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S.. M.R.C.G.P.
                                              CORONER


                         Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721
                                                                           1 4 F e b r u a r y 19 91


TO:     SUPT. S BEECHEY



RE:     MOPPERS UP

Christopher Edwards                                 We want to call Paul Ibbotson and
                                                    Martin Stanley Smith.
Adam Edward Spearitt                                Query PC Harratt.
Phillip John Steele                                 Mr Boyle as documentary.
Paul Brian Murray                                   David Fox.
I enclose a copy of my letter to                                        dated 13 February 1991
for your information.
Can you add the above names to our lists.




S L POPPER
H M Coroner
                                                    13 February     91

Your Ref:
Our Ref:      SLP/LL


Hillsborough Steering Committee
c/o Castle Chambers
Cook Street
LIVERPOOL
L2 9SH

Dear
RE:    RESUMED INQUESTS - INDIVIDUAL QUERIES
I refer to your letter of 3rd January 1991*
Most of the queries which have been raised I do not think actually will
assist the Jury in their deliberations but I do understand of course
that some of the issues are of very real concern to the individual
families.
Dealing now with the individual cases:-
1.     Christopher Edwards
       I do not think it appropriate to deal with all the queries w ich
       Mr Edwards appears to have raised, neither do I intend to call
       every named witness who had anything to do with Christopher.
       It is neither necessary nor appropriate. I do intend to listen
       to PS M J Hemmingway if possible later on this week and I also
       at the mopping up session will endeavour to invite Paul Ibbotson
       and Martin Stanley Smith.
2.     James Gary Aspinall
       You will appreciate from the fact that you have been at the Inquests,
       that there is a vast amount of visual evidence and it would not
       be possible for me to say that there 1s ;no other in relation to
       James but I am not aware of any and I do not think that I can
       help any further.
3.     Jonathon Owens
       We have dealt with this matter by hearing Michael Robertson and
       I do not propose to do anything further. (I will write to you
       separately in due course about your letter regarding the ticket.)

                                                            /continued*,.
                                     2


Hillsborough Steering Committee                          13 February 1991


4.   Adam Edward Spearitt
     I am not clear whether you are actually asking for PC Harratt
     to attend to deal with the point that is worrying Hr Spearitt,
     but I would be prepared to call him if it would help. I do
     not think there is any need to amend the Summary as such,
5.   Phillip John Steele
     Mr Boyle is in Australia as I understand it, but if it would
     help I am prepared to read as documentary evidence on the basis
     that this is not evidence which will be disputed, any relevant
     part of his statement.
6.   Paul Brian Murray
      In order to assist   I will ask David Fox to deal with his timings.
      Mr Murray seems to   have misunderstood the comment of the
      pathologist. I do    not think that anything more is required.
      I do not intend to   call any of the other officers.
7/8 Sarah and Victoria Hicks
     I think I have dealt comprehensively with these two young girls
     and I do not propose to call any further witnesses.
Dealing with other outstanding queries (Page 3 of your letter):-
1)   John Alfred Anderson
     Mr Anderson has already given evidence, as indeed have the
     pathologist and Dr Forrest. I do not think anything more needs
     to be said or done other than any comments I may wish to make in
     my summing up.
2)   Colin Mark Ashcroft
     I will refer this query to West Midlands Police but I am doubtful
     there is very much more that can be done plus possible statistical
     analysis.
3)   Nicholas Peter Joynes
     I think if we knew the name we would have passed it on to you, but
     unfortunately information is not available.
Yours sincerely



S L POPPER
H M Coroner
                              OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR       MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                               WATERY STREET
                                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                               SHEFFIELD
                                           (West District)
                                                               S3 7ET
 STEFAN L. POPPER, LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                               CORONER


                          Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721
                                                                  13 F e b r u a r y   1 9 .9.1




Our Ref:          SLP/LL

MEMORANDUM
TO:          SUPT. S BEECHEY



RE                      .ETTER OF 3 JANUARY 1991,
         INDIVIDUAL QUERIES
I have asked you to confirm that we have no further information other
than what is already disclosed regarding James Gary Aspinall, Paul
Murray and Nicholas Peter Joynes.
Could you please also look into whether or not it is possible to sort
out with the Ashcroft family their query regarding identification.
Yours sincerely
     /   /




     POPPER
H l| Coroner
        HILLSBOROUGH                   STEERING                 COMMITTEE


                     c/o Castte. Chambers, Coo ((Street, LiverpoolL2 9S9(
                       TcC: 051 2550628 Ja.\: 051 236 0047 D X 14100




                                                               Our Reference : FRK/LH


Dr S L Popper
H M Coroner for South Yorkshire
Medico Legal Centre
Watery Street
Sheffield
S3 7ET




3rd January 1991



Dear Sir,

RE: RESUMED INQUESTS - INDIVIDUAL QUERIES

We write further to our letter of the 19th December 1990 to provide you
with , s u m m a r y of outstanding queries which have been raised by families , .
in cofmection with deceased individuals-

In a number of instances, family members are seeking amendments or additions
to the West Midlands Police1 Summaries.      We are enclosing copies of the
relevant documentation but for your ease of reference will summarise
the amendments/additions and queries below:—                                 {

Amendments/Additions to West Midlands Police Summaries
1.    Christopher Edwards
      The Summary indicates that a number of named officers attempted to revive
;s,   Christopher. The Edwards family would like more information as to what
      Christopher's condition was when the various Officers attended him and
      also what time these attendences took place. The family would, like the.
      Summary'amending to reflect' these details and we enclose a copy of the
      specific question of the Edwards' for your consideration. It may be
      that"the various Officer's statments may provide the information the
      Edwards' desire.

2.    James Gary Aspinall
      The Aspinall family are concerned about what happened in'the time between -J
      James being identified on the pitch, ie. 15.27, and being certified dead
      at' 15.45. Is there any other visual evidence which may account for the
      missing 18 minutes and can the summary be amended to reflfect to this. A
      copy of Mrs Aspinall's letter of the 15/11/90 is enclosed for your
      information.
                                               -2-


         3.   Jonathan Owens
              The Owens family would like the Summary amending to reflect that Jonathan
              together with his friends, Peter Birckett and Michael Robertson, were in
              a snooker hall between 11.15 and 13.15 on the day of the tragedy. This
              information was contained in a statement given to the West Midlands Police
              by Mr Robertson.

              The Owens family also dispute P.C. Parkes' account when Jonathan joined the
              crowd outside Leppings Lane at 2.40pm. Video evidence timed somewhere
              between 14.45 and 14.50 showed Jonathan and his friends standing in
              Leppings Lane and making no attempt to join the crowd. Can this
              discrepancy be clarified ? You will note that in our letter of the
              19th December 1990 we requested that P.C. Parkes be called to give evidence
              and it was with this issue in mind that we made this request. A copy
              of Mr and Mrs Owens'letter dated the 15/10/90 enclosed for your information.

              Adam Edward Spearritt
             Adam's father, Edward has been attempting for some time to discover what
             happened to Adam before he was sighted in front of the Spion Kop at 15.25.
       i     The Summary (paragraph 5) gives the impression that P.C. Harratt saw Adam
            .pass between Pens 4 and 3 at around 15.05 and therefore leaving some 20
  I   A j/^ minutes unaccounted for. However, the release of P.C. Harratt's statement
 r     .     statement show that in fact the sighting took place between 15.22 and 15.30.

               Mr Sp§arritt ,wou])d like the Summary amending to reflect these timings.
> * •         ,He would also 'like to know if other sightings were made of Adam prior to
               P.C. Harratt‘X pther than the unconfirmed ones at 15.08 and 15,09.

              Phillip John Steele
              The Summary indicates that Mr John Liam Boyle gave assistance to Phillip.
              The Steele family would like if possible to know what time this assistance
              was given and the Summary added to accordingly. It maybe that the answer,
              to their question is contained in Mr Boyle’.s statement and we would
              respectfully ask that you consider releasing a copy to ourselves. "We enclose
              a copy of Mrs Steele's letter of 12/11/90 in this regard for your
              information.

         6.   Paul Brian Murray
                                                                      I
              The Summary is unclear as to whe^ ^Sergeant David Fox pame into contact
              with Paul, merely placing the time after.some time after 15.05. Photograph
              Reference 5/32 timed at 15.32 shows Paul being carried on a temporary
              stretcher by, among others, Sergeant Fox. The Murray's are anxious to
              fill in the missing 25 minutes or so and perhaps you would kindly consider
              releasing Sergeant Fox's statement.

              We enclose a copy of Mr and Mrs Murray's undated letter which outlines
              their concerns and should be obliged if it would be possible for you to
              kindly consider the further questions contained therein.

         7.   Sarah Louise Hicks.
              The Hicks family are anxious to establish whether Sarah received attention
              betv/een 14.50, when she was seen by Paul McCaffrey and 15.21 when she
              was helped through the perimeter fence by P.C. Marshall. We should be
              obliged if you would kindly consider releasing a copy of P.C. Marshall's
              statement which may deal with this aspect. A copy of Mr Hicks'letter of
              13/11/90 is enclosed for your information.
8.    Victoria Jane Hicks
      You may recall that in our letter of the 19th December 1990 we requested
      that you kindly consider calling P.C. McGuinness~and Mr Paul Taylor*-
      We enclose for your consideration a copy of a letter dated 13/11/90
      which provides further details of Mr Taylor's account of his contacts
      with Victoria. Mr Taylor's account of cuddling Victoria conflicts with P.C
      McGuinness* account of removing her from a pile of bodies on the
      terracing and the Hicks family would like this clarifying if possible.



Further outstanding Queries
      John Alfred Anderson
      The Anderson family are anxious to have clarified at the Inquest that
      their son's consumption of a quantity of alcohol prior to the game 1
      did not contribute in any way to his death. We enclose a copy of
      Mr Anderson's undated letter to ourselves in this regard for your
      consideration.

      Colin Mark Ashcroft
      The Ashcroft family are not content with the position of Colin on the
      terraces as identified and would like if possible to view the video
      footage again. A copy of their letter dated 12/11/90 is enclosed.

       Nicholas Peter Joynes
       The Summary indicated that Nicholas was attended upon by a young doctor
     ;=from Liverpool. This doctor has not been identified up to the completion
       of the Summary. Mrs Joynes would very much like to meet this individual
       and wishes to know if he/she has been identified. A copy of Mrs Joynes'
       letter of 12/11/90 is enclosed.

We are obliged to you for your assistance in regard to the above mentioned     i
queries and ask that you kindly contact our                     if yoi>.jrequire
any further information.

Yours faithfully


c


HILLSBOROUGH STEERING COMMITTEE
