 tribunal
daily   summaries
         o/cfj\                                                                                             'TZi'gV/oAz, -7>Ati.y svuuM/gs.
                                                                                                                                          /   *'//
                                                                                      (’                    i<~~&J ^ /c^         ^
                                                                                                                                              &

 HAMMOPto SUDDARI)SC^
                          S 0 U IC iT G R S

 ALAN I. BOT IOMi£Y          JOHN W. G. HELLER                G. N. IAN GKEENPIfcLD        CONSULTANTS;             EMPIRE HOUSE
 D. TREVOP. LEWIS            iAN r . |   hu ttlew o rth       STEPHEN GALE                 ROGER W. SUDOARDSc.u ■   10PIC C ,ADILLY
 MICHAELS. 6REGS0M           PETERC- METCAtP                  MARK W. HILTON               SIR OESMOND HEAP         BRADFO RD BD1 3LR
 JOHNO.DE MAIN               CHRISTOPHER W. JONES             PAUL R. MANSER               IAN W. WHITSON
 MICHAEL L. $HfcPHER3        ANDREW R. JORDAN                 J0NA1 HAN H. WRIGHT                                   TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
 PETER N. Wll.BP.AHAW        SIMON R. B. STELL                STUART A. V tfill Y                                   1LLCX‘ !7201
J. RICHARD ARCHER            SIMON fi. INMAN                  RONALD S. DRAKE
OARBARA W. FRANCE            flilCHAflU W. WAOE-SMITH                                                               M .D.X.H0, 117?0
                                                              RICHARD BURNS
C. NOEL HUTTON               JOHN(i. BECKK1T                  DAVID.W. K, ARMITAGE                                  FAX (02’'4) 737647


OUR REF.            PCM/P AB                      YOUR REF.      ACC (SS )/JEL                      date      16 th Ma1            1989




 Dear Stuart,

 Inquiry

Having given some thought to the points raised yesterday, both by
Counsel to the in quiry and by the first witnesses, I felt that it
might be helpful to put one or two .points on paper.

So far as the ope n m g statement is concerned, although the tone did
appear prejudicial in various respects, 1 think we should eep in
mind that many of the comments made were favourable from ou r point
of view.

Firstly, and perhaps most significantly, it was accepted ttiat the
Ar*r* 4 r
        *4 i. V
decision   to*. open gate C, in order to relieve
                                             ,
                                                 pressure outs de the
                                                                                       _




turnstiles, was a proper and necessary decision, in the
circumstances, This statement must reflect the overwhelmi tig content
of the evidence r eceived by the inquiry to date.

Secondly, comment was passed about the forming of the cordon across
the ce.ntre of the pitch, which has been criticised by some
supporters as bei ng wasteful of Police manpower.  Counsel to the
inquiry adverted to the potential problems which would have: ensued
if there had been a confrontation of fans on the pitch and described
the placement of this cordon as "necessary".   It follows th at this
part of the operation is also unlikely to come in for any ser ious
criticism and I ajn sure that this will come as a relief to David
Chapman


                                                                                                                       /.            contd.




K. S. Anderson L's9 • >
Assistant Chief C unstable,
South Yorkshire P slice

FAX 0742 52 3409


LEEDS Offices:        QWTANNIA CHAMSERS 4/5 OXFORD PLACE LEEDS L$1 3AX TELEPHONE (0532) 444921 TELEX 557202 =AX 444734/421199
                      JOSEPHS WELL- HANOVER WALK LEEDS LS3 1A8 TELEPHONE (0532) 450845 TELEX 55365 FAX 426868
H am m ond su d d a r d s                                             PAGE NO.




Thirdly, Counsel to the inquiry, whilst critical of arrange ments for
cl3 strlbution of supporters between the pens making up the ~ eppings
Lane terracing, whs at pains to emphasise that arrangements inside
the ground were primarily a matter for the Club,

So far as points of criticism are concerned, those which w< re made
by Counsel in his opening statement and which causcd some 1 rrjtation
do appear to be based on evidence which is to be called frc the
supporters.

The specific poin s which were covered by evidence yesterda y and the
evidence to be ca .Lied again today were as follows:


          An iirfl                                            han las t
                            tance from""TEl
                                          c" ground, i .e,"""Eetv/ccn
          the paTJcHTjJTSre a s and the perimeter gates.        The of
          duty Merseyside Police Officer.who gave evidence
          first sa|d that he saw very few Officers between
          parking his car somewhere in Halifax Road and the
          outside of the ground.        Those that he did see were
          standing in groups at road junctions or manning
          the _barriers which prevent access to the small
          residential streets to the immediate north of the
          ground.       He contrasted this situation with last
          ye a r , wh<fen he claimed to have axrived at
          approxim, .tely the same time, or perhaps a little
          earlier, and had seen many Officers checking
          tickets, giving directions and turning back fans
          who could not produce tickets.

     2.   At the ground itself, the Merseyside Officer(and
          the othey witnesses} who"gave evidence yesterday
          claimed to have seen only two mounted Officers and
          no other Police presence at all, until he got
          inside the ground.   Bill Woodward was able to
          knock th|s witness back a little in cross
          examination, by showing him timed photographs
          taken between 2.2 5 p.m. and 2.30 p.m., showing a
          large amount, of Officers outside the ground at
          that time.   However, he maintained that, whatever
          those photographs might show as to the position up
          to 2.30 p.m., he only saw the two mounted Officers
          when he arrived at 2.45 p.m. Other witnesses give
          a broadly similar account.
                   i
          The Merseyside Officer, and so far one other
          witness (jbut others are to follow), gives evidence
          of an Officer at either qate 3 or'gate 4 pushing
          fans who had come out of the pens back into them.
          Reference* was made to fans being pushed back
          through tj.he gate and also to being pushed off the
          perimetei} fencing which they had climbed up.



                                                                          contd.
H am m o nd Su d d a r d s                                     PASS NO.   3




 Those arc the Uhtjee points to dato at which there is direc
 criticism supported by evidence given at the inquiry.

There were, of course, other points of criticism, as yet un supported
by evidence, the majority of which sound far more against :he Club
than the South Yorkshire Police, if indeed they are applic able to us
at all.  These include the failure, to monitor the numbers filtering
the separate pens, .the failure to provide any direction, e ther by
stewarding or signs and the failure to take any particular steps to
cope with the consequences of the opening of gate C, in te ms of
preventing access to the central tunnel.   This final critii ism is
really an extension of the other two, since there would ha ie been no
reason to take special precautions to deal with the entry ithrough
gate C if the Club had had a proper monitoring system and/<j)
adequate stewardiLng and direction signs

We shall have to wait and see how these criticisms develop m
evj dence.

 So far as the mechanics of the inquiry are concerned, Coun $el
 indicated an intention to call, firstly, Liverpool support^ rs, whom
 he indicated (rather hopefully I think) that he should'fin sh with
 during this week and, thereafter, some local inhabitants, presumably
 a mixture of resi dents, shopkeepers and publicans.. He ant cipated
 that this should take some part of next week and, thereaft^ r , he
 would be calling Officers from the South Yorkshire Police,    lie
 indicated an inte ntion to call Officers concerned in the p anning of
 the match, Office rs concerned with the situation outside tfte ground
 and Officers conderned with the situation inside the grourn . He
 proposed to cal.l all those directly involved, plus a cross section
 of others.  How m any witnesses this will entail depends on the
(breadth of the do finition of "directly involved” . Certain y, it
 seems to me that something between 50 and 100 Officers cou d be
 called.

If Counsel succeeds in keeping to his timetable, this evidence could
start to be requiired at any time from the middle of next w dek - say
24th May - onwards.   My own feeling is that Counsel will n ot be able
to keep to the tijmetable and that we arc more likely to ha\
witnesses called jduring the first week in June.

Ideally, I would ilike to see personally every witness prior to their
being called, but,' this may not'be possible if very large nlumbers are
involved. I shoujld at least wish to sit down with the SenU o r
Officers and go through likely points of cross examination      In
planning these mejetings, there is a balance to be struck b«:tween not
leaving it to the last minute but, on the other hand, hear•ing as
much as possible of the evidence to be called from the Liv<$:rpool
supporters and th local inhabitants.



                                                                . contd.
H a m m o n d su d d a r d s                                   ’AMhNO.   4




 I suggest t-hat wc assess the position at the end of this we i.k

 i should say, specifically, that I see no reason for Roger Greenwood
 to cancel his arranged leave during the week commencing 22n3 May.
 I would anticipate that each of the Senior Officers will be giving
 evidence for no less than one day, hence, even if Counsel dses
 succeed in keeping to his timetable, matters can surely be jarranged
 so that Roger Greenwood is called after his return.

A further point wljiich was made yesterday by Lord Justice Taylor was
that if any persoiji wishes to put .forward any observations o
submissions as regards the recommendations which the inquiry should
make, then those Observations should be submitted in writing within
the next month,    ‘^‘he question arises as to whether the South
Yorkshire Police        a body wish to make any recommendations, e.g,
that all major football matches should start at 12.00 noon, with a
ban on any licensed premises opening before that time within two
miles of the viciiity,      There may be other matters which you would
wish to put forward.      On the other hand, it may be that any such
submissions could be. more appropriately made through the ACPO, on
the basis that such problems are common to all or at least many
areas of the country.      Perhaps you will discuss this and let me know
if you would like any assistance from.us in dealing with wrjitten
submissions.

 Finally, in thinking generally about the first day of the inquiry,
 it occurred to me! that you will wish to give at least some thought
 to the question of publicity and/or public relations.   You will have
 noticed that the two witnesses who completed their evidence
 yesterday walked straight out-to be interviewed in front ol
 television camera s and, whilst T am not suggesting that thi s is an
 appropriate course for Policc Officers who have given evidence to
 the inquiry, you bay well wish t» consider, perhaps even with the
 Officers concerned, whether some form of statement may neec. to be
 issued, either after individual Officers have given evidence or
 after the evidence given by all South Yorkshire Police Officers has
 been taken.  It may be that, having thought about this matter, the
 decision will be |that no such step is required, but I mention it at
 this stage so tha!t thought can be given to it.

 If there are any batters which you would like to discuss a is m g out
 of this letter, p'lease telephone me, as I shall be in the <f>££ice all
 day.  Alternatively, I hope to be at the inquiry tomorrow rporning
 and, as Kate Hal]] from this office will also be present, I should be
 able to make time for a meeting during the morning, if neecjl b e .


 Yours sincerely,




 Peter J2< Metcalf
From:    DS

To:      Chief Superintendent Wain                       15 May 1989




HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER ENQUIRY



The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Enquiry opened at Sheffield

Town Hall at 10.30am on Monday 15 May 1989-      The Enquiry is

being conducted by Lord Justice Taylor, who is accompanied by

two assessors, namely, Mr. Brian Johnson,       Chief Constable of

the Lancashire Police, and Professor Leonard Maunder (Civil

Engineer).




Lord Justice Taylor outlined the times during which the Enquiry

would hear evidence, which will be from 10.00am to 1.00pm and

from 2.00pm to 5.00pm, starting at 10.30am on a Monday morning

and concluding some time during the afternoon on Fridays.;




The opening speech was made by Mr. Andrew Collins, QC, Counsel

for the Enquiry.    He outlined the events at Hillsborough Stadium

on Saturday 15 April 1989, but made particular reference to

certain aspects which the Enquiry would need to examine.       These

are summarised as follows:




(a)     The late arrival of supporters attending the game

        should have been anticipated, evidence will be

        heard that road works on the M63 in the Manchester

        area caused delays.    No entertainment was provided

        in the stadium to provide an incentive for supporters

        to enter the ground.
 The lack of sufficient turnstiles to enable the

 Liverpool supporters to enter the ground in an

 orderly manner.




 No steps appear to have been taken to "screen"

 fans at a distance away from the ground, to

 exclude non-ticket holders from mixing with

 ticket holders, thereby enlarging the crowd

at the turnstiles.   Witnesses suggest that the

police appeared to take steps at the 1988 semi­

final to check tickets away from the turnstiles.




The allocation of the Leppings Lane end of the

ground to Liverpool supporters is another point

which the Enquiry would have to examine.




Impatience of waiting supporters outside the

turnstiles was another area which would need to

be examined and was something that should have

been anticipated.




There did not appear to be any attempt to ensure

orderly queueing of spectators outside the turn­

stiles.   Specific reference is made to the

necessity to ensure orderly queueing in the

ACPO guidelines, the South Yorkshire Police

Standing Instructions on the policing of football

matches, and in the Operational Order itself.
The question of deferring the kick-off is another

matter the enquiry would have to examine.     Mr. Collins

said that at 2.30pm there was clearly a mass of

people outside the ground and the assessment at that

stage was that those waiting to enter could be

accommodated in the ground.     However, by 2.45pm the

crowds outside had not diminished and the question

of deferring the kick-off did not appear to have

been considered at that time.




Once the decision has been taken to open the gates

there does not appear to have been any liaison

between officers outside the ground and officers

inside the ground.     No steps were taken to seal

off the tunnel and direct incoming supporters to

the outer pens.




The gradient of the tunnel has been found to be a

1 in 6 gradient.     The "Green Guide" recommends that

any gradient should not be excess of a 1 in 10

gradient.     This is obviously a matter for the club

itself.




The Enquiry would also have to look at the terrace

'pens', gates and fences.     The gates from the ’pens’

to the perimeter track appear to be totally

inadequate.     The Enquiry would also have to con­

sider the perimeter fencing itself, should it be

replaced by large sections of fencing which open
      as opposed to fixed fencing containing small exit

      gates.




(k)   The stewarding of terrace 'pens' would be examined

      with a view to establishing what, if any, steps

      were taken to stop over-crowding.




(1)   Initially, police officers thought that Liverpool

      supporters climbing over the perimeter fencing were

      attempting to invade the pitch.     Mr. Collins found

      this difficult to accept as the game was only a

      matter of minutes in progress and in fact Liverpool

      at that stage at the upper hand.     Pitch invasions

      usually take place when the team supported by the

      "invading fans" is on the losing end.




(m)   The provision and availability of medical supplies

      and equipment will be examined.




(n)   The state of the ground and the role and training

      of stewards would also be examined.




(o)   The Enquiry would also need to examine the pro­

      vision of adequate turnstiles and sign posting to

      encourage even distribution of supporters.




Mr. Collins then outlined the order in which evidence would be

presented to the Enquiry, which is scheduled as follows:
1.    Liverpool supporters.




2.   Independent locals.




3.   South Yorkshire Police.

         3 aspects of the policing arrangements would

         be examined when police officers were

         called to give evidence;

         (a)   Pre-match planning.

         (b)   Events outside the ground on the day.

         (c)   Events inside the ground before and

               after the disaster.




4.   Ground staff.




5.   Ambulance/Fire Service personnel.




6.   Football Association.




7.   Technical evidence as to   the state of the ground.




Evidence was subsequently heard from 3 Liverpool supporters,

coincidentally, all of whom had attended the corresponding FA

semi-final in 1988.   There were 2 particular points of interest

which were brought out during their examination.     One witness

claimed that when he attended the 1988 match police officers at

the coach park off Halifax Road were checking whether or not

supporters were in possession of valid tickets, and encouraging
 fans to make their way to the ground as soon as possible.     The

 same witness also claimed that last year a cordon of police

 officers were in position in Leppings Lane, checking the tickets

 of supporters..




Another witness also claimed to have seen a cordon of police

 officers in Leppings Lane, checking tickets at last year's match.




 Written transcripts of the evidence given by all witnesses will

 become available as the Enquiry progresses.




'^Pjllice SergeAAt
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER INQUIRY

(SECOND DAY - 16 MAY 1989)



The inquiry re-opened at Sheffield Town Hall at 10.00 am on Tuesday

16 May 1989.    The inquiry continued with the evidence of Peter

William Jackson, a practising solicitor from Liverpool and Secretary

of the Football Supporters Association of Great Britain.



Jackson continued his evidence which can be summarised as follows:

Criticisms of police handling of area outside the turnstiles, refers

to attending the equivalent match in 1988 when he describes an outer

cordon at the perimeter gates checking tickets and filtering the

arriving supporters through into the various queues.    He does say,

however, that this year he saw an officer at each set of the

turnstiles and an officer at gate   'A' directing people to the various

turnstiles.    He concluded his evidence with the submission that he

has taken personally two hundred statements from Liverpool supporters

but as they match 'almost exactly1 the opening address of Mr Collins

QC he does not propose to submit these two hundred statements to the

inquiry.



Evidence was then heard from Alison Jane Bennett, a Liverpool

supporter whose home address is in Nottinghamshire.    She gave

evidence of travelling to the football match with four other people,

none of whom had tickets for the match.    She purchased five tickets

at £20.00 each, face value £6.00.    The tickets were for the Spion Kop
end which was occupied by Nottingham Forest supporters.

At 1.30 pm she managed through turnstile    'G' at the Leppings Lane

turnstiles to gain access to the Leppings Lane end of the ground

with the Spion Kop tickets, as did her four friends.       The five of

them went into enclosure 4 and her only significant evidence

thereafter is that when the crushing started, she felt the police

were very slow to react and suggested that police officers were

shouting for people climbing the fence to escape to go back.        It was

put to her that the officers may have been shouting 'go back' to the

supporters behind those that were getting crushed, and she refused to

accept this as a possibility.



The third witness of the morning was Daniel Joseph Hennessey, a

student from Liverpool.     Hennessey provided useful evidence for the

South Yorkshire Police case.     He arrived at the ground at 14.45 pm,

describes mounted police officers attempting to control the huge

crowd that was in the area at that time.     At 14.52 pm he found

himself near to gate    'C' which he describes as   'miracuously opening'

in front of him.     He walked through, states that there was no

crushing on the way through the gate and headed into the tunnel.         As

he entered the tunnel at 3.00 pm there was no crushing in the tunnel

and describes being able to see the players on the pitch and having a

conversation with others around him about the fact that Alan Hanson

was warming up on the playing area.     He exited into enclosure number

3 and describes    'worming' his way through the crowd to get into a

position he liked.     He described the crowd as no worse than an

average big match at Anfield.     He then describes being crushed and
the next thing he remembers is a policeman pulling him out of the pen

by his left arm.



The theme of late arrivals still managing to worm or wriggle their

way through the crowd and being happy in the crowd that existed

around 3.00 pm was a theme taken up by Counsel Mr Woodward and most

of the subsequent witnesses accepted that this was the case.      This

evidence does tend to rebut any argument that already over crowded

pens were over whelmed with a massive in     rush of supporters at around

kick off time, the cause a surge     leading to the disaster.



Next witness was Keith Goulding, whose evidence didn't take     us any

further.   He repeated the claims    of lack of organization on the

outside and the fact that police officers were making people get back

into the pens at the time of their attempts to escape the crush.



The next witness was Ian John Clark, a student from Liverpool.        At

half past two and being marshalled by at least a couple of dozen

police officers and six mounted officers r    he describes them as regulat­

ing the number of people going though the court yard and into the

turnstile area.    He describes in his statement a barrier having

collapsed but in evidence in chief and cross examination, it became

patently obvious that what he had seen was a surge of people and he

assumed the barrier had collapsed.    When shown the exact position of

the single failed barrier in pen 3, he categorically states that that
was not the position of the barrier he assumed had collapsed.     His

evidence opened no new ground.



David Perry, a taxi driver from Liverpool, describes being in a

public house prior to a football game when a group of four or five

youths were approached by a man who said he was a steward and that he

was willing to get any non ticket holders into the Leppings Lane end

for five pounds each.       He took up his position in the ground in pen

4 at 1.30 pm, claims to have had no anxiety at all up to 2.30 pm when

a crush started which continued to develop.     His evidence was merely

a repeat of previous witnesses from this point on.



David Cruice describes arriving at the ground approximately 2.35 pm,

having seen a lot of police officers in the area. Describes queueing

at the turnstiles, four officers on horse back trying to organise the

large number of people there.     When he reached the turnstiles he

describes a 45 year old police officer who had 'fear written all over

his face' and describes the officer trying to get out of the way of

the pressing crowd.     When he managed to get through the turnstile, he

found that the police officer he had seen outside was in fact inside

the ground dusting himself down.     Cruice found no problems inside and

went through the tunnel with his friend, onto a tightly packed

terrace, pen 3.   He picked his spot and again wormed his way down to

the middle of the pen.     At the time the incident arose, he describes

the officers on the perimeter track taking a long time to react.

Cruice then began to describe his attempts to assist those    'dying

around him'.   Cruice broke down giving his evidence.    He did say,

however, that officers were on the terraces giving mouth to mouth
resuscitation.



Patrick Cunningham.     Cunningham states that at 2.45 pm he entered the

ground and with the crowd of people entered the tunnel.     On reaching

the terrace end of the tunnel, decided to turn back but because of

the crowds, was unable to do so and he describes being 'catapulted'

onto the terraces.    At the end of his evidence, Cunningham was asked

what differences were there between 1988 and 1989, he having attended

both games.     Cunningham states that in 1988 when the coach was parked

on Claywheels Lane the police officers in the area were asking for

tickets, asking for fans to produce their tickets on leaving the

coach.     In 1989 however, he saw police officers but was never

approached by any.    A further difference was the lack of police

presence in Leppings Lane.



There seems to be an inevitability about this evidence being given,

as all witnesses are sitting within the inquiry room whilst other

witnesses are giving very similar evidence prior to their

presentation.



Keith Leonard, Counsel House Warden from Liverpool.     Travelled in mini

bus as he had in 1988.     In 1988 claims police stopped mini bus and

searched - this didn't happen in 1989.     Parked the mini bus some ten

minutes from the ground, got to the ground and in through the

turnstiles between 2.50 pm and 2.55 pm.     As he entered the tunnel he

saw that Alan Hanson was out warming up so the time would be around

2.55 pm.   Describes the tunnel as not full and on reaching the
terraces found those to be full but still room for more.      Leonard

again describes   'worming' through the crowd to find a better

position.   Describes himself at one stage as crushed up against a

crush barrier and bent double in a 'C' shape over the barrier.         Saw

no stewards or police on the perimeter track.     When the pressure

eased he managed to stand up correctly and at this stage saw a pile

of people in front of him four to five deep.      People at the bottom of

the pile in a 'bad w a y ' .



Wayne Windever, 19 years, describes attending 1988 Semi Final with a

ticket but in 1989 travelled with others without tickets.      Claims to

have managed to purchase a ticket.     He claims to have paid £5.00, ie

less than the face value, for a Leppings Lane terrace ticket.     (This

was never challenged in cross examination).       Windever went on to

say that he made his way from Spion Kop around the back of the South

Stand to the Leppings Lane end (this too is difficult to understand,

given that police officers were blocking both ends of the service

road off to prevent rival fans coming together).     However, Windever

found himself outside gate     'C' at the time that it was opened by

police officers and took his opportunity to go in there.      In cross

examination, Windever was in some doubt as to whether he'd walked,

ran or shuffled through the gate (indeed most of his evidence was

ambiguous to say the least).     He says that on entering the ground he

saw no direction boards and was given no direction.     But, again, in

cross examination, claims he knew exactly where he was going and

therefore had no use for direction boards or personal direction.

Because he had been in pen 3 at the equivalent match in 1988, he made
his way through the tunnel which wasn't crowded and took up his

position in pen 3.     Whilst it was tight, he managed to 'worm his way

down to the front' and took up a position near the front in pen         3 at

a time when both teams were     on the pitch warming up.   He then

describes the crush.     Windever went on to state that a police officer

was on the perimeter fence at the time people were getting crushed,

kicking people back into the terracing that were attempting to climb

out via the fence. In cross examination this assertion was made to look

ridiculous.   He had chosen not to include it in his written statement

but had introduced it for the first time at the inquiry.       Stated     at

first that the police officer was standing on top of the fence and

faced with the stupidity of such an assertion, qualified it to state

that the officer was half way up the fence and kicking through the

mesh at people attempting to climb up over the fence.



The final witness of the afternoon was Gary Gaines, store keeper from

Liverpool.    The significant   features of his evidence are as follows:



At 2.00 pm he was sitting with     other Liverpool supporter on the     lawns

outside Gateway Supermarket when a mounted police officer rounded up

the supporters and encouraged them to make their way to the ground.

Gaines was also able to tell the inquiry precisely when the barrier

had failed in pen 3.     He was in that area having entered about 2.40

pm and found himself crushed against the very barrier that failed.

He describes having his leg against another supporter's knee which

separated him from the barrier.     He feels that the supporter's knee

was broken in the crush and a few moments later, at a time when the
    football team was on the pitch warming up, which would be around 2.55

    pm, he heard another crack and the barrier to the left hand side of

    him failed and the supporters who were standing behind that barrier

    slowly fell to the ground.



    The inquiry closed at shortly after 5.00 pm and further statements

    were made available for further Liverpool supporters who would be

    giving evidence later this week.



•
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

WEDNESDAY 17 MAY 1989 - DAY 3



The hearing opened with a rebuke for the press by Lord Justice Taylor,

who criticised inaccurate headlining, sensationalism even by the

reputable press.     A failure to report what is actually said, but simply

reporting what is contained in statements of witnesses provided to them

Lord Justice Taylor threatened to withdraw that facility.



A total of 15 witnesses appeared before the inquiry throughout this day

all of whom were Liverpool supporters.



The following points of note were introduced:

       Points of interest based on the evidence of witnesses

       1.   Anthony Barnbrook was inside the turnstile area when he saw

            gate   'C' open, he estimates between a 100 and 150 supporters

            came in through the gate.       A police horse subsequently came

            and blocked the gate.       Mr Barnbrook subsequently entered pen

            4 and went to the front of the pen.       A big push came and the

            witness was lifted a foot or more off the floor.       Four or

            five police officers were on the track, one of whom was a

            policewoman.     People in the pen were screaming 'gets us out,

            help u s 1.   The Liverpool goal keeper, Bruce Grobbalar ,

            apparently heard the screams and alerted the WPC who is said

            to have opened the pen gat e .
Under cross examination by Counsel for the South Yorkshire

Police, the witness referred to 'shoving and barging'

outside the turnstiles and that as far as he was concerned,

it was   'every man for himself', and that if you wanted to

get into any match when you see a gap you go for i t .


Mr Ian Divine who was at last years corresponding Semi Final

said that things ran smoother last year.     There appeared to

be no organization outside the ground and no ticket checks

were made by the police outside the ground this year.       He

eventually went into pen 3 which he described as being very

crowded.     He made his way from pen 3 into pen 2.   When he

was cross examined by Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police

this witness was asked about the actions and effectiveness

of mounted officers outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles.

He said initially that the mounted officers were      'charging'

through the crowd on a number of occasions.       He was

questioned on this point and it transpired that the mounted

officer was in fact attempting to separate the fans to

relieve pressure.      The inquiry was left in no doubt about

this.



Mr David Lowe is a Liverpool supporter who lives in

Mansfield.     He travelled to the ground without a ticket but

succeeded in buying a ticket from a tout at a cost of
£20.00.    The ticket was in fact for the Spion Kop.

However, Mr Lowe attempted to gain admittance to the ground

through the Leppings Lane turnstiles.     He claimed that at

1.45 pm he located a steward at the Leppings Lane end who

directed him to a turnstile, the operator of that particular

turnstile refused him entry.     Mr Lowe returned to the

steward who directed him to another turnstile.     He was

admitted through that second turnstile and went into pen 4.

He later said that the police officers were not helping

anyone, after it was apparent that people were injured and

that the first occasion on which he himself saw any police

assistance was around 3.30 pm.



Of particular interest was the evidence given by Mr Roy

Parry who came to the match with his two sons aged ten years

and eight years.     He arrived about 2.15 pm and saw lots of

people but described this as a typical match day scene and

had no more difficulty than normal.     He followed the crowd

through the tunnel intending to occupy a position behind the

goal in pen 3.     The pen was quite full and he went with his

sons to the bottom right corner where they remained for some

ten minutes.     The pen began to fill and his children became

uncomfortable.     After the match had started he recalled an

incident where a Liverpool player hit the bar and decided to

move further back in the pen because his children were

upset.    He moved through the pen to the back and was at the
tunnel entrance about 3.15   pm. He took his children out

through the tunnel and saw   that people were still coming    in

through the tunnel.   No police officers appeared to be in

evidence.



The question of a ticket check by police officers was raised

by Mr John Phimester, who attended the 1988 Semi Final.       He

claimed that in 1988 at a distance of some 50 to 100 hundred

yards away from the perimeter gates, a line of Police

Constables were checking tickets and lining people into

queues.   On that occasion ittook him a matter of five

minutes to enter the ground.   He occupied a seat in the     West

Stand and claims to have observed people climbing over the

perimeter fence about 3.04   pm. He said there was no

organization on the track,   most of the police officers were

standing round bemused.



Mr David Postlethwaite arrived at the ground around midday.

He came early, after seeing police instructions in a

Liverpool programme, which said the gates would be open

around 11.30 am and entertainment would be provided in the

ground. He went on to say that about 2.30 pm he heard an

announcement over the tannoy asking people on the Leppings

Lane terraces to move forward to allow spectators to enter

the terracing from the rear.   He is the only witness to     date

to have referred to such a tannoy broadcast.    When he was

cross examined he was asked about this tannoy message but

was adamant that he had in fact heard this request.
7.   The witness Thomas Hilton entered the ground and went onto

     the Leppings Lane terraces through the central tunnel.     He

     entered pen 3 and moved through pen 3 along the back of the

     terracing into pen 2.   He decided he wanted to find his

     friends and walked back through pen 3 to the mouth of the

     tunnel, from where he was forced back by a surge into pen 4.

     He made an observation that there was not as many police

     officers as the previous years' match, either on the track

     or outside the gates.



8.   Stephen Westergreen attended the 1988 Semi Final.   He said

     that last year a line of police officers were across

     Leppings Lane checking tickets, in fact the police officers

     had placed temporary barriers across the entire width of

     Leppings Lane with gaps in between, through which supporters

     could walk after having their tickets checked.   He said that

     this barrier was some 100 yards away from the perimeter

     gates.
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

THURSDAY 18 MAY 1989 - DAY FOUR


A total of 15 witnesses appeared before the Inquiry throughout this

day, all of whom were Liverpool supporters.



The following points of note were introduced in evidence:-

1.     The first witness to be called was Mr Trevor Hicks.     Mr

       Hicks lost both his daughters in the tragedy.     Mr Hicks made

       several observations of note, 2.30 pm he says the pens were

       filling and were quite busy.     He was in the corner pen

       situated close to the Police Control Box.     At 2.45 pm the

       centre pens were extremely busy and people were showing

       signs of distress.   2.50 pm, people were climbing from the

       centre pens and were being crushed against the fences.       His

       daughters were in pen 3 and he became concerned for their

       safety.   Around 2.50/2.55 pm Mr Hicks observed a senior

       Police Officer standing on the platform outside the Police

       Control Box, apparently looking at the pens.     Members of the

       crowd were shouting at this officer to draw his attention to

       the crushing in the centre pens.     The officer wore a flat

       Police cap with gold braid on the peak, although Mr Hicks

       claimed this officer was wearing a brown anorak.     He went on

       to say this may have been the officer who ran onto the pitch

       to stop the game.    The officer ignored the shouts from the

       crowd and returned to the Police Control Box.     A short while

       later another Police Officer came to the platform at the
Police Control Box, around kick off time.     This officer also

wore a flat cap but had black braid on the peak.     Again

members of the crowd shouted to this officer, drawing his

attention to the crushing in the centre pens, the officer

appeared not to respond.   Eventually the officer said 'Shut

your fucking rattle1, and returned to the Police Control

Box.   When he was cross examined by Counsel for the South

Yorkshire Police, Mr Hicks agreed that the first officer, ie

the officer with the gold braid on his cap, did not respond

to shouts from the crowd because his attention was focused

on something else, that being the state of the centre pens.

Mr Hicks also agreed that the second officer could also have

been concentrating his view on the central pen area and

found that the shouts from the crowd were distracting him.

He might well have felt under some pressure and was

concerned for the people in the crowd which caused him to

respond in the way alleged.



Evidence was later heard from Peter Garrett, a Police

Constable in the Merseyside Force and Membership Secretary

of the Football Supporters Association.     He claimed that

there was no deliberate pushing by members of the crowd

outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles.     He claims to have

made a comment to police officers inside the ground,

suggesting they would be better employed outside the

turnstiles, to which a Police Constable is alleged to have

said 'it's nowt to do with us'.   He went into the North

Stand to take his seat, stewards in the Stand did not check
his ticket.



The majority of the witnesses who gave evidence this date

had been to the corresponding fixture in 1988, one of those

witnesses claimed to have seen a cordon of Police Officers

placed across the tunnel to prevent access to the tunnel at

last years match.    Another witness who had been to the match

last year claims that the police had set up a ticket check

in Leppings Lane close to the petrol filling station and the

roundabout at its junction with Penistone Road.     When this

witness was cross examined by Counsel for the South

Yorkshire Police, it was put to him that he was mistaken,

and that he had in fact seen the barriers and Police

Officers closing off the side streets ajacent to Leppings

Lane.   The witness was adamant however, that the ticket

check and the barriers were placed across Leppings Lane in

the position previously indicated.



Another point worthy of mention were the actions of Police

Officers on the perimeter track at the front of the Leppings

Lane terraces, one witness in his evidence said that all the

officers on the track could do was to tell the supporters in

the pens to 'move back' and indicate that with hand

gestures.     Whilst being cross examined, this witness agreed

that the Police Officers actions could have been directed to

fans at the back of the pen, suggesting that they move back

to relieve the pressure on those at the front of the pen.
The Inquiry closed at 5.00 pm.

On Friday 19 May 1989, evidence will be heard from local residents

and shop keepers.
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

FRIDAY 19 MAY 1989 - DAY 5

The last of the Liverpool supporters to appear before the Inquiry

gave evidence this morning.    His account of the events was similar

in most respects to that previously given by Liverpool supporters.

1.   The first indepedent local witness appeared before the

     Inquiry. Mrs Angela Hockenhull resides in the vicinity of the

     Hillsborough Football Ground.    She describes a build up of

     people from 10.30 am onwards.    People began to come into her

     garden to urinate, in groups of one or two initially.     The

     crowd appeared to build up from 1.00 pm to 2.30 pm when more

     and more male supporters came into her garden to urinate.       She

     said that a large number of the Liverpool supporters appeared

     to be quite drunk.    The streets were littered with assorted

     cans.    Between 2.30 and 3.00 pm groups of 20 or more men were

     coming into her garden to urinate, both herself and her

     husband went into the garden to remonstrate with the urinating

     males.   When she herself did this, she found that a number of

     the men would turn towards her and show off their genitals.

     Eventually her husband located a Police Inspector who posted a

     Police Constable at the front of the garden to deter people

     from using her garden as a toilet.



2.   Mr Lee Oxley has lived in the Hillsborough area for 26 years

     and has lived in his present home near to the ground for the

     past 6 years.   He claims to have seen a large crush around

     2.30 pm and comments that he has never seen as much congestion
     in the area before.   People in the street were asking for

     spare tickets, people were in high spirits and the smell of

     alcohol was evident, a number of people were groggy and

     carrying cans of alcohol.    Under cross examination he said he

     formed the impression that people were coming later this year

     than in previous years.



3.   The third local resident to appear before the Inquiry was Mrs

     Constance Sweet.    She told the Inquiry that she was in

     Leppings Lane at 2.4 5 pm.   Crowds of people were asking for

     tickets.   She also commented about people drinking and

     carrying four packs of alcohol and throwing empty cans on the

     floor. She told the Inquiry she saw a policeman on the roof of

     a Land Rover using a loud hailer to address the crowd of

     people in the Leppings Lane area.    The officer was begging the

     people in the crowd to stop pushing forward.    He kept

     repeating his message, and adding that people were being

     crushed at the turnstiles.    She felt the officer's voice

     expressed his concern.    Nothing appeared to happen.     Nobody in

     the crowd appeared to move away.    She also described seeing

     youths openly urinating in the street.    She was later asked to

     identify the time at which she saw the police officer using

     the Land Rover public address system.    She said it would be

     about 2.55 to 3.00 pm.



The Inquiry adjourned at 1.00 pm and did not sit during the

afternoon of this day.

The Inquiry was scheduled to resume at 10.30 am on Tuesday 23 May

1989 .
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY



TUESDAY 23 MAY 1989 - DAY 6




The first witness to give evidence at the resumption of the Inquiry

was Mrs. Janet Anne ELLIS.     Mrs. ELLIS is a hairdresser, who has a

salon near to the Hillsborough Football Ground.     She arrived for

work around 7-30am on Saturday 15 April 1989, and claims to have

seen fans performing somersaults in Leppings Lane and drinking at

that time in the morning.    As the crowd built up, fans began to

urinate in the area near to her shop, and by 2.30pm groups of some

50 supporters were using the yard to her premises as a toilet.        She

describes seeing supporters carrying cans of alcohol in their hands,

in bags and in the pockets of their clothing.     She saw groups of

youths going into a shop in Southey Green Road, which had an off-

licence facility, they were grabbing bottles and cans and the staff

in the shop couldn't cope.     When she was cross-examined by Mr.

WOODWARD, Q C , Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police, she went on

to say that she had never seen as many police officers at a football

match, and that in her opinion there was an ample presence of police

officers.     The police officers were moving fans on and not allowing

gangs to form.     She continued to describe groups of youths drinking

and urinating in the vicinity of her hairdressing salon.




The next witness was Mr. Frederick ECCLESTON, a Liverpool supporter

who had been recalled to give evidence.     Mr. ECCLESTON is a qualified

male nurse.     He arrived at the Leppings Lane turnstiles around

2.15pm on the afternoon of the FA Cup Semi-Final.     Once through the
turnstiles, he went on to the North West Terrace and found a comfor­

table position.   He went on to say that in his opinion the centre

pens were "jam packed" at 2.45pm.   He described seeing the pen gates

opening onto the track and realising a problem had occurred. In view

of his medical background, he made his way, with the assistance of a

steward, to the perimeter track, where he assisted with the injured.

He described the actions of several police officers, he said that a

number of officers used their own initiative and were magnificent,

although in his opinion there was no overall control or managerial

control, and some officers did not appear to know what to do.    He

also went on to be critical of the equipment and facilities for the

treatment of casualties.




The last witness to appear before the Inquiry during the morning

session was Mr. Adam James PEMBERTON, a solicitor who resides in

Sheffield.   On the day of the match Mr. PEMBERTON had a ticket for

the North Stand, although, inexplicably, he found himself at the

Penistone Road end of the ground at 2.30pm.   He did state that at

that time he saw fans urinating in Penistone Road.    He eventually

made his way to the Leppings Lane turnstile area, where he had

arranged to meet a friend.    It was obvious that his friend was not

waiting for him and he attempted to dispose of a spare ticket, but

nobody appeared to want it.   He claims a male PC and a female PC who

were on duty outside the turnstile area appeared to be frightened of

the situation which was developing, and that people were shouting to

the police officers to help and to do something.     The PC's didn't

appear to have radios and were unable to communicate with other

officers.    Once he went through the turnstiles, Mr. PEMBERTON claims

he saw a group of 10s12 police officers near to Gate 'A1, he thought
they were doing nothing.   He went to this group of officers and told

them to do something, and that somebody would be killed in the crush

outside.   An officer made a remark to him which he thought was

abusive, although he couldn't say exactly what was said.   The

following day he suffered from some pains in his chest, went to

hospital, and was told that two of his ribs had been broken.
SUMMARY OF PROCEEDINGS AT HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

TUESDAY 23 MAY 1989



Chief Superintendent Mole called and examined by Mr Collins

(Treasury Solicitor).    Cirriculum Vita details.

Pointed out that crowd control matters were a responsibility of

his when Staff Officer.

Central Division with a responsibility to Sheffield United

Football Club.

1979 to Research and Development Department, responsibility for

public order matters.

Broad experience of policing at Hillsborough including Semi

Finals at Hillsborough Football Stadium.

Discussion regarding comparison of Semi Final Matches with

League games.    Mr Mole points out that i t 1s rare for away

supporters to fill the Leppings Lane terraces.

There then followed a discussion about the history of

segregation at Leppings Lane which led into consideration of

the signs that exist at that end of the ground.     Mr Collins led

Mr Mole through a description of the turnstile area and

discussed the lack of clarity in tickets and turnstiling for

the F A Cup Semi Final game, in particular the      'A ', 'C ', 'B ',

 arrangements which obtained at the Leppings Lane turnstiles.

This created confusion.

Discussion about the congestion that was caused as a result of

the confusion should the police have anticipated this.       Mr Mole

points out that there was no problem last ye ar .
Discussion of liaison between the police and the club in

relation to the policing of Semi Finals.

Mr Mole points out that segregation was a key issue and was the

basis of the policing arrangements.

It was agreed that this leads to a inbalance of ticket

allocation but in the final analysis it was the clubs and the F

A's decision to hold the event given the available policing

arrangements.

Discussion then about travelling, trains are obviously

preferred by the police in order that they can marshall the

crowds from the trains which arrive at a given place and at a

given time.   Mr Mole was asked for his opinion regarding rail

travel and the reason for its fall in popularity.   He considers

that the non availability of alcohol both on the trains and

between the railway station and the football ground is the

major reason for this shift away from trains.

Then considered supporters who travelled by road.   Mr Mole

describes the outer search plans, the routes from the coach

parks manned by police officers, therefore supporters have to

walk through a static police cordon between arrival at the

coach park and reaching the ground.

The checks that take place of these fans are for tickets and

for drinks, for tickets there is no offence if they are not in

possession of a ticket, the only thing that the police are able

to do is influence and publicise the fact that non ticket

holders are unwelcome.

The question of segregation was challenged by Mr Collins,

upheld by Mr Mole.
Moved on to discuss the likelihood of non ticket holders

attending the Semi Final match and Mr Collins suggests a

greater problem is likely in 1988, not accepted by Mr Mole.

Intelligence received on Liverpool travelling supporters was

good, the 1988 event was successful, the only changes that were

necessary were minor ones, when asked about those Mr Mole

pointed out that officers who were under employed were left off

the operational order for 1989 and areas which demanded an

increase in manpower such as the perimeter track received that

increase.   Mr Collins asked about overcrowding on the West

terraces in 1988. Mr Mole answered that he had no knowledge.

Mr Mole was then asked about the policing arrangements for

filtering out non ticket holders approaching the Stadium.        It

was agreed that this was a considerable policing task and had

been achieved in the past by random selectivity of supporters

as they approached the    ground.   This policy was carried forward

into    the plans for the 1989 football match.

Mr Mole was asked whether the closing of pubs and the non

availability of alcohol inside the ground had led tt> greater

crowds nearer to kick off.    Mr Mole accepted this view and

described the   'pie and a p i n t 1 psychology that existed amongst

many football supporters which was more suitably catered for

inside the football ground.

There then followed a discussion about delaying the kick off in

1987.   At the conclusion of this discussion Mr Mole was asked

about policy for differring kick off, and his reply was:

         "the policy is   a matter for me to assess the

         problems being   faced and to whether      or not
           I would cause any difficulty by not

           going on with the match until later.

           That would have to take into account

           any factors which were facing me

           and in 1988 I was quite confident

           that what I had got coming to the

           Stadium was there and would be in the

           Stadium in good time."

Mr Mole then went on to describe his      'style' in being out and

about round the ground to discover the developing situation.

Mr Mole explained why the tasks allotted to Superintendents

Greenwood and Marshall were reversed in 1989.

Mr Mole conceded that if a delay in the kick off was necessary

it made no difference as to why that need had arisen.

Mr Collins opened a new area concerning the policing of

terraces.     Mr Mole pointed out that with a capacity crowd on

the terraces the police    effectiveness being amongst them is

minimal.     He went on to explain that at the second phase,

Serials are deployed to the rear of the terraces to monitor

public order.

Mr Collins then moved on to the ACPO guide lines for policing

football and referred Mr Mole to paragraph 1.43 which deals

with turnstiles and queueing.       Mr Mole conceded that there is

possibility of problems at the turnstile area if you do not

have order.

Mr Collins then explored under whose control the Serials

policing the turnstiles    would be.    This was considered by Mr

Mole to be a 'blurred' responsibility. Superintendent
Greenwood, the Ground Commander, had control of the officers

because at Phase II the officers went inside the ground and

then came fully and unequivocally under the control of

Superintendent Greenwood. However, for Phase I Superintendent

Marshall to all intents and purposes retained control of these

officers.     Mr Mole went on to compliment Chief Inspector

Creaser and Inspectors Sykes and Purdy who were a Sector

Inspector, a Chief Inspector respectively of the Serials

concerned and it was their responsibility for policing outside

the turnstiles.     They were experienced officers who could be

relied upon to do all that was necessary.

Mr Collins then asked about plans to cater for a large number

arriving late.     Mr Mole spoke of periphery units and outlined

their duties in respect of providing intelligence of late

comers.     Mr Collins asked if the plan catered for a build up at

the turnstiles such as there was at 2.30 pm on 15 April and

referred to Leppings Lane turnstiles as a 'knife edge'.       Mr

Mole said that there was no plan and that in 1987 and 1988 the

turnstiles had coped very well indeed and refuted the term

'knife edge' as a description of the Leppings Lane turnstiles.

He quoted Green Guide Notional turnstiles thro' put and stated

that if fans were responsible and arrived in good time then

they would succeed in getting into the ground without problem.

Mr Collins then pointed     out that there was no entertainment to

attract supporters to the ground early. Mr Mole conceded that

point but stated that the police had requested the club to

provide entertainment as they did in 1988.

Mr Collins then introduced the question of Liverpool fans
arriving late. Mr Woodward rose to challenge the fact that we

had not heard any evidence to support that.     It was put to Mr

Mole who conceded that he had heard some Intelligence since but

knew of nothing before the 1989 game.

There then followed a discussion about ticket touts where Chief

Superintendent Mole was invited to provide his opinion about

how the problem might be tackled.   Mr Mole suggested that

ticket touting and the like should remain     acriminal offence in

order that the police could deal with it.

That ended the days proceedings on Tuesday 23 May 1989.
SUMMARY OF PROCEEDINGS AT HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

WEDNESDAY 24 MAY 1989

Mr Mole returns to the hearing.   Mr Collins pointed out that Mr

Mole's comments of yesterday in relation to the segregation of

fans had been misreported in the press and this was cleared up.

The Operational Order for 1989 was discussed, a copy was sent

to Assistant Chief Constable (Operations).     Mr Mole conceded

that his was the ultimate sanction to go ahead or not with the

Order.

The utilization of police horses was then discussed and Mr Mole

agreed that their use was invaluable.     Their role was then

discussed further and the question of regulating queueing at

turnstiles was made particular reference to.     It was conceded

that the Operational Order does not make mention of this role.

Chief Superintendent Mole suggested that Hand-Davis the mounted

Inspector would be aware of precisely what is required.     The

Leppings Lane turnstile area geography was discussed and Mr

Mole suggested the real task of mounted officers would be

outside the perimeter fence.   When pressed on the role for

mounted officers inside the perimeter fences, Mr Mole suggested

that they operate well and do a good job there.     Their overall

charge is that of Inspector Hand-Davis.     It was accepted that

the mounted officers could come under the control of

Superintendent Marshall if he so directed.

The use of the spotter plane in 1988 was discussed.     It was

felt notnecessary for the 1989 operation.
The South Yorkshire Police Standing Instructions were then

referred to, particularly paragraph 9.3 which discusses an

acceptance by fans that delays may occur but we should do all

we can to avoid that delay and paragraph 9.5, which discusses

the staggering arrival time of visiting supporters to prevent

disorder outside the ground.

Mr Collins attempted to make of this that we encouraged delayed

arrival.     The point was not successfully rebutted albeit

Counsel were made aware at this stage that 9.5 relates

primarily to league games where a small number of visiting fans

can be marshalled.     It would be impossible to carry out this

task with 54,000    'visiting' fans.

The use of the P A system and electronic scoreboard were

discussed.    Mr Mole suggested that he never used and never

sought to use the electronic scoreboard.     Mr Mole was then

asked what he thought would be pre-match entertainment.       He

suggested some spectacle of some sort.

Mr Collins discussed signing.     Mr Mole conceded that the

signing at the Leppings Lane end could be improved.

Mr Collins then went on to discuss the responsibilities for

packing onto the terracing.     Mr Mole suggested that supporters

should find their own level.     He conceded however, that the

connecting gates between the pens were relatively small.

Mr Collins then referred to the 1981 incident in the Wolves -v-

Spurs F A Semi Final at Hillsborough.     Mr Mole agreed that

there were similarities.    Mr Mole made the point that there

would be merit in separate tickets for separate pens to avoid

over crowding in particular enclosures.
Mr Collins was apparently critical of the police delay in

opening the perimeter gates.    Mr Mole points out that he

encourages a sort of    'community policing' at the football

ground so that    officers would know the area and the people

coming to that    same area would get to know the officers.

There was a discussion about pitch invasions but Mr Mole made

the point that    safety is paramount.

Mr Collins returned to communications within the ground and

discussed the use of electronic scoreboards and the likes, loud

hailers etc.     Mr Collins then switched back again to the

policing of terraces.     Mr Mole conceded that he wouldn't expect

stewards to be on the terraces.      Mr Collins asked the specific

question whether it was a police function to ensure no over

crowding.   Mr Mole stated that it wasn't.

Mr Collins directs Mr Mole to consider Appendix 'C' of the

South Yorkshire Police Standing Instructions for Policing

Football.   The Appendix apparently indicates that officers

engaged on duties in the Stands and terraced areas will take up

positions at the rear of the crowds to ensure the passageways

in those areas will be kept clear and that support and advice

can be given to stewards.     Mr Mole pointed out that this was

indeed done at Phase II of every police operation at the

Hillsborough Football Ground.

Discussion took place about playing the match on Sundays.

Mr Collins then began to ask for Mr Mole's opinions about Mr

Duckenfield's policing of Hillsborough and his attendance at

pre-planning meetings before taking over the    'F' Division.     He

asked who had responsibility for manpower planning.     Mr Mole
replied that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield would have that

responsibility in the final analysis.

That was the end of the examination.

The cross examination then took place.    Mr Glasgow opened for

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and introduced a document

bundle which had been given to Mr Mole the evening before.

There was a discussion about the balance that was required

between Control and   safety and pointed out that the police

were in a no win situation because if there was violence they

were criticised and if there was injury they were criticised.

Mr Glasgow asked Mr Mole about Liaison with the club and Mr

Mole agreed that the officers of the club were professional,

helpful and co-operative.   Mr Glasgow spent a long time

creating a picture of harmony between the police and the club

where the club reacted to the whim of the police.    Mr Mole was

asked if he had ever faced the problem of such magnitude that

he contemplated opening flood gates to allow an inflow of

supporters.   Mr Mole answered that he had not faced that

situation but went on to say that having looked at the

situation that obtained on the 15 April that may well have been

necessary if he had been    Commander of that situation.    Mr Mole

was asked if he would have insured that those inside the ground

knew what was going to happen.    He answered that with hindsight

he would like to think that he had time under the pressure that

was being exerted to come to that conclusion and manage to

alert those who were to receive the surge but admitted that he

could not put himself in that position.    Mr Glasgow pressed him

on the fact that he would have five minutes in which to reach
that decision, was that sufficient time.       Mr Mole conceded that

it probably would be.    Mr Glasgow suggested that stewards have

sufficient difficulty in seating arrangements, let alone

terracing.    Mr Mole agreed with that.     He suggested that the

quality of stewards is another aspect that ought to be

addressed.    Mr Glasgow then explored this position of Mr Mole's

that fans were to find their own level and asked whether and

what action would have been taken had difficulty been

perceived.    Mr Mole said that it would have been taken if_

difficulty had been perceived in the filling of the pens.          Mr

Glasgow introduced the suggestion that the tunnel had been

closed off in 1988 to prevent any fans from going down that

tunnel. This was denied by Mr Mole.       Mr Glasgow questioned

whether the F A document on arranging Semi Finals       would have

been helpful to the police.    Mr Mole said it would.     Mr Glasgow

concluded by asking about the delaying of kick off.       Mr Mole

accepted that he had delayed kick off in 1987 and that it was a

police responsibility.

Mr Mole was then cross examined by Mr King.       Mr Mole conceded

that decision on postponing the kick off is nothing to do with

the reason for the need to postpone the kick off.       Mr King

explored the position with regard to turnstile arrangements and

talked about the figures that could be got through those

turnstiles.   Mr Mole conceded that the sole plan for dealing

with late arrivers would be to delay kick off.       Mr Mole was

then asked about communications between Sector Commanders

inside and outside the ground.    Mr Mole pointed out that the

radios were on talk through facility so all Sector Commanders
would be apprised of developing situations. Mr King     asked

about the responsibility for filling pens.     Mr Mole clearly

stated it was a responsiblity for stewards (except were in

league   matches the police operated a policy of filling pens

sequentially. )

Discussion took place about the connecting gates between the

pens and the unsatisfactory nature of the same.      Mr Mole was

then asked abouth the central pens which it was conceded were

an area that demanded special attention.     He was asked what he

would do if he noticed that the central pens were full.       Mr

Mole accepted that one of his options was to place a cordon

across the tunnel by use of the reserve Serial.     Mr Mole

claimed that the perimeter track officers would be monitoring

the filling of the terraces.

End of cross examination.

Mr Mole was then cross examined by Mr Jackson.     Mr Jackson

aimed to discredit the picture created by Mr Glasgow of the Co­

operative Football Club.    Mr Jackson pointed out the refusal to

pay for police services in the past and discussed historical

documents, ie 1981 which discussed problems with packing at the

Leppings Lane terraces.     The police concluded as a result of

these communcations that 10,100 was too high a figure for

safety on the Leppings Lane terraces.

Mr Jackson suggested that hooliganism is the main concern of

the police and that the pens which were created to deal with

the problem of hooliganism now created a different problem,

that of safety.

Mr Jackson pointed out that Leppings Lane turnstiles had to
cope with three times the number of their Penistone Road

counter parts.     There then followed further discussion about

the apparent contingency plan to bring visiting supporters to

the ground late.    This was answered by Mr Mole.   Mr Jackson

then spoke of the deployment of officers and compared the

manpower available to deal with an incoming train load of

supporters as opposed to the officers available to deal with

23,000 fans at Leppings Lane turnstiles.

End of cross examination.

Mr Muller representing the Fire Brigade then cross examined Mr

Mole.   Mr Muller pointed out that the density of the fans in

the terraces is crucial in determining the ability to evacuate

those terraces.    Mr Mole conceded that the decision of whether

terraces are full is based on a visual check only.        Mr Muller

suggested this was not altogether satisfactory and Mr Mole

conceded this fact.

Mr Muller asked if it would be an advantage to have an officer

monitoring the crowd.    Mr Mole suggested that he had not been

aware of a need until    now.

There then followed a discussion about the 'control' of the

gates of the connecting pens.     The Fire Brigade Counsel seems

to be suggesting that control implies a police officer standing

by those gates.    Mr Moles refutes this.

Mr Muller then discusses the officers working the perimeter

track and suggests that the Operational Order removes his

initiative to release

Mr Mole denied this.     Mr Muller suggested that officers      ought

to be informed on the    perimeter track of the dangers    of
crushing and referred to the debriefing of the 1981 game in

which crushing had taken place.

End of cross examination.

Cross examined by Mr Maxwell representing Shefffield City

Council.     Mr Maxwell asked about Serials 14 and 15.    Mr Mole

admitted they were not on the terraces.     Mr Maxwell asked how

they were to maintain order if they weren't there in Phase I.

Mr Mole referred to Serial 13 who 'act as the eyes' for this

Serial.     Mr Maxwell asked if Phase II arrangements would

compromise by meal arrangements.     Mr Mole defended this

position.    Mr Maxwell asked if the club would be told the

departure from the normal policing arrangements.     Mr Mole

accepted that they would be told about anything they may be

expecting to be otherwise.

End of cross examination.

Cross examined by Mr Dyson, representing the F A.

He asked if there were any differences with Intelligence

regarding Liverpool Football Club in 1989.     Mr Mole said that

there was not.     Mr Dyson asked about the practice of dealing

with the F A over the years.     Mr Mole suggested there had been

no direct dealings.     He was then asked again about the

segregation policy and Mr Mole claimed it was a non negotiable

decision of his.

End of cross examination.

Then cross examined by Mr Kallipetis who represents the

ambulance service.    Asked two simple questions about the

television monitoring system at Hillsborough which Mr Mole

answered factually.    Mr Woodward then addressed Chief
Superintendent Mole.    Mr Mole was directed to the Green Guide,

page 20, paragraph 46, which talks of contingency plans for

dealing with problems of crowds outside grounds.     Mr Mole

replied that there had never been any need to consider

contingency plans to deal with such a problem at Hillsborough.

Mr Mole went on to agree that there was no information to

suggest a material change in expectations of policing the

match, there was no warnings or Intelligence to suggest a

different mode or time of arrival etc.     Mr Mole described two

types of plans for dealing with crowds which he termed

aggressive and co-operative, the latter being used for football

match duties.    Mr Woodward had Mr Mole describe the corridor

through which the fans progress from the coach parks to the

ground.     This isn't a shoulder to shoulder deployment, rather a

staggered deployment.

Mr Mole made the point very strongly that planning for events

depends upon ones expectations of them.

He was then asked about dealing with late comers.     Mr Mole

suggested that we can only encourage people to come to the

ground.     He was asked about his weeding out policy and Mr Mole

pointed out that arresting people denudes deployment.        Mr Mole

was asked about his 1988 operation for checking ticket holders.

He replied that it's the same as every year,    just random

checking.     He was then asked about sanctions under the law to

deal with non ticket holders.     Mr Woodward explored the

business of the 1981 papers which Mr Mole would not be expected

to have any knowledge of having taken over in 1982.

The question of 'control' was discussed in relation to the
fences, the gates and the radial fences.     The police

interpretation of control had never been challenged.

Mr Mole was asked to elaborate on the authority of

Superintendents Marshall and Greenwood to direct the officers

outside the turnstiles.     Mr Mole pointed out that before the

game Mr Marshall would have this authority in practice but in

Phase II they would revert to Mr Greenwood's direction.

End of cross examination.

Mr Collins, Treasury Solicitor, then took the opportunity of 'a

sweep u p 1.   He discussed the problem of denuding deployment and

asked about the provision of a cell bus.     This was discussed by

Mr Mole.

Mr Mole was asked whether the turnstile count arrangements

would be better placed in the Police Control Room to which he

replied yes.     He then explored again the position with regard

to non ticket holders but no new ground was opened.

That is the end of proceedings as regards Mr Mole's evidence

and cross examination.
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY



WEDNESDAY 24 MAY 1989 - DAY 7



Chief Superintendent Duckenfield began to give his evidence

during the afternoon of day 7.   He began with an outline of his

career to date, including previous postings and periods of

service which involved the policing of football matches.     His

last involvement in policing a football match at the

Hillsborough Stadium was some ten years ago.

Mr Duckenfield went on to explain that when he discovered that

he would be in charge of the 1989 Semi Final Match at

Hillsborough, he held a meeting with Chief Superintendent Mole.

He also had a meeting with his planning team which consisted of

Superintendent Murray, Chief Inspector Beal, and Inspector

Sewell, to discuss arrangements for the Semi Final.

During this initial examination, Counsel for the Inquiry

suggested a number of areas which might have caused concern to

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, such as the effect of radial

fences on the Leppings Lane terraces and the inadequate signing

at the rear of the West Stand.   A number of other points

concerning the safety aspects of the ground, the

responsibilities of individual officers in relation to

emergencies and the availability of escape routes in an

emergency, were all put to Mr Duckenfield.

The hearing was adjourned at 5.00 pm.
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY



THURSDAY 25 MAY 1989 - DAY 8



Further examination of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield by

Counsel for the Inquiry continued.

In brief, questioning of Mr Duckenfield concerned the following

areas:-

(A)       TANNOY ANNOUNCEMENT

          Who was asked to make the tannoy announcement to the

          crowd outside the turnstiles, was it done, did the Chief

          Superintendent check that it had been done.

(B)       PERCEPTION OF THE PROBLEM

          What was the initial perception of the problem - why did

          he not do something about it - why was further action

          not taken - if the officer in command had perceived a

          problem why wasn't that communicated to Subordinate

          Officers.

(C)       DEfFERAL OF KICK OFF

          The question of whether or not to delay the kick off was

          examined by Counsel for the Inquiry.   At 2.30 pm when

          Chief Superintendent Duckenfield considered delaying the

          kick off, he had been advised by Superintendent Murray,

          that the crowd outside the turnstiles at that time would

          comfortably pass through the turnstiles and be

          accommodated in the ground before the 3.00 pm kick off.

          It was suggested to Mr Duckenfield that he should have

          considered the possibility that there were crowds of
supporters who had still not joined the throng outside

the turnstiles.

OPENING OF GATES

Mr Duckenfield went through the series of events, as he

could recall, in relation to the requests and subsequent

openings of the concertina gates.

ACCOMMODATON OF SPECTATORS ENTERING THE GROUND THROUGH

THOSE CONCERTINA GATES

Whilst   accepting that Mr Duckenfield had no   alternative

but to   order the opening of the gates, Counsel for the

Inquiry asked Mr Duckenfield if he gave any thought to

the probability that most of those supporters would go

straight down the centre tunnel.     He pointed out the

lack of signs and the fact that one of the video

monitors showed the fans going off the screen in the

direction of the tunnel.     Mr Duckenfield was also asked

whether or not he had considered closing off the tunnel.

ASSESSMENT OF SITUATION IN TERRACE PENS

It was pointed out that the fans who came out of the

terracing did not spill onto the pitch initially, which

suggested they were not attempting to invade the pitch.

CENTRE TUNNEL

It was   suggested that Mr Duckenfield should have

deployed officers   to the rear of the tunnel   to relieve

the pressure on the crowd.
The initial examination of Mr Duckenfield terminated at lunch

ti m e .

Cross examination of     Chief Superintendent Duckenfield commenced

after the lunch time adjournment.

He was first cross examined by Counsel for the relatives of the

deceased.     The main theme of questioning by Counsel for the

relatives concerned the arrangements for stewarding, packing of

pens, and general responsibilities of the     club.

Chief Superintendent     Duckenfield was then crossexamined   by

Counsel for the Football Supporters Association.      The theme of

cross examination concerned the ineffectiveness of the gates

from pens 3 and 4 to the perimeter track.

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield was then cross examined by

Counsel for the South Yorkshire Fire Service.     It was suggested

to the Chief Superintendent that as the police appeared to be

in control of the gates in the radial fences, then officers

should be positioned to ensure that the openings remained

clear.     It was suggested that that task would be even more

difficult for a Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Steward.

Counsel for Sheffield City Council was next to cross examin the

Chief Superintendent.     This cross examination was brief but

questions were directed at Chief Superintendent Duckenfield

concerning the directional signs on the concourse area at the

rear of the West Stand.     The point was made that the Football

Club had engaged a total of 376 stewards for this particular

match, when in fact the Safety Certificate required only 66 to

be on duty.

Counsel for the Football Association then cross examined Mr
Duckenfield.

Questioning here, in the main, concerned a meeting which took

place in the Police Control Box at Hillsborough at around 3.15

pm between Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Mr Graham

Kelly, General Secretary of the Football Association.

It was suggested to Mr Duckenfield, that he had misled Mr

Kelly, as to the precise circumstances surrounding the opening

of the concertina gates.   Apparently Mr Duckenfield had

suggested that Liverpool supporters had forced open one of the

gates and that was the account initially related to Mr Kelly.

Mr Kelly then went on to make press statements based on what he

had been told by the Chief Superintendent.

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield was then cross examined by

Counsel for the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service.

Mr Duckenfield was asked about various aspects over the major

incident plan concerning liaison with the Ambulance Service.

The hearing adjourned at 5.00 pm.
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY



FRIDAY 26 MAY 1989 - DAY 9

The proceedings opened with cross examination of Chief

Superintendent Duckenfield by Counsel for Sheffield Wednesday

Football Club.     It was suggested to Mr Duckenfield, that the

opening of the concertina gates without any warning deprived

officials inside the ground of their ability to manage the

crowd.     Mr Duckenfield was questioned as to the reasons for the

attempt to contact Mr Lock.     It was suggested that an attempt

should have been made to get in touch with the Chief Steward,

and not Mr Lock, who should have been in a position to arrange

to accommodate the influx of fans as a result of the gate

opening.     Mr Duckenfield was also asked about the account of

the events which he gave to the Sheffield Wednesday Club

Directors in the Board Room.     It was suggested that he with­

held the fact that the decision to let people in through the

gates was a police decision.

Additional questions were put to Mr Duckenfield by Counsel for

the relatives, Mr Hytner.     Mr Duckenfield was asked to explain

why, in deciding to surpress the truth, did he tell a lie about

the actions of the Liverpool fans.     It was put to Mr

Duckenfield that the lie had caused wide spread slandering of

Liverpool supporters and Mr Duckenfield was asked to make a

public apology exonerating the Liverpool fans.

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield was then cross examined for a

short period by Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police.

Cross examination of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
terminated during the afternoon of Friday 26 May 1989.

The next police witness to appear before the Inquiry was

Assistant Chief Constable   (Operations) Mr Jackson.

Mr Jackson was asked to outline his career during which he

pointed out that he had been involved in the policing of

football matches at Maine Road, Manchester, the home of

Manchester City Football Club.   Mr Jackson was asked a variety

of questions concerning his overall responsibility for the

policing of football matches throughout South Yorkshire.

It was suggested to Mr Jackson by Counsel for the Inquiry, that

he might have considered appointing Chief Superintendent Mole

as overall commander for the F A Cup Semi Final, in view of his

vast experience in policing matches at the Hillsborough

Stadium.

The hearing closed at 3.30 pm Friday 26 May 1989.
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

TUESDAY 30 MAY 1989 - DAY 10

Assistant Chief Constable (Operations) Mr Jackson continued to give his

evidence to the Inquiry.

Mr Jackson was asked by Counsel for the Inquiry whether or not he was

familiar with the recent article which appeared in 'Private Eye'

magazine.   The article related to an incident which had occurred at the

home of York City Football Ground on the 26 March 1988, when fans were

involved in a crushing incident at a gate.    It was necessary to open the

gate to relieve the crushing and a number of fans entered through the

gate.   The Football Association launched an Inquiry into this incident

and by coincidence, reported its findings whilst    'sitting' at the

Hillsborough Football Ground.

Mr Jackson said he had no knowledge of any such incident.

Counsel for the Inquiry then continued to question Mr Jackson concerning

events of the 15 April 1989.

In his evidence to the Inquiry, Mr Jackson was asked to explain his

perception of the problem in pens 3 and 4 of the Leppings Lane terracing.

He went on to explain his conversations with Chief Superintendent

Duckenfield and Superintendent Marshall.     He subsequently went on to make

a number of recommendations as to how he felt the emergency services

should have access to a combined control room at Hillsborough Football

Ground and the creation of a separate sterile area between the terraces

and the perimeter track.

Questioning initially concerned the lay out of the Leppings Lane

turnstiles and the fact that the design of the area did not lend itself

to the formation of orderly queues.

A number of other suggestions as to how improvements to the turnstile
area could be made were put to Mr Jackson by Counsel for the relatives.

It was put to Mr Jackson that police officers on the perimeter track were

too slow to react to the situation in the pens, and that their pre-match

briefing had conditioned them to expect pitch invasion.

Counsel for the Football Supporters Association suggested to Mr Jackson

that the police officers near to the turnstiles were responsible for the

crushing because they had failed to take any action when the crowd built

up around 2.30 pm.

Mr Jackson was then cross examined by Counsel for the South Yorkshire

Fire Service.   Questioning here in the main concerned packing of the pens

and the question as to whether or not police officers should be located

in the pens to supervise the packing and to monitor    the crowd levels in

the pens.   It was pointed out, during this cross examination, by Counsel

for the Inquiry that Inspector Calvert would later be called to give

evidence and that that officer would be in a position to answer questions

about liaison between the police and the Football Club between 1979 and

1987.

Mr Jackson was then cross examined by Counsel for the Football

Association.    The Football Association made the point that Mr Jackson did

not appreciate that the concertina gates had been opened on police

authority until 4.15 pm that afternoon, and that he was under the

impression that fans had forced their way into the ground.

Counsel for the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service asked

several questions concerning the accommodation of ambulances at the

ground once the major incident plan had been put into effect.

Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police then cross examined Mr Jackson.

The incident at Watford Football Club whereby around 1500 Liverpool

supporters turned up to an all ticket game without tickets and a number
of those non ticket holders had attempted to force open gates before

eventually being admitted on payment.    Mr Jackson admitted that the South

Yorkshire Police were not in possession of any Intelligence to that

effect.

Mr Jackson was asked to explain what steps were taken by local officers

to contact public house licensees before the match and he went on to

explain that a number of local public houses had been visited and

licensees urged to consider the use of a 'private door' for regular

customers only.

Mr Collins, Counsel for the Inquiry, concluded by asking Mr Jackson one

or two further questions.    He suggested that the operational plan did not

cater for sudden or late arrivals at the ground and that no one had

anticipated the possibility of a build up in Leppings Lane.     It was

suggested that the police had the resources to cater for these situations

and that the police should not have allowed the situation to develope

where police officers were placed in difficulty.

Superintendent Marshall was then called to give evidence.     He was taken

through a number of points which were included in his statement, by

Counsel for the Inquiry.    Mr Marshall pointed out his previous experience

of policing football matches and the fact that he had been involved in

policing football matches at Bramall Lane, home of Sheffield United

Football Club.    At one point, Mr Collins asked Superintendent Marshall

who was the officer in charge of the mounted section officers,

Superintendent Marshall explained that Inspector Hand-Davis was the

senior mounted officer and that Inspector Hand-Davis was responsible to

him.   Mr Marshall said in his evidence, that after patrolling outer areas

of his sector, he arrived in the Leppings Lane area about 2.15 pm, the

area was becoming increasingly congested.    By 2.45 pm the normal happy
atmosphere was not there and the police had lost their ability to manage

that situation.     He explained that the situation was worsening by the

minute.     He also explained that the perimeter gates had been closed in an

attempt to relieve the crushing on people queueing at the turnstiles but

were later forced open by the supporters.             Superintendent Marshall was

then asked about his requests to open the gates.             He said that his

request was to open the gates, in the plural sense, and not a particular

gate.     He saw gate    'C' open   for the first time and thought the gate had

been opened at his request, but later found it had been opened to

facilitate an ejection allowing a number of fans to enter.             He was then

waiting for gates       'A' and   'B' to be opened.    He was asked if he gave any

thought to the consequences of his request for the opening of the gates

and that did he consider what would happen inside the ground.             He

admitted that he didn't think about that consequence.             He also said that

the opening of the gates did in fact relieve the pressure on people

queueing at the turnstiles.

He went on to give details of hearing a radio message about possible

trouble inside the ground, he entered the ground through gate 'C', went

to the tunnel where he found that people were bringing out casualties.

This was around 3.03/3.04 pm.         Initially he saw fans bringing casualties

out through the tunnel, but police officers soon began to assist with the

removal of casualties.       A number of ambulances began to arrive at the

Leppings Lane end but it was found that the ambulances could not get

through the open concertina gates, as the roof tops of the ambulances

were too high to drive under the gates.

Superintendent Marshall was then cross examined briefly by Counsel for

the relatives of the deceased, before the proceedings closed at 5.00 pm.
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

WEDNESDAY 31 MAY 1989 - DAY 11



Proceedings resumed with cross-examination of Superintendent MARSHALL by

Counsel for relatives of the deceased.     During his cross-examination,

Counsel for the relatives suggested that there were three possible causes

for the crush of people outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles.     Those were

as follows:-

        The insobriety of the crowd.

        Ineffective policing OR

        Poorly designed turnstile area which rendered the

        situation beyond policing.




A number of points were put to Superintendent MARSHALL by Counsel for the

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.     It was put to Mr. MARSHALL that when

he asked for the gates to be opened, why in fact had only Gate 'C'

apparently opened.    Counsel went on to suggest that the opening of Gate 'A'

would have led those people going through that gate into the North Stand

where officers were positioned to receive them.     Had Gate 'B' been opened,

people entering through that gate could have found their way onto the

North West terrace.    But Gate 'C' must have been the most inappropriate

gate to open, due to the fact that persons entering the concourse area

through that gate would have seen the central tunnel directly in front of

them.




Cross-examination of Superintendent MARSHALL terminated shortly after the

lunch time adjournment.
Superintendent MURRAY was the next police officer to give evidence.

During his initial examination, Superintendent MURRAY was asked to out­

line his previous experience of policing football matches.        He was asked

briefly about the request for a reduction in manpower for the 1989 semi­

final.     He was asked to explain his precise role of the day.     He was asked,

when the    concertina gates were open, whether or not he observed    any influx

or surge    of supporters into pens 3or 4.    In reply, Superintendent MURRAY

said that he didn't consider whether those fans were going to be accommo­

dated.




It was suggest to Superintendent MURRAY by Counsel for the relatives that

in order to monitor the packing of the pens, it would have been       advantageous

to place    a police officer in those pens.   Superintendent MURRAY   said that

he did not consider that suitable and that the pens normally find their

own level.     Superintendent MURRAY was then cross-examined by other Counsel

but nothing of particular interest emerged.




The proceedings closed for the day at 5.00pm.
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

THURSDAY 1 JUNE 1989 - DAY 12



Cross-examination of Superintendend MURRAY was concluded during the

morning session.




Superintendent GREENWOOD was then called to give evidence.    Mr. GREENWOOD

was asked if he was familiar with a crushing incident which occurred at

the FA Cup Semi-Final which was held at Hillsborough in 1981, as he was at

that time an Inspector at F Division and was on duty at that match, and

was later present at a de-briefing.     The officer was later asked whether

he had any experience of over-crowding at the Hillsborough ground.

Further questioning during his initial examination concerned Mr. GREENWOOD'S

role as Ground Commander in charge of the interior of the stadium.     Mr.

GREENWOOD subsequently related his account of the scenes which he was met

with when he went to the perimeter track at the rear of the Leppings Lane

goal.   He said that the front three or four rows of people in the terrace

were in a distressed state, although at that stage he felt the situation

was retrievable in that there appeared to be room at the back of the

terracing for people to move back to aleviate the pressure on those at

the front of the terracing.     He recalls the gate in the perimeter fencing

was open at that stage, and the central tunnel was clear.     He said he was

not aware that there were bodies under the crowd in the pen.     It soon

became apparent to Superintendent GREENWOOD that the game would have to

stop and he himself went onto the pitch to speak with the referee.     Police

officers at the scene were frustrated because they found themselves in a

position where they were unable to do anything, in view of the confined

area in which they were working.     Mr. GREENWOOD acquired a loud haler with
which he asked the crowd in the centre pens to move back.     He then organ­

ised the formation of a chain of officers at the front to remove bodies

and casualties from the pen.




During cross-examination, Counsel for the relatives put to Superintendent

GREENWOOD a number of criticisms of the police which had been supplied to

him by his clients.   The first critisism was that   of the    reactionof the

police to the initial occurrence, police officers    on the    track and on the

fence acted too slowly and failed to appreciated that there was crushing

and danger to fans in the pens.   Spectators in pens 1 and 2 were shouting

to police officers to the effect that people in the centre pens were being

killed, the police did not react to those shouts.




The Liverpool goal keeper, Bruce Grobbelaar, says    he heard shouts from

the crowd and told police officers, those officers appeared to have done

nothing.    If the goal keeper, from his position on the field, could hear

those screams, the police officers who are on the fence and on the track

should have heard it.    It was a failure of the police, due to their

briefing, which had over-emphasised hooliganism and the possibility of a

pitch invasion, and that the briefing did not cater for safety and

crushing.



Counsel for the relatives went on to say that his clients had grouped

police officers into three categories; the first category was that of

heroes - the officers who acted on their own initiative and performed

 heroic deeds; those who were inactive - due to lack of leadership or

 initiative; those who were inactive - due to their state of shock.
He then went on to elaborate slightly on his suggestion that officers

were inactive due to lack of leadership or initiative.   He said that some

officers stood inactive whilst fans were organising themselves into doing

something useful.   The fans were under no leadership but were organising

themselves.    Some police officers appeared to be standing around doing

nothing.




Counsel for the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club asked Mr. GREENWOOD

whether or not he recalled the club using a system of numbered tickets

which identified different pens for the ticket holder to stand.    Superin­

tendent GREENWOOD said he had no recollection of a numbered ticket system,

it was suggested to Mr. GREENWOOD that the police did in fact object to

the use of the numbered ticket scheme.




Extracts from the statement of Bruce GROBBELAAR, the Liverpool goal

keeper, were read to the Inquiry by Mr. Andrew COLLINS, QC, Counsel for

the Inquiry.




In his 'sweep up' Mr. COLLINS said that there were two theories as to why

the situation had been allowed to develop in Leppings Lane, those were,

firstly, that the police operation went wrong, and secondly, there had

been a conspiracy on the part of a number of Liverpool supporters to get

into the ground, he said there was little evidence to support this second

theory.



The Inquiry then heard evidence from Chief Superintendent NESBITT con­

cerning rescue efforts and from Superintendent BRAUM concerning the state

of the roads on the afternoon in question.
Detective Superintendent McKAY began to give his evidence towards the end

of the day's proceedings.    He told the Inquiry of his participation in a

'phone-in' programme organised by a Liverpool radio station and that on

that broadcast he had appealed for Liverpool fans not to come to the

ground without tickets.     He went on to explain the initial setting up of

a temporary mortuary in the gymnasium at Hillsborough and touched on the

scenes in the gymnasium.


    *

The Inquiry closed at 5*00pm.
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

FRIDAY 2 JUNE 1989 - DAY 13



Detective Superintendent McKay completed giving his evidence to the

Inquiry.     Counsel for the relatives of the deceased asked a number of

questions concerning the events which took place in the gymnasium.




The next witness to appear before the Inquiry was Inspector Hand-Davis

the officer in charge of the South Yorkshire Police Mounted Section.

Inspector Hand-Davis opened by outlining his experience in policing

football matches in the three counties of Yorkshire.    He went on to

say that having policed the 1987 and 1988 semi-finals which were

staged at Hillsborough, it was his experience that the crowd situation

was such that Mounted officers could be stood down by 2.45pm on the

match day afternoon.    He went on to detail the crowd build-up, the

apparent confusion amongst Liverpool supporters as to the ticket/turn­

stile arrangements.    He explained that all efforts by Mounted officers

to control the crowd outside the turnstile area were unsuccessful.      He

explained to the Inquiry how the double perimeter gates were closed in

an attempt to relieve the pressure on those persons waiting to enter

the turnstiles, but to no avail.    He also gave accounts of fans

throwing themselves under the belly of his horse in apparently desper­

ate attempts to approach the turnstiles.    He went on to tell the

Inquiry that he saw Gate 'A' open and a number of fans enter through

that gate.    He was aware that entry via Gate 'A' led to the North

Stand which was a seating area and that disorder may result.

Inspector Hand-Davis was not aware of any influx of fans through Gate
Being aware of the potential for disorder, Inspector Hand-Davis made

his way to the police box but heard the radio message referring to the

possible pitch invasion.   On hearing this radio message, Inspector

Hand-Davis returned to his horse to stand-by for any directions.




Inspector Hand-Davis was then cross-examined by Mr. Hytner, Q C ,

Counsel for the relatives of the deceased.   It was suggested to

Inspector Hand-Davis that there was a lack of communication between

himself and Superintendent Marshall, himself and ground control and

that he received no information by radio as to what Superintendent

Marshall intended doing.   He put it to him that it would have been

useful to place horses across Leppings Lane to cut off the flow of

fans into the turnstile area.   Whilst being cross-examined by Counsel

for Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, Inspector Hand-Davis said that

in his opinion Hillsborough is a fine ground and was probably the best

he had ever policed.   When he was cross-examined by Counsel for the

South Yorkshire Police, Inspector Hand-Davis said he felt that an

attempt to stem the flow the supporters walking towards the ground in

Leppings Lane would have taken a huge amount of officers, and would

have been impracticable.




The Inquiry closed at 1.25pm.
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY
MONDAY 5 JUNE 1989 - DAY 14



Week 4 of the Inquiry began with evidence being given by Chief

Inspector Creaser.     During his initial examination, Chief Inspector

Creaser accepted that the centre tunnel was in fact closed off by

police officers, at the 1988 FA Cup Semi-Final.     He went on to

explain that the serial responsible for the closing off may have

acted on their own initiative.     Chief Inspector Creaser told the

Inquiry that he was outside the turnstiles when he heard radio

messages concerning the opening of the concertina gates.     He him­

self realised that the large concourse area between the turnstiles

and the West Stand would absorb the people waiting to enter the

turnstiles and relieve that pressure.     Chief Inspector Creaser said

that he did in fact see Gate 'B' open and noticed that somebody was

struggling to close it.    Mr. Creaser was then cross-examined by

Counsel for relatives of the deceased.     He was asked whether or not

any thought had been given, in the pre-match planning, as to the

sort of numbers which could safely be contained outside the turn­

stiles, that is between the turnstiles and the public road.     He was

also asked whether or not any thought had been given to the question

of large numbers of people arriving at the same time.     He was subse­

quently asked a variety of questions concerning the packing of pens

3 and 4, the capacities of pens 3 and 4 and the provision in the

Operational Order for diversion of fans to the wing pens once pens 3

and 4 were full.     Chief Inspector Creaser was subsequently cross-

examined by Mr. Woodward, QC, Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police.

He stated that he had been on duty at the FA Cup Semi-Finals at
Hillsborough in 1987, 1988 and 1989.     He said that in 1987 the pens

on the Leppings Lane terraces were filled by police officers, one at

a time.   As soon as one pen was full, the incoming fans were then

diverted into the next pen and so on, however, that was found not to

be suitable as fans were constantly wanting to go to the toilet, go

to the refreshment bar, or to go elsewhere in that particular area.

In 1988 the incoming fans were allowed to find their own level on

the terraces but Chief Inspector Creaser said that to the best of

his knowledge the tunnel doors were in fact shut in 1988 to prevent

any further entry   onto the central pens.   He said that to his

knowledge one of the officers involved in the closing of the central

tunnel was former Police Sergeant Higgins.




The next officer to give evidence was Inspector Darling.     Inspector

Darling was in charge of Serial 1, the serial which placed officers

on the perimeter track.    He was asked in particular about the allo­

cation of radios to the officers on the track.    He explained that

the majority of those officers were Community PC's and would all be

in possession of their own radio sets.    He went on to say that pens

3 and 4 were reasonably full but there appeared to be plenty of room

at 2.45pm.   He was referred to the Operational Order under the

responsibilities of Serial 1, and asked who in fact was the senior

officer who can authorise the opening of track gates.    He went on

to say that that officer would be an Inspector, and in the case of

the 1989 match, himself.    Inspector Darling was then cross-examined

by Mr. Hytner, QC, Counsel for the relatives of the deceased.      Mr.

Hytner suggested that if the centre pens were full around 2.40pm,

there were bound to be problems once the ground was full.

                                   He was asked whether or not it
occurred to him that those people coming into the pens through the

centre tunnel would not know that the pens were full until they got

there.




The next officer to give evidence to the Inquiry was Inspector

Bullas.   Inspector Bullas has been in charge of Serial 13, whose

duties confined them to the West Stand above the Leppings Lane

terracing.   Inspector Bullas was asked to explain what information

or instructions he was given as to his duties in relation to

monitoring the filling and crowd levels in the pens on the Leppings

Lane terraces.   It was put to him that Chief Superintendent

Duckenfield had given evidence to the effect that Serial 13 had the

responsibility for monitoring the terracing below the West Stand.

Inspector Bullas went on to say that at 2.30pm pens 3 and 4 were not

full by any means.     He was next in a suitable position to observe

the terracing around 3.00pm, when both teams were on the field.        He

recalls a movement from the tunnel which he described as similar to

molten lava coming down a mountain.     The incoming fans seemed to be

moving straight down towards the pitch.     Inspector Bullas used his

radio and attempted 3 times to contact ground control, but unfortunately

did not get through.     He later saw officers opening the pens gates

and people climbing over the fences, he went down into the centre

tunnel and became involved in removing casualties from the terracing,

through the tunnel.     Inspector Bullas was asked by Counsel for the

relatives of the deceased, if he knew of the capacities of the pens

on the Leppings Lane terracing, he was also asked if he was aware

that there was no mechanical means of checking these capacities.

Mr. Hytner quoted from evidence given by previous witnesses which
V




    suggested that the pens were uncomfortable and full by 2.40/2.45pm.




    The Inquiry closed for the day at 5-00pm.
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

TUESDAY 6 JUNE 1989 - DAY 15




The Inquiry continued to hear police evidence, and the first officer

called was Inspector Sykes.    Inspector Sykes was initially examined

by Counsel for the Inquiry, who referred to the South Yorkshire Police

Operational Order in relation to the 1989 semi-final.     Part of the

duties of serials outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles was to assist

in the formation of orderly queues.     Inspector Sykes went on to say

that due to the layout of the turnstiles, orderly queueing was

impossible outside the Leppings Lane entrance.     Inspector Sykes was

subsequently cross-examined by Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police.

It was accepted that Inspector Sykes had considerable experience in

policing football crowds and football matches at Hillsborough in

particular.   The officer estimated that    there were in the region of

2,000 non-ticket holders, adding to the     crowd outside the Leppings

Lane turnstiles.   Before he completed giving evidence, Inspector Sykes

was asked by Counsel for the Inquiry whether or not he was in

possession of any information suggesting that large numbers of non­

ticket holders were likely to come to the event.     Inspector Sykes

left the witness box at 11.11am.




The next officer to give evidence was Inspector Purdy.     He was led

through his evidence with particular reference made to the actions

which he took to remove and sweep away non-ticket holders from out­

side the turnstile area.   When he was cross-examined by Counsel for

the South Yorkshire Fire Service, Inspector Purdy was asked why he
did not evacuate pen 2 once it became apparent that fans in pen 3

were in distress.   Inspector Purdy explained that the fans in pen

2 moved away from the fencing to give the officers room to remove

the casualties who were being passed over the radial fences.     Inspector

Purdy left the witness box at 12.12pm.




The next officer to give evidence was Inspector Ellis.     He was also

led through his evidence with reference made to his use of the public

address system fitted to a police Land Rover which he used to address

the crowd outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles.   Inspector Ellis left

the witness box at 12.42pm.




Inspector Bennett then gave evidence to the Inquiry.     In common with

the previous witnesses, Inspector Bennett was led through his evidence.

The hearing adjourned for lunch at 1.00pm and resumed at 2.00pm.




There were no particular points of interest during cross-examination,

and Inspector Bennett terminated his evidence at 2.22pm.




The Inquiry then heard evidence from officers who were members of

Serial 16.   The first to give evidence was Sergeant Payne, who was

led through his evidence and no particular questions were asked of

him during cross-examination.




PC Duffy was the next member of Serial 16 to give evidence.     He told

the Inquiry that he had been asked by a Liverpool supporter for direc­

tions to the ticket office, assuming that tickets were on sale to

the general public on the day of the match.   During cross-examination,
PC Duffy was asked if he was in possession of a police radio.      He

said he was not in possession of a radio.




The next Serial 16 officer was PC Evans, an officer with 16 years

service.   PC Evans was led through his evidence by Mr. Collins, QC,

Counsel for the Inquiry.   PC Evans gave evidence for some 24 minutes,

and left the witness box   at 3 .17pm.




The next officer to give   evidence was PC Best, another member of Serial

16.   He was led through his evidence by Mr. Goldsack, QC, Counsel

for the Inquiry.   PC Best told the Inquiry that he had cause to arrest

a prisoner who was taken to the Police Room at the football ground.

PC Best was not in possession of a radio and went on to tell the Inquiry

that he was unaware of what was happening elsewhere in the ground.




PC Huckstepp was the next officer to be called to give evidence.

Again the point was made that this officer was not in possession of

a radio, which made him rely on his Sergeant or Inspector to pass

on details of communications.   When PC Huckstepp was cross-examined

by Counsel for the relatives of the deceased, he was asked about

comments which were in the officer's original statement.     Apparently

PC Huckstepp had included a number of his own opinions in his original

statement in which he suggested thata system could      have been devised

to divert fans away from   the central pens, and that   the crush outside

the turnstiles could have been better controlled by the police.




PC Taylor was the next officer to give evidence.     Nothing of particular

interest emerged whilst this officer was giving evidence.
At 4.11pm Police Sergeant Morgan commenced giving his evidence.     He

was initially led through his evidence by Mr. Goldsack, QC, Counsel

for the Inquiry.    Whilst initially giving his evidence, Sergeant Morgan

was asked about the confusing ticket/turnstile arrangement for the

1989 semi-final.    Sergeant Morgan went on to tell the Inquiry of his

actions once it became apparent that people in pens 3 and 4 were in

some distress.     Sergeant Morgan went on to state that he took a group

of officers to the back of the West Stand and entered the tunnel,

which gave him access to the centre pens, the tunnel was deserted.

The Inquiry closed at 5*00pm, with Sergeant Morgan part way through

giving his evidence.
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

WEDNESDAY ? JUNE 1989 - DAY 16




The Inquiry continued to hear police evidence and a total of 10

officers gave evidence this date.




Evidence was given to the Inquiry by 3 Merseyside Police mounted

officers, the first of whom was Sergeant Smith.    Sergeant Smith was

led through his evidence by Mr. Andrew Collins, QC, Counsel for the

Inquiry.    Sergeant Smith told the Inquiry that he felt the turn­

stiles at the Leppings Lane entrance to the ground had not been

designed particularly well, the metal dividing wall and guide fence

were badly positioned and did not particularly aid the use of horses

in that area.    Sergeant Smith went on to tell the Inquiry that a

large number of Liverpool fans arrived in the area from over the

river bridge, which was contrary to what they had been told in their

briefing.   At the briefing, Sergeant Smith claimed that he had been

told to expect the majority of Liverpool fans arriving from the

Penistone Road end of Leppings Lane.    He told the Inquiry he had

never known such hostility from Liverpool fans and had never seen

as much drinking in the streets at a semi-final previously.    When

he was cross-examined by Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police,

Sergeant Smith gave brief details of the a football match at the

home ground of Tranmere Rovers FC, which was held some 4 weeks after

the Hillsborough disaster.   Some 4,000 spectators had not been ad­

mitted to the ground by 3.00pm in time for the kick-off, although

there was sufficient space in the ground.    Police officers arranged
those fans into orderly queues and they were subsequently admitted

to the ground through two turnstiles, without any problem or dis­

order.




Police Constables Fry and Grunhill were the other Merseyside Police

mounted officers who gave evidence to the Inquiry.




Police Sergeant Crawford, a South Yorkshire Police officer, told

the Inquiry that he had been on duty at the 1988 FA Cup Semi-Final.

He told the Inquiry that it had been necessary to close off access

to the centre tunnel, as the centre pens appeared to be full, as

far as he could recollect PC 1278 Lang was the officer who had been

instructed to close off the tunnel.




The Inquiry closed at 5*08pm.
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

THURSDAY 8 JUNE 1989 - DAY 17



Police evidence continued with a total of 13 officers appearing before

the Inquiry.    The officers who gave evidence were serial Sergeants

and Constables who at some stage became involved in the rescue and

treatment of casualties from the terrace pens.




The majority of the officers gave evidence to the effect that a large

number of the Liverpool supporters were intoxicated to one degree

or another.




At one point during the morning sessions of the hearing, Lord Justice

Taylor addressed Mr. Bill Wooldward, Q C , Counsel for the South York­

shire Police.   Lord Justice Taylor made the point that it was not

possible for him to thank every officer individually for the efforts

which were made to rescue those injured at Hillsborough, but that

it was obvious that the actions of police officers did in fact result

in many lives being saved.




After the lunch time adjournment the Inquiry heard evidence from

officers who had performed duty on Serial 1, the perimeter track

serial.   PC's Smith and Illingworth told of their actions in opening

the gates to the perimeter track to allow distressed supporters to

vacate the centre pens.




The Inquiry closed at 5.00pm.   It was suggested that the police evi­

dence would be concluded on Friday 9 June 1989.
HILLS BOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY
P&'bM
THURSDAY 9 JUNE 1989 - DAY 18




Officers of Serial 1 continued with their evidence.    The Inquiry

subsequently heard evidence from PC Buxton, the driver of the

Land Rover which was used to address the crowd outside the

Leppings Lane turnstiles shortly before 3.00pm on the afternoon

of Saturday 15 April 1 9 8 9 .




Evidence was subsequently heard from Detective Sergeant Morton

and Detective Sergeant Gutcher concerning their involvement in

the treatment and rescue of casualties from the Leppings Lane

terraces.




Evidence was then heard from officers who manned the police

control box at the Hillsborough football ground.    The first to

give evidence was PC Ryan, the tanoy/telephone operator.     The

Inquiry then heard evidence from Sergeant Goddard, the officer

who acted as radio operator at the football match on the 15

April 1989.




The Inquiry closed around 3-15pm, and is scheduled to resume

at 10.30am on Monday 12 June I9 8 9 , when Sergeant Goddard will

continue giving evidence.
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

MONDAY 12 JUNE 1989 - DAY 19

The Inquiry commenced at 10.00 am, with evidence given by Police Sergeant Goddard.

Sergeant Goddard was only in the witness box for approximately 15 minutes, during

which he completed cross examination by Mr Bill Woodward QC, Counsel for the South

Yorkshire Police.

The next witness to appear before the Inquiry was Mr Peter Wells, Divisional

Superintendent for the St John's Ambulance Service.    Mr Wells is currently on

holiday and was allowed to give his evidence at the earliest possible opportunity

this date, to enable him to commence his holiday. Mr Wells told the Inquiry that he

had been in charge of making football arrangements for the St John's Ambulance

Service at the Hillsborough Stadium for the past 4 years.     He went on to give

details of the staffing arrangements and equipment held by the St John's Ambulance

Service on the day of the Semi Final.    He was cross examined by most Counsel and was

in the witness box for approximately one and a quarter hours.

Police Constable Trevor Bichard was the next officer to give evidence at the

Inquiry.    Police Constable Bichard performed duty in the Police Control Box at

Hillsborough and was detailed to monitor all video screens and the VHF radio set in

the Control Box.    Police Constable Bichard was also cross examined by most Counsel

and spent approximately one and three quarter hours in the witness box.

The Inquiry then heard evidence from three St John's Ambulance Officers who were on

duty in various capacities at the match at Hillsborough.

The last witness to appear before the Inquiry on this date was Police Constable

Guest, who had been on duty in the Club's own Control Room located within the South

Stand.     Police Constable Guest's duties involved monitoring the Club's own closed

circuit television screens which are sited in the Club's Control Room and observing

the turnstile flow rates which are shown on the centrally located computer.

Police Constable Guest was subjected to lengthy cross examination before the Inquiry

adjourned slightly early at 4.45 pm this date.
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

TUESDAY 13 JUNE 1989 - DAY 20


Proceedings commenced slightly late this date at 10.50 am, following a

conference between Lord Justice Taylor and the various Counsel as to

the progress of the Inquiry to date.

Evidence given by Police Constable Guest was completed in a short

period of time.

The Inquiry then heard evidence from Inspector Turner who told the

Inquiry that no system of filtering or checking tickets had been

arranged in Leppings Lane.     The relevant portions of statements made by

Inspector Grace and Police Constable Lang were read to the Inquiry and

accepted.

Chief Inspector McRobbie was then called to give evidence.     He was in

the witness box for some 45 minutes.     Chief Inspector McRobbie said

that on the day in question he was in fact off duty, having been

recently posted to 'F' Division.     He attended the Semi Final in his own

time to observe the policing operation.

The Inquiry also heard evidence from Police Constable Rook, who was on

duty in the Force Operations Room on the day of the match.     He told the

Inquiry that he was the officer who made the telephone calls to the

Fire Service to request their attendance to deal with casualties.

The Inquiry then heard evidence from members of the South Yorkshire

Fire Service.     Susan Elizabeth Davies was the first Fire Service

Representative to give evidence, she had been on duty at the services

control room at the Wellington Street Headquarters.     She told the

Inquiry that she took the telephone call from Police Headquarters
asking the Fire Service to attend at Hillsborough Football Ground.

She was followed by Station Officer Swain, who had attended at the

ground in response to the police call.

The Inquiry then heard from Station Officer Fletcher, who also attended

at the ground in response to the call for assistance.

Assistant Chief Fire Officer Hornsby also gave evidence.    He told the

Inquiry that he had attended to ensure that rescue efforts were being

carried out and to liaise with the police.

Leading Fireman Harris told of his attendance at the Football Ground.

The next witness to appear before the Inquiry was Mr George Lloyd, a

Liverpool steward who claimed to have been on duty assisting Sheffield

Wednesday stewards at the match at Hillsborough.

Counsel for the Football Supporters Association, Mr John Jackson,

suggested to Lloyd that he was not in fact acting on behalf of

Liverpool Football Club and that he had no authority.    Lloyd denied

this and claimed to be acting as a steward at Hillsborough.

Mr Raymond Lloyd, the brother of George Lloyd, then gave evidence on

similar lines to that given by his brother.

The Inquiry then heard evidence from Mr Brian Sayles, a turnstile

operator who had been on duty at turnstile 'B' on the 15 April I9 8 9 .

He told the Inquiry that a number of Liverpool fans had attempted to

bribe him by placing five pound notes on the counter of his turnstile,

in an effort to gain entry.   He also admitted that approximately 30

Liverpool supporters in possession of Kop tickets were allowed through

his turnstile.   He went on to tell the Inquiry that the behaviour of

the crowd waiting to enter the ground through his turnstiles was

diabolical and terrifying and that he had never seen anything like it

before in his life.

The Inquiry closed shortly after 5.00 pm.
 HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

WEDNESDAY 14 JUNE 1989 - DAY 21
The Inquiry continued to hear evidence from turnstile operators

who had been on duty.    They gave varying accounts, as to the

number of people who entered the ground through their turnstiles

either without tickets or in possession of     tickets for the Kop

end of the ground.    There were two methods   of entry employed    by

fans who did not appear to be in possession of tickets. Fans

either jumped over the turnstile itself or 'doubled up with a fan

who was in possession of a ticket', so that when the turnstile

revolved to admit the ticket holding fan, the non ticket holding

fan closed in and moved through with the ticket holder.

Turnstile operators also spoke of attempts to bribe them by

offers of five pound and ten pound notes.

The Inquiry went on to hear evidence from the Chief Steward for
                                               #


the West Stand area, Mr Thorpe.     Mr Thorpe was led through his

evidence by Counsel for Inquiry, and was cross examined by most

Counsel.   During cross examination, it was obvious that Mr Thorpe

 had never seen the 'Green Guide' and in fact claimed to have

 never heard of the publication.    Whilst being cross examined by

 Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police, Mr Thorpe said that he

 was present at a stewards evening in August 1988 when Inspector

 Sewell addressed a gathering of stewards.         Inspector Sewell told

 the stewards of the division of responsibility between the club

 and the police.     The stewards were told that the police were

 there to deal with public order and matters outside the ground

 and that the club had responsibility for matters inside the

 ground, other than public order.     Mr Thorpe said he could recall
the Inspector explaining those responsibilities and he understood

that police would deal with misbehaviour inside the ground.

As far as Mr Thorpe could recall, nobody present at that meeting

disagreed with what Inspector Sewell had to say.

The Inquiry went on to hear evidence from a number of other

stewards who had performed duties in various areas of the ground.

A total of 8 other such stewards gave evidence to the Inquiry.

Their evidence was very similar in most respects, in that most of

them related incidents of misbehaviour by Liverpool supporters,

attempts by Liverpool supporters to obtain entry without tickets

and the throwing of tickets by fans inside the ground, to fans

outside the ground who were waiting to enter.

The Inquiry closed shortly after 5.00 pm.
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

THURSDAY 15 JUNE 1989 - DAY 22

The majority of this days proceedings were taken up with an

opening address by Mr Andrew Collins Q C , Counsel for the

Inquiry, who introduced to the Inquiry an assortment of some

500 miscellaneous documents which the Inquiry had seized for

reference purposes.     However, one witness did give evidence at

the commencement of proceedings on this day.

Mr Gary Vaux gave evidence to the effect that he had attended

the   F A Cup Semi Final which was held at Hillsborough in 1981

between Wolverhampton Wanderers and Tottenham Hotspur Football

Clubs.     He related his account of a crushing incident which

occurred on the Leppings Lane terraces during the 1981 match.

He was subsequently cross examined and left the witness box

after approximately half an hour.

At the conclusion of the address by Counsel for the Inquiry, Mr

Collins outlined a number of points on which various

organizations were to be criticised.     They were listed as

follows:

1.    The inordinate delay on    the part of the City Council in

       doing anything about safety matters in relation to renewing

       the Safety Certificate.

2.    Failure on anyones part    to consider the effect of the

       removal of barrier 144.    The former South Yorkshire County

       Council for Sheffield City Council could bear

         responsibility in relation to this matter.
No steps appear to have been taken to consider the effect

of the creation of the terrace pens on the capacity of the

Leppings Lane standing area.

From around 1985, or thereabouts, no consideration has been

given to the number of turnstiles admitting spectators at

the Leppings Lane end of the ground.   The Football Club or

the City Council could bear responsibility in relation to

this matter.

The Inquiry has uncovered a number of breaches of the Green

Guide, namely:

(a)   The capacities of the terrace pens

(b)   The barriers

(c)   The perimeter gates

(d)   The tunnel

The Football Club and the City Council could bear

responsibility in relation to these matters.

The first aid room at the ground never appears to have been

supplied with its proper equipment, ie a Minute Man

rescusitator.

No one seems to have thought about the even distribution of

fans on the terraces or the fact that capacities of the

pens would be exceeded.

As the terrace pens stand, their capacities are in excess

of what the Green Guide recommends.    Paragraph 222 of the

Green Guide states that the maximum number of persons

should be calculated on a 54 person to 10 square metres

ratio.   The total area of pen 3 is 188 square metres,
     the total area of pen 4 is 191.8 square metres.   Therefore,

     according to the formula outlined in the Green Guide, the

     capacities of those pens should be as follows:

               Pen 3 equals 1015

               Pen 4 equals 1036

                  TOTAL - 2051

Just after 4.30 pm Assistant Chief Fire Officer Seaman was called

to the witness box.   Counsel for the Inquiry took him through the

relevant parts of his statement.

The proceedings were adjourned at 5.00 pm.
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

FRIDAY 16 JUNE 1989 - DAY 23

Assistant Chief Fire Officer Seaman continued to present his

evidence to the Inquiry.   He was led through the salient points of

his statement by Counsel for the Inquiry.     Mr Seaman was

subsequently cross examined by all Counsel present.

The hearing was adjourned at around 1.10 pm     and did not sit

during the afternoon.

Lord Justice Taylor told the Inquiry that the hearing would not

sit on Monday 19 June 1989 to allow Counsel to examine and absorb

the large amount of material distributed throughout this week.

The Inquiry will resume at 10.00 am on Tuesday 20 June 1989.
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

TUESDAY 20 JUNE 1989 - DAY 24

The Inquiry resumed today following its one day adjournment on

Monday 19 June 1989.

The first witness to appear before the Inquiry was Mr Frederick

Maddox, a Detective Constable in the Lincolnshire Police

stationed at Grantham.    Mr Maddox told the Inquiry that he was

present at both the 1988 and 1989 F A Cup Semi Finals which were

held at Hillsborough.

The Inquiry then heard from Doctor Purcell, the Sheffield

Wednesday Football Club team doctor.     Doctor Purcell was led

through his evidence by Mr Bernard Phillips QC, Counsel for the

Inquiry.   He was asked if he was aware of condition 8 of the

Safety Certificate in relation to the presence of a doctor at

the football ground and the fact that that doctor's whereabouts

should be known to the police control room.     Doctor Purcell said

that he did not know about that requirement and no one had ever

brought it to his notice, he had certainly never told the police

of his whereabouts.     He went on to tell the Inquiry that as far

as he was concerned, he had always been instructed by the club

to remain in the South Stand, to watch the play in case any

Sheffield Wednesday player sustained an injury, it would then be

easier for him to diagnose that injury having witnessed the

manner in which the injury was caused to the player.

The Inquiry then heard evidence from Mr Patrick Higgins, station

officer with the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service

(SYMAS).   Mr Higgins went on to explain to the Inquiry the

arrangements for ambulance staff to be present at football
matches at Hillsborough.    He told the Inquiry that two ambulance

officers were positioned in seats in the South Stand having been

provided with season tickets by the club, but the club always

contended that ticket allocations for a Semi Final match were

controlled by the F A and that tickets for ambulance personnel

were not available.   However SYMAS officers did attend but at

their own cost and by arrangement only with the police.     He went

on to explain that before the 1989 Semi Final contact was made

through Inspector Sewell who arranged to meet the ambulance

personnel to allow them entry to the ground.    Mr Higgins went on

to explain that as far as he knew, the club were aware of this

arrangement.

When Mr Higgins was cross examined by Counsel for the Sheffield

Wednesday Football Club, he was asked about the supply of

tickets to SYMAS and it was suggested that the presence of SYMAS

officers was conditional, in that they had agreed to provide

immediate attention and transport for any injured player and

that was basically the arrangement by which they were allowed to

be provided with season tickets.

The ambulance officer denied this and said that their presence

at the ground was in response to the recommendations of the

Popplewell Report.

The next witness to appear before the Inquiry was Station

Officer Eason of SYMAS.    He gave evidence of tending to

casualties on the pitch but nothing of particular interest

emerged.

Superintendent Clark, the ambulance controller at SYMAS

Headquarters was next to give evidence.    He said he was aware
before the match that a Semi Final was to be held at

Hillsborough Stadium and had been told approximately a week

before the match, as far as he was aware, to alert the ambulance

service in case of traffic problems whilst attending emergency

calls in the Hillsborough area.

Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer Hopkins was the next witness.

Whilst giving his evidence, Mr Hopkins told the Inquiry that all

ambulances carry a 'breaking in k i t 1 which contains amongst

other things, bolt croppers, a saw and a length of rope.     He did

in fact go on to state that as far as he was aware,    none of this

equipment was used in an attempt to remove any of the perimeter

fencing.

Chief Ambulance Officer Page was the next witness to appear

before the Inquiry.   He told the Inquiry that the charge to a

football club in relation to the supply of two ambulances and

relevant crew members would be £249.00.    However, Mr Page told

the Inquiry that as far as he was concerned, he would have liked

to have seen two ambulances and a staff of twelve personnel on

duty, which would have meant a charge to the club of some

£500.00.

The last witness to appear before the Inquiry this day was Mr

David John Walker, a sports writer with the Daily Mail

newspaper.   Mr Walker said that he had attended the 1987 F A Cup

Semi Final and went on to state that the South Yorkshire Police

were absolutely supurb in the way they policed that match.       He

took up his seat in the South Stand around 2.30 pm for the 1989

Semi Final, he said that at 2.40 pm the centre pens looked full

to capacity and thought the kick off would be delayed.     Whilst
being cross examined by Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police,

Mr Walker spoke of having previously discussed policing

arrangements for Semi Finals with Chief Superintendent Mole.    He

went on to say that the Sheffield Wednesday Club described Mr

Mole as the best crowd control policeman they had ever worked

with.

The Inquiry closed at 4.55 pm.
 HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

WEDNESDAY 21 JUNE 1989 - DAY 25

The first witness to appear before the Inquiry on this day was

Mr Maurice Kay QC, who had attended the Semi Final match in 1988

and the Semi Final match in 1989.    He gave a straight forward

account of his attendance at those matches, although he did say

whilst being cross examined by Counsel for the' South Yorkshire

Police, that in his opinion, the use of mounted police in the

area between the perimeter gates and the turnstiles was counter

productive, they were taking up room and when the horse moved,

it created involuntary movement of the crowd.    Apart from that,

nothing of else of significance emerged during Mr Kay's

evidence.

The next witness to attend the Inquiry was Doctor Byrne, who had

been at the match as a supporter and responded

once he realised there was a serious problem. He told the

Inquiry he did not hear any announcement over the tannoy

requesting medical assistance and thought that it was a gross

omission.    He subsequently made his way to the gymnasium where

he assisted with the treatment of casualties and certification

of bodies.   He said he felt that the police had handled things

very efficiently and very humanely in the gymnasium.    He was

later asked a number of questions concerning the equipment that

was actually available and the equipment which in his opinion he

felt would have been useful to have been on hand at the ground.

The next witness to appear before the Inquiry was Mr Graham

Kelly, the Chief Executive of the Football Association.    He was

led initially through his evidence by Mr Andrew Collins Q C ,
Counsel for the Inquiry.      Mr Kelly was shown a EUFA document in

relation to football matches which were categorized as category

'A' matches.    He was also shown a Football Association letter of

1985 giving directives jointly agreed between the Football

Association and the Football League as to the requirements of

football clubs.    It was suggested to him that too much emphasis

was placed on preserving the integrity of the pitch.       He was

also asked about the consideration of segregation when deciding

which grounds should be allocated for use as a Semi Final venue.

He went on to say that the F A are guided very much by police

advice and that the police requirements in relation to

segregation are paramount and that the F A have to go along with

police arrangements.       He was asked a number of questions

concerning the decision to chose Hillsborough as a Semi Final

venue and not Old Trafford football ground in Manchester.        Mr

Kelly went on to explain the reasons why Hillsborough was chosen

as a Semi Final venue.      The main factors are summarized as

follows:

   Georgraphy          -         Sheffield is better located than

                                  Manchester

   Capacity            -         The F A require the use of a large

                                  capacity Stadium

   Experience in       -         Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

   staging prev-                 had a long experience in hosting

   ious Semi                     Semi Finals which was a major

   Finals                        factor

   Whether or not the home club was playing a home match on the

   day in question
   Home City         -         The F A prefer not to hold a Semi

                                Final at a ground in the home city

                                of one of the competing clubs

It was put to Mr Kelly that Liverpool were on course for a

league and cup double and that it should have occurred to

somebody that a larger following would go to the match at

Hillsborough and that non ticket holders would be encouraged to

go and attempt to get in.

Mr Collins then asked Mr Kelly if he was aware of the activities

of Liverpool supporters who went to the F A Cup Final, and

referred to a newspaper article in the Times newspaper some days

after the F A Cup Final which carried a report of Liverpool

supporters without tickets travelling to Wembley attempting to

get in the match.    Kelly said he did not know anything about

that article.

Mr Kelly   was then asked about arrangements for delaying a kick

off.   He said that without question the F A would accede to any

request by the police to delay a kick off even if the

participating teams were    on the pitch.   Mr Kelly also referred

to his conversation with Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and he

said that he had been told by Mr Duckenfield that a gate or

gates had been forced allowing an inrush of Liverpool

supporters, and that fatalities had resulted.     He also said that

whilst in the police control box he had been shown a video

screen which showed a picture of a gate which the police claimed

had been forced.    It was also suggested to Mr Kelly that had the

match been televised live, then that would have deterred large

numbers of non ticket holders from travelling to Sheffield.
Mr Kelly was then cross examined by Counsel for the relatives of

the deceased.   It was put to Mr Kelly that the provision of live

entertainment was more likely to encourage people to go into the

ground. However, Mr Kelly disagreed, saying that F A experience

shows: that live entertainment makes no difference whatever as to

whether or not people enter the ground at an earlier stage.

It was then put to Mr Kelly that a number of breaches of the

Green Guide had been detected and that the F A should have

considered those in deciding whether or not to allocate

Hillsborough as a Semi Final venue.   Mr Kelly went on to say

that they would have been a matter of concern.

Whilst he was cross examined by Counsel for SYMAS, Mr Kelly

agreed that as far as the F A was concerned, the attendance of a

doctor was solely to treat injuries to players.

When Mr Kelly was cross examined by Counsel for the South

Yorkshire Police, he agreed that the police control box was very

congested at the time he visited Mr Duckenfield.   Counsel for

the South Yorkshire Police then put to Mr Kelly a number of

incidents where Liverpool supporters had travelled to away

matches and attempted to force their way in to all ticket

matches.   Counsel for the Inquiry, Mr Collins, objected to the

use of these references in view of the fact that the clubs

concerned were not represented at the Inquiry and the documents

referred to by Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police had not

previously been circulated.

When he was cross examined by Counsel for the Football

Association, Mr Kelly told the Inquiry that he had in fact been

given two accounts as to the way in which Liverpool supporters
had been admitted to the ground.    He was told that a gate had

been forced and he was also told that a gate had been opened by

the police and at the time, did not know which was the truth.

The Inquiry next heard evidence from Doctor John Ashton, who has

made a number of contraversial statements to the press.     Without

going into detail, Doctor Ashton was not well received.     He did

not come across to the Inquiry as an accurate witness and for

most of the time during which he gave evidence, Lord Justice

Taylor did not make notes of any of the facts which he gave to

the Inquiry.

He was cross examined vigorously by Counsel for SYMAS,     in view

of a number of press statements attributed to     him in which he

had allegedly said that the ambulance operation was ineffective

and inefficient.   Ashton said that a number of his statements

were misquoted.    Lord Justice Taylor interjected and pointed out

to Ashton that he wasn't misquoted when he personally gave

interviews on the television.    It was obvious to the Inquiry as

his evidence progressed that he did not recall a number of

significant occurrences which the Inquiry accepted had occurred.

The Inquiry then heard evidence from Doctor Curpen, another

general practitioner who was at the match as a spectator and who

responded once the incident became apparent.

The Inquiry closed later than usual at 5.25 pm.
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

THURSDAY 22 JUNE 1989 - DAY 26

Mr Kenneth Evans, who is employed by the Football Association as

a crowd control observer was the first witness to give evidence.

Prior to his retirement Mr Evans was Assistant Chief Constable

with the West Midlands Police Force and had experience of

policing football grounds in the West Midlands area.     Mr Evans

had attended the 1988 F A Cup Semi Final at Hillsborough between

Liverpool and Nottingham Forest and had prepared a report on the

policing of the match which was subsequently forwarded to the

Football Association.   Mr Evans was subsequently asked by

Counsel for the deceased whether or not he inspected football

grounds to assess their suitability for holding a Semi Final

before any choice was made.     Mr Evans said that he did not make

his inspection on that basis.

Mr Woodward QC, Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police, asked Mr

Evans certain matters in relation to the Safety Certificate,

such as what role the police played at a football match and what

role the stewards played.     Lord Justice Taylor interrupted and

pointed out that the majority of senior police officers, when

giving evidence, accepted that stewards could not be placed on

terraces.   He suggested that Mr Woodward could not change that

evidence.

The next witness to appear before the Inquiry was Mr Glen

Kirton, who is employed by the Football Association as a press

and public relations officer.     He had been present at the 1989 F

A Cup Semi Final at Hillsborough.     He told the Inquiry he was in
the vicinity of the players tunnel around 2.40 pm and saw the

Club Secretary Mr Mackrell, Mackrell was looking around the

ground and told Kirton that there were some 20,000 supporters

still to go in.   Kirton told the Inquiry that he then had a

conversation with Mackrell where he asked Mackrell whether or

not the police were going to ask for a delay in the kick off.

Mackrell allegedly said that the police had not indicated that

they wished to delay the kick off.   Mr Kirton went on to say

that the decision to delay the kick off would be entirely a

matter for the police and that the F A would not object,

pointing out that that had in fact been done before.

Mackrell allegedly said to Kirton that the police don't like

delaying kick offs in view of the fact that it caused them a

number of organizational problems at the end of the match.

Mr Kirton continued to give evidence after the lunch break and

was cross examined by Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police.

He was asked whether or not he had ever witnessed incidents of

supporters attempting to gain entry to grounds who were

obviously not in possession of tickets.   Mr Kirton went on to

relate an account which he witnessed at the F A Cup Final at

Wembley in 1989 where Liverpool supporters attempted to force

their way in through a door to the royal tunnel entrace.

Doctor William Eastwood began to give his evidence around 2.50

pm this afternoon.   He was asked a number of questions in

relation to technical matters concerning the testing of

barriers, the load stress subjected to each barrier during that

test and the amount of movement permissible by each barrier

whilst under going its test.   One point of interest did emerge
whilst Mr Eastwood was under going examination by Mr Andrew

Collins QC, Counsel for the Inquiry, it appeared that Doctor

Eastwood's testing of the barriers did not in fact conform to

that recommended by the 1986 Green Guide.    The 1986 Green Guide

recommended that each crush barrier should be tested once every

four years, when in fact Doctor Eastwood's company were testing

barriers once every five years which was the recommendation of

the subsequently amended 1976 Green Guide.

The Inquiry closed shortly after 5.00 pm, with Doctor Eastwood

part-way through his evidence.
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

FRIDAY 23 JUNE 1989 - DAY 27

Doctor Eastwood continued to present his evidence to the Inquiry.

He was taken through a number of technical aspects in relation to

the Leppings Lane terraces by Counsel for the Inquiry.    Doctor

Eastwood was subsequently asked about the crushing incident at the

1981 Semi Final.   He said he understood that the central tunnel

had been closed off that day as an experiment, and that the

problem as far as he was concerned was not of over crowding but of

bad packing on the terrace, in that too many supporters had been

sent to the South corner pen.   Argument continued in relation to

the creation of pens and the fact that once pens are created,

there should be some means of controlling and limiting the numbers

admitted to those pens.

Doctor Eastwood did in fact say that he was not aware that the pen

crowd levels were not being controlled and he went on to say that

if he had found that out, he would have mentioned that to the

club.   Doctor Eastwood went on to tell the Inquiry that he did in

fact write to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club in 1985 enclosing

a sketch of proposed modifications to the Leppings Lane turnstiles

which he claimed would have provided an ideal solution.    His

scheme would have enabled a mechanical count to be made of those

entering the different areas of the Leppings Lane terraces.      For

some reason that suggestion was not taken up and an alternative

was eventually agreed.

Doctor Eastwood was subsequently asked about the removal of

barrier 144 in 1986 from the area in front of the mouth of the
tunnel.     Eastwood said that his company was impressed by Inspector

Calvert's suggestion for the removal of the barrier and took that

advice due to Inspector Calvert's experience as a man on the

ground.     Eventually, Doctor Eastwood accepted that the removal of

that barrier effectively created a corridor through that terrace

down which pressure could flow towards the front of the pen.

A number of breaches of the Safety Certificate were pointed out to

Doctor Eastwood.     The exit gates, ie concertina gates, do not

comply with the Green Guide, the Green Guide suggests that exit

gates should open outwards and should not be of the roller/shutter

type.     The perimeter gates are less than the 1.1 metre width

required and are a breach of the Safety Certificate.

The heights of the crush barriers on the terracing are in breach

of the Safety Certificate.     The ramp down the tunnel and its

gradient breach the Safety Certificate.

The hearing adjourned for lunch at 1.15 pm and resumed at 2.30 pm.

Cross examination of Doctor Eastwood then began.     The South

Yorkshire Fire Service continued to press on with their suggestion

that the police had accepted responsibility for the manning of

gates and the radial fences.

The hearing concluded at 3.25 pm for the weekend break.
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER ENQUIRY



MONDAY 26 JUNE 1989 - DAY 28



The Inquiry resumed after the weekend break, with Dr. Wilfred Eastwood

continuing to present his evidence to the Inquiry.    He was cross-examined by

Counsel for the Sheffield City Council.   At one point during his cross-

examination Dr. Eastwood estimated that the pressure exerted on the barrier in

Pen 4 which was distorted would have been equivalent to the weight of

approximately half a ton per person who was stood against the barrier.     Dr.

Eastwood was asked a number of questions concerning his certification that the

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ground was safe to use and was in accordance

with a safety certificate.   It was pointed out to Dr. Eastwood that Section 15

(i) of the Safety Certificate required that all structures at the ground

comply with the recommendations of the Green Guide.   Dr. Eastwood said that he

felt the Green Guide was not a substitute for common sense and professional

knowledge.   Whilst he was being cross-examined by Counsel for the South

Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service, Dr. Eastwood was asked about the

width of the terrace steps on the Leppings Lane Terrace and it transpired that

the width of a number of those steps were not within the Green Guide

recommendations.   Dr. Eastwood was subsequently cross-examined by Counsel for

the South Yorkshire Police, it was put to Dr. Eastwood that the radial fences

were introduced in 1981 to facilitate segregation only, and that the radial

gates gave access for maintenance and policing.   Dr. Eastwood went on to say

that he did not expect a PC to be placed at one of those gates and had never
expressed a view that an officer should be so stationed.     Dr. Eastwood was

asked if he could recall where the assurance came from that the radial gates

would be manned by a police officer.    Dr. Eastwood said it may have been from

the Sheffield City Council but he could not specifically recall from whom.       He

did accept however, that he could not recall the police ever giving any

assurance that the radial gates would be manned by a polie officer when the

terrace was opened to spectators of the same club.




Dr. Eastwood was then cross-examined by his own Counsel, Mr. Toulson Q C , who

clarified a number of points which had previously been put to Dr. Eastwood.

When Dr. Eastwood was re-examined by Counsel for the Inquiry, it was suggested

to him that the removal of barriers from the Leppings Lane terracing created

gaps which were not in accordance with the Green Guide and, therefore, were a

breach of the safety certificate.     Dr. Eastwood replied by saying that the

Green Guide was advisory but should allow for common sense.     It was suggested

to Dr. Eastwood that he'd set himself up deliberately to contravene the Green

Guide, but he replied by saying that everything which he did had previously

been discussed by the Working Party and everybody knew what he was going to

do.   Dr. Eastwood was also asked about the removal of barrier 144 from the

mouth of the tunnel on the terrace.    He said that the barrier had been removed

at the request of the Working Party following a forceful request by the

Police.   It was pointed out to Dr. Eastwood that the Police do not know the

ins and outs of the Green Guide in relation to the placement of barriers and

gaps between barriers.   Dr. Eastwood referred to his earlier comment    and said

that the Police were responsible for policing that terrace and that he had to
accept   th e ir   v ie w .   D r.   E a stw o o d   le ft   th e   w itn e s s   box   at   4 .1 5   pm.




Dr. Glyn Phillips was the next witness to appear before the Inquiry. He had

entered pen 3 on the day of the semi-final and stood close to the radial fence

adjacent to pen 2.            He said that before the match fans were in discomfort and

were voicing that discomfort to police officers.                                  He said that in his opinion

the police officers must have been able to see the discomfort never mind hear

the shouts.        Once the disaster became apparent Dr. Phillips assisted on the

pitch by providing first aid to casualties.




Mr. Ferenc Morath was the last witness to appear before the Inquiry this date.

He was present at the 1987 F.A. Cup semi-final at Hillsborough which was

played between Leeds United and Coventry City.                                He had approached the ground

along Leppings Lane from the direction of the roundabout some time after 12

o'clock, which was in fact after the scheduled kick-off time.                                          He recalls

being asked to produce his ticket when leaving the coach park and again whilst

walking along Leppings Lane, although the ticket check in Leppings Lane

appeared to be a casual non-organised check with groups of officers placed

across the road checking tickets.                       He said that he did not see any barriers

placed across Leppings Lane.                   He said there did not appear to be any

organisation outside the turnstiles once he arrived there and just saw a mass

of people in the area between the turnstiles and the perimeter gates.                                          After

entering the ground he went onto the terrace through the centre tunnel, there

was a crush on the terrace but he managed to remain at the back part of the

pen until half-time when he left the centre pens via the tunnel and found a
    comfortable position on the North-West terrace.




    The Inquiry closed at 5.10 p.m. this date.




#
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY



TUESDAY 27 JUNE 1989 - DAY 29



The Inquiry opened at 10.00 am this date and the first witness to give

evidence was Mr. Andrew Sanderson, a civilian communications officer employed

by the South Yorkshire Police.   He was led through his evidence with

particular emphasis placed on the radio problem which occurred just after

2.00 pm on 15th April 1989.   Mr. Sanderson told the Inquiry that the

transmissions from ground control were breaking up and the voices of those

speaking on the radio were clipped.   Mr. Sanderson subsequently changed the

microphone which was in use in the control room and subsequently found it

necessary to change the base station set, after changing the base station set

the radio was switched to 'talk through'.   Mr. Sanderson also told the

Inquiry that the officers who were to perform duty inside the ground were

provided with an ear piece to assist in hearing radio messages.   When cross-

examined by Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police Mr. Sanderson told the

Inquiry that the equipment in use on the day was standard radio equipment and

that he was not aware of anything which could combat the problem of two many

officers wanting to speak on the radio at the same time.




Police Constable Hooson was the next witness to appear.    PC Hooson explained

the nature of his duties at the Midland Station in Sheffield City Centre, the

subsequent transport of Liverpool supporters to Leppings Lane and his

involvement in the opening of the gate in pen 4.   PC Hooson told the Inquiry
that he had approached the perimeter gate in pen 4 before the kick-off when

the players were still on the field warming up.    Gate 4 was closed when he

arrived, he noticed that people were crushed up to the fencing and in a

desperate condition.    PC Hooson went on to explain how after having opened

the gate a number of fans were removed from the pen.    It was put to PC Hooson

that he may well have been mistaken, as evidence had previously been given by

PC Illingworth, who had claimed also to have been the first officer to open

gate 4.    When PC Hooson was cross-examined by Counsel for the South Yorkshire

Police, he stated that he was absolutely sure that he was the person who

opened the gate to pen 4 and that the gate remained open while ever he was

present.




The next witness to appear before the Inquiry was PC Cammock.     PC Cammock

described being caught up in the crush of people outside the Leppings Lane

turnstiles.   He was cross examined briefly and left the witness box after

some 20 minutes.




Mr. Bownes of the Sheffield City Council's Legal and Administration

Department was the next witness to appear before the Inquiry.     Mr. Bownes is

responsible for issuing the ground Safety Certificate in relation to the

Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground at Hillsborough.    During his examination

and subsequent cross-examination it was apparent that Mr. Bownes new nothing

about football in general and the layout of a football stadium.     It was also

clear that he did not appear to take an effective lead when participating in

the routine Working Party meetings and ground inspections.    It was also
    apparent that Mr. Bownes did not take accurate minutes of those meetings and

    whenever minutes were taken he was reluctant to produce them for inspection

    at subsequent meetings.     In fact, in a Fire Service internal memo one

    particular individual, who had attended a Working Party meeting on behalf of

    the Fire Service, made the comment that, for their own protection the Fire

    Service would need to keep notes as Bownes was reluctant to produce minutes.

    It was revealed that the removal of barrier 144 from pen 3 had in fact been

    authorised by Bownes himself.     Bownes told the Inquiry that the question of

    the removal of that barrier had been discussed at the ground during a routine

    inspection and that he himself gave authority for its removal, having been of

    the opinion that he was authorised to approve that removal as he felt that

    authority had been delegated to him by the head of his Department.     He went

    on to admit that he did not appreciate the effect of the removal of that

    barrier or the effect of the pens on the capacity of the Leppings Lane

    terraces.     Mr. Bownes was subsequently cross-examined and it was obvious from

    that cross-examination that Bownes was not aware of a number of breaches of

    the Green Guide and the Safety Certificate by the club.     The hearing closed

    at 4.45 pm.




#
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY



WEDNESDAY 28 JUNE 1989 - DAY 30



Mr. David Bownes, of the Sheffield City Council Legal and Administrative

Department completed his evidence during the early part of the morning

session.




Inspector Calvert was then called to give evidence.   He was taken through his

role as Liaison Officer with the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and his

role in the affairs of the Working Party.   When Inspector Calvert was cross-

examined by Counsel for the relatives of the deceased he accepted that there

was no formal arrangement between the police and the club as to who would be

responsible for the packing of the pens and the monitoring of crowd levels in

the pens on the Leppings Lane terrace.   When Mr. Calvert was cross-examined

by Counsel for the Football Supporters Association he was asked to explain

what steps were taken by the Police to control the attendance of non-ticket

holders from Leeds in the 1987 F.A. Cup semi-final.   Inspector Calvert went

on to explain that there were checks of supporters arriving at the railway

station and supporters travelling by motor vehicle leaving the motorway.

During cross-examination by Counsel for the South Yorkshire Fire Service,

Inspector Calvert repeated the fact that the Police had never given an

undertaking to man gates in the radial fences.   Inspector Calvert completed

giving evidence to the Inquiry shortly after the lunch adjournment.
The next witness to appear before the Inquiry was Mr. Graham Mackrell, the

club secretary for the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.    Counsel for the

Inquiry stated that he did not intend to lead Mr. Mackrell through his

statement but would examine him on points he felt pertinent.    Mr. Mackrell

was asked if he realised that the Safety Certificate which stipulated

capacities separately for the North/West terrace and the Leppings Lane

terrace was breached on a number of occasions as there was no way of

controlling the numbers in those two areas of the ground.    He was also asked

about the wall dividing the concourse area at the rear of the West Stand, and

it was put to him that that wall became obsolete from 1987 when fans of

opposing teams no longer met at that end of the ground.     He was also asked

about the lack of direction signs to the various parts of the Leppings Lane

terrace.   Mr. Mackrell was then asked about the requirement to have in

attendance at the ground a qualified doctor in accordance with the Safety

Certificate.   Mackrell said that as far as he was concerned Doctor Purcell

was in fact the club doctor in accordance with the Safety Certificate.     Mr.

Mackrell was also asked to give his account of exactly how he got to know

about the opening of Gate C.    He went on to explain that he saw Mr. Locke

around 2.55 pm in the Players' Tunnel, Locke said words to the effect that a

gate had been forced or opened and that some supporters had got in to the

ground.    Mackrell then went to Gate C to find out what had happened.    When he

arrived at Gate C he saw that the gate was open about 2 feet only, a Mounted

policeman was blocking that opening but allowing fans to enter after having

examined their tickets.    He then went on to the Police Control Box to speak

to senior officers.    He told the Inquiry that he could not recall what was
3



said in the Police Box.   Mr. Mackrell was cross-examined in some detail by

Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police.   Mr. Mackrell accepted that he was in

possession of a club personal radio and that he could hear all the stewards

who were also in possession of a personal radio.   Mr. Mackrell was then taken

through his account of his conversation with Mr. Locke, Mackrell went on to

tell the Inquiry that he could not recall a conversation with Mr. Kirton when

it was suggested that he had discussed a delay in the kick-off.   It was

pointed out to Mackrell that a Mr. Cannon, a photographer who was present at

the match recalled overhearing a conversation between himself and Mr. Kirton

during which a delay in the kick off was discussed, Mackrell maintained that

he could not recall any such conversation.




The Inquiry closed at 5.00 p.m.
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER ENQUIRY



THURSDAY 29 JUNE 1989 - DAY 31



The final day of the public inquiry commenced at 10.00 am this date, with

Inspector Sewell presenting his evidence.   He was led through his statement

by Mr. Bernard Phillips Q C , Counsel for the Inquiry.   He was asked about a

number of points in relation to his role as 'F' Division Football Liaison

Officer and his role as member of the Working Party.      Another point on

which Inspector Sewell was asked was his organisation of the meetings with

club stewards and instructions which he gave to club stewards at those

meetings.   Inspector Sewell underwent cross-examination and spent

approximately 2 hours in the witness box.




The next witness to appear before the Inquiry was Mr. Douglas Locke, a

Security Consultant employed by Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and a

retired Police Superintendent.   Mr. Locke told the Inquiry that whilst he was

a serving officer in the South Yorkshire Police, the Force had come to an

agreement that police officers would steward the Leppings Lane terraces.        He

said that in 1982 he was present at a meeting involving Chief Superintendent

Herold, Superintendent Chapman, himself and the Club Secretary where the

Police gave an undertaking that they would steward the Leppings Lane

terraces, although no written agreement was drawn up to that effect.     He went

on to say that the stewards are in general well-meaning local supporters, but

their effect is limited, therefore, the Police decided to steward away fans
on the Leppings Lane terraces.     Mr. Locke was subsequently cross-examined by

Counsel for the relatives of the deceased.     Mr. Locke accepted that the

policing arrangement for the Leppings Lane terrace was designed to cater for

the safety of those spectators and to assess the crowd levels.     When Mr Locke

was cross-examined by Counsel for the Football Association he was asked if he

knew of any other football grounds where the police steward the away terrace,

Mr. Locke said that he couldn't think of any grounds where stewards pack

terraces.   Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police went on to ask Mr. Locke

exactly what he saw his role as.     Mr. Locke said that as far as he was

concerned he was a Security Consultant, however, he was referred to an

article which appeared in Police Review in which Locke stated that he was in

fact Safety and Security Consultant.     Mr. Locke denied that he had any safety

responsibility and said that his only responsibility was for security and

supervision of stewards.




The Inquiry then heard evidence from two independent witnesses, a Mr. Taylor

and a Mr. Watts.   Both of these individuals had been drinking in different

public houses before the game and had either overheard or spoken to Liverpool

supporters who stated they were not in possession of tickets for the game but

intended to get into the ground, apparently by any means.     Superintendent

Stewart was the next witness to appear before the Inquiry.     He gave evidence

to the effect that the Police had never given an undertaking to man any gates

in the radial fences.   He accepted that he was present at a meeting in

September 1981 but repeated the fact that the police had never given that

undertaking.
r
        3




        The last witness to appear before the Inquiry was Police Constable Waugh, a

        radio/telephone operator stationed at Force Control.   PC Waugh told the

        Inquiry of his telephone call to the Ambulance Service on the day of the

        semi-final.




        The Inquiry closed after final discussion around 4.30 pm.




    i
