                                                                   "   !




MALCOLM EDMUNDSON                                                          R139

CHIEF INSPECTOR



On duty Incident Roan at 10.00 am re semi-final, Police Constables Jones and

Waugh working with me in Incident Roan manning radio.    On my arrival they

were busy booking traffic vehicles on duty and there were no problems at

that stage.   On my instructions they created an extended incident on the

Catmard and Control so that we could put on any matters relating to the

semi-final and analyse it afterwards.     This was done by transferring a

message put on by F Division earlier that week.        FI were informed the

incident became EL 2 on the extended incident.

By 1300 hours there was a lot of congestion on the roads and the motorway

but by 1415 hours this was cleared and all motorway routes had very little

football traffic.   I remanber everyone carmenting that things were going

well and that traffic seemed to have arrived much earlier that last year.

Most of the routes to the ground were clear by 2.30 pm there was certainly

no hold up for Liverpool supporters the only hold ups had been through

Attercliffe and City where the Notts Forest supporters had cane.       I remember

Superintendent Brougham caning over the radio about 2.40 pm saying that all

the routes to the ground were clear and motorcyclist wanting to go in for

meal early.   They were told to stay exit mainly because it was said that

meals would not be ready.    In any case they carried on checking their cwn

sections until about 2.55 pm.     As far as I am concerned there were no

unusual problems with traffic it went very well.   The motorcyclists and all

officers engaged in getting people to the ground did a first class job.

 There was never any suggestion that fans were held up because of problems on

 the roads.

 All the time we had been monitoring Hillsborough Ground Control on channel

 25 via a repeater set in the Incident Roan.     I recognised Police Sergeant

 Goddard as the main operator at the ground and on occasions Superintendent
  / A.
Murray used the radio.    Up to 2.15 pm the reception was good and there were

no unusual problems.     Then for the next 20-25 minutes the radio was very

poor it broke up and there was a loud whistle.       It was obvious they were

having problems with the radio in fact I remember saying they were having

problems over Force Control radio and we asked if they needed ocnmunications

people to help.     Ground control said they were present and trying to fix it.

After that time it was much improved back to the good reception ve had heard

earlier that day.     This would be about 2.40 pm and after that the reception

was clear.    I heard Superintendent Marshall saying to match control that he

had a large crowd outside the Leppings Lane end of the ground.      I think he

asked for more horses but I'm not sure whether match control got in touch

with any.    I do not know that they asked us via Force Control for a vehicle

with a PA system to go to Leppings Lane because there was a large crcvd

pushing and they feared someone would be hurt.      We did send a car but when

he got there he radioed back that there was a car with a PA already there.

It was more and more apparent listening to the match control radio that the

crowd a Leppings Lane were causing extreme problems for the officers.         I

remember them asking Inspector Sewell to send more men and I remannber

someone asking for the kick off to be delayed.       I don't knew who that was

but the reply fran match control was that there was no chance as one of the

teams was already out.        It must have been about 2.50 pm by this time.

Superintendent Marshall then asked for the gates to be opened as he feared

for the safety of all the people at Leppings Lane.      He said they were being

crushed and he thought a wall was going to go.            Superintendent Murray

himself replied to this and said there was a need to check tickets.

 Superintendent Marshall then repeated his plea and I could hear the crowd in

the background who were obviously very noisy and unruly.         I think other

 persons asked for the gate opening but I can't say who.     I was convinced by

what I heard that people would be hurt so I asked my staff to contact match

 control and ask them if they needed any ambulances.      They said not at that
    / .r\
stage but we were to keep monitoring the radio.   This was about 3.00 pm at

the time and I heard Police Sergeant Goddard in ground control say 'open the

gate we do not want anyone killed'.   I am sure these were more or less his

exact words.   This was done and after a minute Superintendent Marshall told

Match Control that the situation outside had eased and that the gate was

closed.

I could then hear the officers at the ground saying persons were injured and

I told Police Constable Rode in the Operations Roan to ring the ambulance

service and warn them of possible major casualties.   Within a minute we were

requested to get a fleet of ambulances and we did via the ambulance service

who were still on the telephone to Police Constable Rook.   I then activated

the Major Incident plan and we started to activate the casualty bureau etc.
                                                                     /'<>/•/ / v / 3 V



                                                                        RI39A

    MALCOLM EDMUNDSON

    CHIEF INSPECTOR



    Further to my account given regarding my involvement in the Hillsborough

    disaster, I new produce an extract taken by roe frcm the Racal tape recorder

    for the incident room on 15 April 1989 of the radio transmissions to and

    frcm that roan.




i
