                                                             Richard Marie Watson Pc 1799,
                                                             •B' Group,
                                                             Main Street Police Station,
                                                             Rotherham.


  At 8*3Oam on Saturday 15th April 19&9* i paraded for duty at Main Street Police Station,
  where transport was provided to Hillsborough football stadium fro briefing prior to the
  semi final match at that groun. The sergeant in charge of Serial A-1 was Ps 406 Dixon,
  to whom I would be responsible for the remainder of the day* At 10am the breifing was
  given and following that I was told to work with Pc 90 Southall and to patrol Halifax Road
  between Wadsley Bridge and Browning Road. The only person on the serial issued with a
  personal radio was- Sgi Dixon*


  On patrol in Halifax Road the area soon began to fill with Liverpool fans making thier way t
  to the ground after being dropped off by coach in Halifax Road* A large percentage of the
^ f a n s made thier way to the shops Halifax Road junction with Southey Green Road and were
  buying or attempting to buy alcohol from the White Horse Public House or Thresher wine
  merchants. They sat intthe sun drinking the beer they had purchesed, although in the main
  the majority were in good humour and the rest had obviously other intentions*


  At 2,40pm our serial regrouped in Halifax Road and began to walk to the ground where we
  were supposed to sit in the force coach in Pennistone Road outside the ground as a reserve*
  At this time there was still large groups of fans still sat drinking obviously leaving
  the walk 4o the ground whilst the last minute* As we walked to the ground in a group I
  could hear on Ps Dixons radio that there was what appeared to be a large public order
  problem in the ground* Close to the ground it became known that we were urgently required
  inside the ground,                        -


  We entered the ground at about 3,10pm and we were positioned infront of the cop containing
  the Nottingham Forest fans, behind the goal area, on the pitch* Looking towards the
  Leppings Lane end of the ground I could see that there were people being pulled into the
  seated area above. The Notts Forest fans were agitated and some came to the fence and tried
  to climb over believing that the situation was infact a pitch invasion. One of the liverpoo.
  fans ran from the other end of the ground and stood infront of the nots Forest end
  beckoning them in a threatening manner. The youth ran back to the other end after being
  challenged and was soon arrested. At the leppings lane end I could see a large group of
  people around the goal mouth which was getting larger by the minute* as people ran to assist
  and fans spilled onto the pitch. I could see people making makeshift stretchers from
  the advertising boards around the pitch. Some Notts fans were offering thier assistance
  but for obvious reasons were told thankyou and the offer declined*

  One youth who was a liverpool supporter came to the fence and asked to be let onto the
  pitch to join his friends. An officer close by told me that he had already thrown out
                                            Richard Mark Watson Pc 1799                                                        Page 2




 of the ground tinder the ground regs by him* I then edjected this youth whos details
were recorded in the Police room* He told me that he had purchased a ticket outside
the ground for £25 which was obviously a forgery. As I walked back to the cop I
 could see bodies on advettisment board and people lying obviously injured screaming
 in pain.


 I returned to my position infront of the cop and hadn't been there long when
 a large number of Liverpool fans charged at us obviously intent on causing trouble
with the Notts Forest fans, with only what appearec to be our serial to stop them.
 At this point I began to fear for my own safety. As the fans got within only a few .
yards of us a line of officers camefrom the tunnell and formed a cordon across the
 pitch slowly pushing the fans back to the leppings lane enclosure.


 By now both ourselves and the Notts Forest fans had come to realise how serious
the situation at the leppings Lane enclosure had been* and the fans began to calm.
 Bodies by this time were being placed near the goal as there appeared to be no room
 in the area behind the stand. Shortly after this the announcement was made that the
 match would be cancelled and the majority of the Notts forest fans left the ground
 in an orderly manner.


Our serial was then ordered to re attend in Halifax Hoad and patrol as we had done
before the gameo The liverpool fans were very hostile towards us although there were
no physical threats. Once the area was clear our serial made thier way to Claywheels
 lane where those who required it were provided with a meal. Transport was then
 arranged and I returned to ^ain Street Police Station and went off duty at 7.30p®




 I cannot say whether ther was any breakdown in tadio transmition as I wa« not
 issued with a radio nor was I sufficiently close enough to anyone with a radio.
 I did not handle any o                                                                the bodies at all throughout the day.




   — ” ----------------------------------------------------------------------------'

 Police Constable 1799 Watson.
