                                                           pO v I 2 -2 . / I f / i , |




164/-S0'!Z   (v#/S/23(i   r^°   O   f   A jJ W H J -7* #
  South Yorkshire J t Sec                                                 .19 May ’ 99    16=06    P. 02




South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
P.O. Box 37, Regent Street,
Barnsley, South Yorkshire S7Q 2PQ,
Fax: Barntley |
W.J. Wilkinson, BA(Econ), CPFA. Clerk and Treasurer

                                                                                         SO UTH YO R K SH IR E
                                                                                                     POLICE
Our ref:    PMS/GAN                                                                              AUTHORITY

Your ref:
                                      CO
Date:      19 May 1999

This matter is being dealt with by;   M lS S G a y l e N i e s y t y   Direct Line;


To;             Members of the Police Authority
                Appropriate Officers


RE:             POLICE AUTHORITY PAPERS - 21 MAY 1999


Dear Member

Further to the Police Authority papers distributed on 19 May, pleas|e find enclosed further
papers which were omitted by Garretts at the time of despatch.

I apologise for any inconvenience.

Yours sincerely




M W Sanderson
Assistant Clerk
South Yorkshire J t Sec                        .19 May ’ 99    16:07




    SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY ■ 21 MAY 19fl!i




    Please add the attached to the end of Appendix 1


    Letter from I Oaines to W J Wilkinson dated 5 March

    Letter from W J Wilkinson to D Duckenfield dated 5 March
           South Yorkshire J t Sec                                                    19 May ’99          16:07              P.04
       ifa a   >ga   l'.tga      from        s.v.p.   c h 1 S F . d e .s t   ,                                                  * a-is . *

                      South Yorkshire
                      POLICE                                                      Ian Dainej i             B.4(Hofls) dipXd,
                                                                                          A juristen t O iia f C o n ito b lt
                      J USTt Cf i   Wi t h    COUSAOt




         W J Wilkirlscn Esq                                                                                 Ref: ACOiD/NMH
         Clerk and Treasurer
         South Ycftsh.ife Joint Secretariat                                                                 5 March 19S9
         PO Box 37
         Regent Street
         Barnsley
         S7C 2PQ                                                                                            B Y FAX




          Dear Bin

          FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR LEGAL COSTS;
          DAVID DUCKENREID AND TREVOR BlCHARO

          ! rafer to my letter of 3 March 1998 and my telephone convrsstisin with Miss Maureen
          Oades on 4 March 1998. I will try to provide tfe initial information to which Miss Osdes
          referred.

          Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield (retired) made mistakes on the day of the
          Hillsborough Disaster. 15 April 1S89. He was cfearfy caned to acec•knt for those miitafces
          by Lord Justice Taylor's judicial enquiry. His errors were based on net recognising tha
          distress of football supporters on fhe terraces and allowing the over crowding tc continue,
          Others also contributed to the disaster but similarly failed to recognisc over-crowdifig.

          in 1990 the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) directed that thart be no prosecutions,
          Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's Scrutiny Report finds no fault in the prOCUI by which the DP?
          made His decision and says that ho new relevant evidence has been adduced since 1930.

          in the eight years since the DPP's decision, there has been no attemipt to initiate t private
          prosecution. Soma people's disappointment at the Scrutiny Report sauses them to talk of
          starting a private prosecution. ( suggest that ycu agree with me that David DuckanfaSd.
          acted in good faith.

          You will also have an application from Sergeant Trevor Sichard. he operated the police,
          CCTV system on the day of the disaster. Some people allege that he lied about the
          malfunction of the system in order to cover up police mistakes, These allegations are
          refatlvely recent. Lord justice Stuart-$mith considered them and re}acted them. I suggest
          fttt you accept that Sergeant Bichard acted in good faith.




                        P«!i« HvMqw i n
                        SofcKU
                        ShfSMdSMLY
                        TbJ: 0114 a e i w
E0fl   set ’on                                           Uj3ZLlftZZX$&           <r   aatmos-Aiio                B S --9 T        6 6 /S 0 /6 T
           South Yorkshire J t Sec                                             ■19 May ’ 99             16:08      P. 05
       '5 ‘NJ5R "SS i I i 53    “ 3K s . y . P ,   >!£r.3E?T,                                                        p*« *.32 3




           in * monte of ft* Fora would be seriously impaired if financial assistance were not
           granted. Th* (srsspect of private praseauttorti for evinis nearty ?iihe years age is alarming
           to Mr Duckenfield and Scgdant 8fchard, The Farce is aware q the Scrutiny Report
           findings and would anticipate that the officers weuld receive flnancia assistance to defend
           them in these ifcjnstances.

           I have written this letter to deal with the issues which Miss Cades ve:y property raised with
           me. I have phrased it in terms which she said would provide the rie<sessary information. 1
           wish tc be able to tel! Mr Duekenfield and Sergeant Sicherd of yeur decision and would be
           obliged if you could telephone me at your earnest convenience.

           Years sincerely




          PP
           It,
           Assistant Chief Constable


           (Di&aiwd by Im Daines whilst on tnnua!antf signed fa his abs*/ts*y




#

                                                                           t




>0fl   98T 'ON                                     < L i8 5 M 9 £ 2 t0 e       3 y y m s - A i I "lit      6£!9I       66/50/61
    South Yorkshire J t Sec                                               .19 May ’ 99           16:08       P. 06
                                                                                                                F,


 South Yorkshire Joint
 P.O. gin 37. K«fl«W Slrwti
 Barnatey, South YrtfclMra 370 2PQ,
 Pax; Otrntley
 W.J- WStdnatn, SAfEeunJi, CPFA. Ctmrk and Ttetsurtr


                                                                                                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE
 Qw rtf; WJVWV8                                                                                            POUCE
                                                                                                             a u t h o r it y
 Yo«r r«(:


 Oale: S March 1998

 ThM matter is being       bf                                                      OiraeiUfc: 772801


 Mr D Ouckenfield




 Dear

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
HOME OFFICB CIRCULAR 4 /8 $ - FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR LEGAL COSTS

. I write with reference ACC I Oaines letter to yourself dated the 27 February 199fcand the
  application which you have made for financial assistance towards he costs of legal
  representation in the event of a private prosecution being brought against you in
 connection with the Hillsborough Disaster. Acting on behalf of the Authority I wish to
  inform you that the Authority wilf meet your reasonable expenses n connection with this
 matter. Details of any expenses incurred may be directed to ACC I Dairies.

Yours sincerely,



W J Wilkinson
Clerk and Treasurer




8 8 1 "ON                                              L iB ZLi& zzivfo   s a u n o s -.u io i       63S9T           S 6 /9 0 /S I
South Yorkshire J t Sec                         -19 May ’99   16'-09   P. 07




    SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY ■ 21 MAY 199i>




     Please add the attached to the end of Appendix 2:



     Letter from W J Wilkinson to B Murray dated 29 June 1998
      South Yorkshire Jt Sec                                               19 May ’ 99            16=09         P. 08


Seufft YorfcaMra Joint S*er*tari«t           ? Y          ^ A y .
P.O. foil 37, fttgw*
       f wjih YartUWf* 9?0 gPQ.
Pm :
W.J, WMntpn. t4 f lW CPFA. Ottk *n<t T cu w tt

                                                                                              OUTH Y O R K S H IR E
Our ref: MVO/Pl,
                                                                                                          POLICE
                                                                                                    AUTHORITY
Yourraf.

Date: 29 Jyn# 1996

TMt matterIt b*>ngda*lt«tth by MiSS M V 0 3 d65                   OirtctUrw:



Dear Mr Murray

R * : Hillsborough Disaster
Home Office Circular 4/98 * Financial Assistance for Legal Costs

I write with reference to your letter dated 28mJune 1998 addressed to the Chief
Constable, Mr R Weils, requesting that the Authority be approached with a view to
reimbursing any legal expenses that you may incur In defending the criminal proceedings
that have recently been instituted against you arising out of the Hills borough Disaster,
Acting on behalf of the Authority I wish to inform you that the Author! y will meet such
reasonable expenses as you may incur in defending the said proceed tngs.

Yours sincerely                      *




W J Wilkinson
Clerk & Treasurer




FIRST CLASS

Mr B.D. Murray




 8 8 T ‘ON                                        u b z u j s s z \2&   *■ a a y n o s -.u io t      0 £ ; 9T       66/S0/6T
     South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
     P .O . Box 37, R egent Street,
     Barnsley, South Yorkshire S 7 0 2P Q .
     Fax; Barnsley
     W J Wilkinson, BA(Econ), CPFA. Clerk and Treasurer
                                                                                         At
                                                                               S O U T H Y O R K SH IR E
     O ur ref:     W J W /W G
                                                                                               POLICE
                                                                                          AUTHORITY
     Your ref:



     Date:       19 M ay 1999



    This m atter is being dealt with by:      Bill WilkiflSOn   Direct Line:




    To: Members of the South Yorkshire Police Authority

    Dear Member
i
    SPECIAL MEETING OF THE AUTHORITY : 21 MAY

    Further to the main agenda, I now enclose further papers in connection with Fridav’
                                                                                      1
    meeting.                                                                                  1   '




    Yours sincerely




    Bill Wilkinson
    Clerk and Treasurer

    Encs


i
        SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY




 Supplemental Report on the outcome of the Chief Constable's judicial review of
the Police Authority's decisions made on 5 February 1999 in relation to the funding
     of legal expenses of former Police Officers and further assistance sought
                               towards such expenses




                                   19 May 1999




                            G a r r etts
                                  1 City Square
                                 Leeds, LSI 2AL
                                 Ref: NJP.AG.EC
CONFIDENTIALITY NOTICE


THERE IS MATERIAL IN THIS TEXT AND THE APPENDICES WHICH IS
CONFIDENTIAL. IT CONTAINS INFORMATION DISCLOSED BY MR DUCKENFIELD,
MR MURRAY AND THEIR ADVISORS WHICH, IF IT IS DISCLOSED AT THIS STAGE,
COULD PREJUDICE THEIR LEGAL POSITION. MEMBERS ARE THERFORE
REQUESTED TO KEEP THIS REPORT SECURE AND DISCUSS ITS CONTENTS WITH
NO ONE OUTSIDE THE MEMBERS OF THE POLICE AUTHORITY, ITS OFFICERS AND
ADVISORS.
                         CONTENTS



Purpose of this report

List of Appendices
        PURPOSE OF THIS REPORT
        The purpose of this Report, which is supplemental to the Report of 13 May 1999, is to :


          Provide to members the submissions of Mr Duckenfield, Mr Murray and HFSG on the
          matters for consideration on 21 May 1999. These are in appendix 20 to this
          Supplemental Report. It will be seen that Winckworth Sherwood, on behalf of Mr
          Duckenfield, propose to adopt the written submissions made on behalf of Mr Murray.

        Provide further information supplied by the solicitors for Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray
        since the Report of 13 May 1999, namely:

2.1       Walker Morris, the solicitors for Mr Murray have now supplied the following costs
          information to supplement that set out in paragraph 6.2.2 of the Report of 13 May 1999:


          Period                      Type of expense   Am ount (inclusive of VAT)

          1 3 /1 /9 9 - 3 1 /3 /9 9   Disbursements             £7941
                                      Counsel's fees            £32,606.25

2.2       Submissions dated 9 October 1998 by Winckworth Sherwood on behalf of Mr
          Duckenfield to the DPP requesting him to take over and discontinue the criminal
          proceedings: and a further opinion dated 16 May 1999 from Mr William Clegg QC.
          These documents are in appendix 21 to this Supplemental Report and they supplement
          the material in appendix 9 to the Report of 13 May.

2.3       Further correspondence from Walker Morris and Winckworth Sherwood from 14 - 18
          May 1999 to supplement the material in appendix 15 to the Report of 13 May. This
          includes important information on the legal aid position and the financial resources of
          Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray.




          Dated 19 May 1999


          Garretts




PP-00035.doc
                                  A P P E N D IC E S




Submissions by or on behalf of Mr Duckenfield, Mr Murray and HFSG on the
applications for financial assistance.


Submission dated 9 October 1999 from Winckworth Sherwood to the DPP, and the
further opinion dated 16 May 1999 of William Clegg QC. This supplements the
material in appendix 9 to the Report of 13 May.

Letter of 14 May 1999 from Winckworth Sherwood and two letters of 14 May and one
of 18 May from Walker Morris. These supplement the materials in appendix 15 to the
Report of 13 May.
                                                                                            -*5T
                                                         N O T F O R P U B L IC A T IO N a s it'
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
                                                     | contains exempt information
                                                     I           p s :a                            of

21 May 1999                                          | i d -;. <^ to fte Lo:^! Government
                                                     •; ■•"•vi • * €. 8? s.-nenosa

Joint report of the Clerk and Treasurer and the Chief Constable


FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

1     Purpose of the Report

To give further consideration to applications for funding by two former police
officers in connection with private prosecutions and judicial review hearings, in
the light of the Divisional Court’s judgment of 31 March 1999.


      2       Recommendations

              Members are asked to consider the recommendations in
              Section 2 of the report attached prepared by Garretts, the
              Authority’s legal advisers in this matter.


3     Background

3.1   In 1998 two former police officers applied for financial assistance from this
       Authority to pay their legal costs in defending themselves against private
       prosecutions. This was granted.

3.2   The private prosecutions are brought by the Hillsborough Family Support
       Group (HFSG) for alleged offences arising out of the Hillsborough
       Stadium Disaster of 1989.

3.3   After taking legal advice, the Authority resolved on 5 February 1999 that
       its decision to provide financial assistance was null and void because of
       doubt about whether it was lawful to meet the officers’ costs.

3.4   The Chief Constable and the Authority co-operated in High Court
       proceedings at a Judicial Review to seek clarification of the Jaw. On 31
       March 1999 the Divisional Court ruled that Police Authorities do have the
       power to pay officers’ and former officers’ costs in legal proceedings.

3.5   In the light of the judgment it is necessary now for the Authority:

      (a)     to revisit the decision of 5 February 1999:
(b)    to consider afresh the applications of the former police officers for
       financial assistance to meet their legal costs and expenses in the
       private prosecutions;

(c)   to consider their applications for financial assistanceto meet their
       legal costs and expenses in recent judicial review proceedings
       involving decisions of the Director of Public Prosecutions;

(d)   to consider their applications for financial assistance to meet any
       legal expenses incurred in recent judicial review proceedings
       involving decisions of the Authority to the extent that these are not
       reimbursed under the costs order made against Ms Adlington,
       Solicitor to the HFSG;

(e)    to consider their applications for financial assistance to meet their
       legal costs and expenses in potential judicial review proceedings
       involving a decision of the Clerk to the South Sefton Magistrates
       Court.

The Process

The Divisional Court judgment has clarified the Authority’s powers to
 provide financial assistance to police officers in respect of their costs and
 expenses incurred in relation to private prosecutions brought against
them and judicial review proceedings in which they participate. This was
the issue on which discussion at the 5 February meeting focussed.
 However, in giving the judgment, the Divisional Court pointed out that it
was not indicating any view on the merits of whether financial assistance
should be provided to the two former police officers as this was a matter
for the Police Authority to decide subject to ordinary public law principles.
The Divisional Court indicated that it thought that the Authority would
revisit its decision of 5 February 1999 following the Divisional Court’s
judgment.

Garretts were appointed to advise the Authority in January 1999 and have
been retained to advise on the next stages. Accompanying this report is a
detailed supporting paper, which outlines the history and background
which has led to the applications for funding and identifies the relevant
considerations which the Authority must take into account in coming to
decisions on the various applications. Garretts report also considers the
implications for the Authority and the former police officers of providing
support in different ways.

Garretts have advised that the legal effect of the assurances given to the
former police officers in 1998 that their reasonable legal costs in
connection with the private prosecution proceedings would be met by the
Authority is likely to be that the Authority is obliged to meet those costs up
to February 1999, when the decision was reversed (subject to the
considerations set out in Section 7 paragraph 7.6 of Garretts report).
3.9   With regard to the application for funding of the private prosecution
      proceedings after the 5 February 1999, Garretts report lays down a
      structured procedure which the Authority is advised to follow in coming to
      its decision, to ensure that relevant considerations are taken into account,
      at the appropriate stage in the decision process. In outline the procedure
      is as follows;-

      do the pow ers exist? (This has been confirmed by the Divisional
      Court).

      whether the Authority is satisfied that the former police officers acted
      in good faith in directing the police operations on the day o f the
      disaster;

      whether the former police officers exercised their judgm ent
      reasonably, in the light o f the circumstances they faced, and if not,
      whether other relevant factors outweigh this consideration;

      whether it is appropriate to require the former police officers to look
      to alternative sources o f finance to pay their legal costs, such as legal
      aid, the Police Superintendent's Association or their own resources,
      given the likely adverse financial effects for them o f seeking legal aid;

      the seriousness o f the charges and whether it is appropriate to agree
      to provide funding, before a verdict is reached on them;

      the Authority's view on the merits o f the charges;

      the impact on the Authority's resources o f funding the former police
      officers costs and the “knock o n ” effect on policing in South
      Yorkshire (the Chief Constable will be present to advise on this at the
      meeting); and;

      the impact o f a refusal to provide financial support on police morale
      and on the confidence o f officers to exercise their judgm ent in
      difficult circumstances;

      (if support is agreed) on what terms should that support be offered?

4     Financial implications

4.1   The Authority set aside £500,000 in reserves in August 1997 for potential
      expenditure in connection with the Scrutiny carried out by Lord Justice
      Stuart-Smith into reports that fresh evidence had been found relating to
      the Hillsborough disaster which had not been previously available. This
      earmarked reserve was subsequently allocated towards funding support
      costs to the officers and the legal costs of the Authority and the Chief
 Constable in connection with the Judicial Review. The position regarding
 the officers’ claims to date is covered in detail in Garretts' report. In
 summary the position is as follows:-

                                                                 £ (excluding V A T)



 Chief Constable’s costs in connection with the Scrutiny        20,000

 Estimated costs of the former police officers’ claims
 to 5 February 1999                                             230,000

 Chief Constable’s costs to conclusion of Judicial Review       74,000

 Police Authority:     costs to 5 February                      42,000
                       costs to conclusion of Judicial Review   64,000
                       costs to 21 May                          30,000

 Costs incurred to date                                         460,000
 (subject to possible independent review of the claims)

 Estimated additional costs of funding the former police
 officers to the conclusion of the committal hearing            300,000

                                                              £ 760,000


Notes:

(i)      It is proposed that the officers’ claims be subject to independent
         review as to their “reasonableness”.

(ii)     Certain costs already incurred in connection with previous hearings
         may be recoverable from central funds and/or Ms Adlington.
         Conversely, the costs of the prosecution or other parties to legal
         actions involving the officers may, if the Authority provides support
         for those proceedings, be awarded against the Authority.

 Subject to confirmation, therefore, the Authority would need to find a
 further £260,000 to cover financing of the former police officers’ costs for
 the committal hearing (with additional amounts for the former police
 officers costs in the DPP judicial review, the powers judicial review, and
the South Sefton judicial review should the Authority choose to fund
these). It is recommended that a decision on whether to fund the criminal
proceedings to trial be taken only when the committal hearing has taken
place, so that the Authority can take its decision in the light of the results
from the committal.

At the time that the 1S99/2000 budget was fixed, it was forecast that, at 31
March 1999, the Authority would hold unallocated reserves of £3.2m,
        equivalent to 1.85% of the budget. In addition it was forecast to hold
        approximately £5.7m in various fearmarked” reserves, set aside for
        specific purposes including Hillsborough related costs as noted above.
       These forecasts are subject to adjustment when the final outturn figures
       for 1998/99 are completed. There are no specific guidelines as to
       proper” levels of reserves, although unofficially many Authorities work on
       the basis that an acceptable level is between 2% and 5% of the revenue
       budget. In terms of unallocated general reserves therefore, the Authority
       is marginally below the lower end of this range. If the earmarked reserves
       are included the position is considerably more comfortable and equates to
       the upper end of the range.

4.4   The 1999/2000 budget guidelines were extremely tight, and necessitated
      the Chief Constable implementing a programme of budgetary reductions
      in order to keep the Council Tax increase to the Authority’s target of 4.5%.
      These reductions were in addition to the Home Secretary’s required 2%
      programme of efficiency gains, approximately one-third of which were in
      cash terms.

4.5   Making additional provision available, therefore, would have a direct
      impact on policing resources at some stage, either as a result of
      reductions needing to be implemented in the current year’s budget, or
      longer term reductions needed in order to restore reserves to their current
      levels if the additional costs were initially funded from reserves.

£     Chief Constable’s Comments - Operational Considerations

      The Hillsborough Stadium disaster of 10 years ago was the single most
      traumatic event in the history of South Yorkshire Police. Lord Justice
      Taylor’s interim report, 4 August 1989, attributed blame to individuals,
      groups of individuals and organisations. The Chief Constable at the time!
      Mr Peter Wright, accepted that share of the blame which Lord Justice
      Taylor apportioned to South Yorkshire Police. He apologised for the
      force’s errors and that apology was repeated frequently by his successor
      Mr Richard Wells. I do not hesitate to accept Lord Justice Taylor’s
      findings. The collective failure of the Force on 15 April 1989 was a
      significant cause of the tragic deaths of 96 people.

      Successive Directors of Public Prosecutions have examined all the
      evidence and have decided not to prosecute any person for any alleged
      offence arising out of the disaster. The Coroner’s Jury in Sheffield
      returned verdicts of Accidental Death upon the 95 victims who died on the
      day of the disaster. The 96th victim lived until 1993, after his death the
      West Yorkshire Coroner returned a verdict of Accidental Death. Lord
      Justice Stuart-Smith, a Senior Appeal Court Judge, conducted a scrutiny
      in 1997 into claims that fresh evidence had been uncovered. His report,
      published in February 1998, clearly stated that he had found no new
      relevant evidence. Following the report’s publication a private individual
      commenced prosecutions against Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray. Thus 9
       years after the disaster, and after many previous enquiries, two long
       retired officers find themselves prosecuted for very serious offences.

        On the day of the disaster these officers were performing their duties for
        the benefit of the public of South Yorkshire. I believe they acted in good
       faith (the alternative is to say that they acted in bad faith) and I must
       consider the impact upon the conduct of the force if the Police Authority
       do not offer financial assistance to the officers to defend themselves.
       Police work involves the making of split second decisions which can affect
       a persons liberty and even their lives. If officers fear that they will have to
       pay their own costs in defending themselves against prosecutions, they
       may feel less confident in making difficult decisions, often in difficult
       circumstances. This particular case is an acute example because of the
       long passage of time between the incident and the prosecution, and
       because of the outcome of the previous enquires.

       I am aware of the impact upon the Authority’s funds that will be caused by
       paying the officers’ legal expenses. (Your Solicitors are putting forward
       sensible proposals to scrutinise these expenses should you agree to pay
      them). I would prefer that those funds were available to provide policing
      services in South Yorkshire today. However, the private prosecution of
      these two retired officers is relevant to today's policing problems. A
      decision not to pay the officers’ legal expenses will have an impact upon
      the conduct of the force and, to that extent, will affect today’s policing
      services in South Yorkshire. In these circumstances I support the
      applications, subject to proper controls.




W J Wilkinson                            M 11 Hedges
Clerk and Treasurer                      Chief Constable

Officers responsible:      W J Wilkinson, Clerk and Treasurer,
                           South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
                           Tel:

                           M 11 Hedges, Chief Constable
                           South Yorkshire Police
                           Tel:


Background papers used in the preparation of this report are available for
inspection in the South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat


Other sources and references: none
1 8 / 0 5 ' 9 9 1 2 :2 5                           HF S G               —   >                              Pg. 0!

             Vs3G* %




               sup pC                                                                              SG’PPO
                                   Hillsborough Family Support Group




             TO:                           David Hariock
                                           Garretts

             FAX NO:                       0113 207 9001
   /         FROM:                         Trevor Hicks

             DATE:                         18 May 1999

             FAX NO:

             TELEPHONE NO:

             NO OF PAGES TO FOLLOW:                          9

             MESSAGE:




             The information in this fax is confidential. Its contents are not to be disclosed to anyone
             other than the addressee except with the authority of the addressee. Unauthorised
             recipients are requested to maintain this confidentiality and immediately to advise the
             sender by telephone/fax of any error or misdirection in transmission.




                           Phone                Fax                   E Mail
                                                                                ]L iverp ool
18/05 '99 12:26                                H F S G                                                   P g . 02




                                          OUTLINE SUBMISSIONS

         1. DECISION OF DIVISIONAL COTTRT

        The Court decided that a Police Authority has power “....but subject to ordinary Law
        principles, to provide financial assistance to police officers and former police officers in
        respect o f their costs and expenses incurred in relation to private prosecutions brought against
        them and judicial review proceedings in which they participate.” The court refused to make           O/
        tne decision specific to the two defendants. Furthermore, whilst clarifying the power to fond,
        tne court declined to state when that power should be exercised, that is, whether it should be
        exercised at the start o f proceedings, during them or on their conclusion.

        The Court also refused to set out matters which the Authority should consider or disregard in
        determining whether or not it should provide financial assistance to officers. Indeed, to quote
        Lord Justice Laws: It is important that the declaration should not indicate any view taken by

 #      the court, for the court has none, as to whether the financing should actually be provided.”

        2..PREVIOUS SUBMISSIONS BY HFSO

        HFSG continues to rely on the written submissions forwarded to the Authority on 22nd
        December 1998 and 5* January 1999 with the exception o f those which touch upon the
        legality ol the funding. The submissions relating to the fourth^h^ge'^gainst Mr Duckeniield,
        (attempting to pervert the course of justice) are also irrelevant at this stage as the DPP has
        discontinued that charge.

        In particular, if the Authority decides that it has power to grant funding prior to any costs
        oemg incurred, the HSFG relies upon Annex C of its submissions of 5lh January (copy
        appended). Annex C contains a summary of the evidence on the charges o f manslaughter and
        misfeasance.

        3, RELEVANT MATTERS TO BE TAKEN INTO CONSIDERATION

        i)     As a primary submission HFSG strongly disagree with the Chief Constable’s
               contention that the defendants should have all their costs paid “up front”. Parliament
               could not have intended to provide for a system which is so open to abuse and
               manipulation. The previous conduct of the defendants and their lawyers gives rise to
               serious concern. In the Judicial Review proceedings the Chief Clerk to South Sefton
               Magistrates provided affidavit evidence. In his affidavit he stated:-

               “The defendants’ solicitors each submitted their claims for costs in September 1998. I
               was extremely surprised at the level o f costs which were being claimed, particularly in
               view o f the fact that neither o f the defendants or their solicitors had actually appeared
               before the court in relation to this matter” .

               Any decision to pay costs “up front” would offend against public policy.




                                                  Page I o f 3
18/05       '99 12:27
                                                           H F s G                " I        I                          P g . Q3




              ^         Availability o f legal aid or alternative *m irc.es n f fin d in g


                      The question o f the extent and scale o f the supply o f money from the public revenue
                      tor legal proceedings is a public and controversial issue. Detailed and highly regulated
    l   .           Provision is made by the Legal Aid Act. A proposal to give police officers a more
 n |\W K            expensive and privileged facility at public expense than is available to others would be
                      deeply contentious and socially divisive.

                     The legal aid scheme is available to a defendant but not to a prosecutor. Section 1 o f
                     the Legal Aid Act 1988 declares that its purpose is to establish a framework for the
                     provision o f advice, assistance, and representation which is publicly funded with a view
                     to helping persons who might otherwise be unable to obtain the same on account of
                     their means. According to Judicial Statistics for 1998, almost everyone who applies
                     for legal aid for criminal proceedings is awarded it. If a defendant is ordered to make a
                     contribution, the Court can remit such an order or order that any contribution should
                     be repaid where there has been an acquittal.

                     In addition, if press reports are correct, it would appear that the Superintendents’
   Nv ^             Association are prepared to consider funding the defendants i f approached. The
                     Association certainly contributed to their legal costs in the recent Judicial R e v ie w
                     proceedings.

             iii)    Whether the applicant for financial support has yet been found guiltv or acquitted A
                     police authority’s funds should not be paid to an officer who is said'to be criminally   S u
                     liable m his personal capacity. An officer who is later acquitted should receive his
        ?            costs from central funds or from the private prosecutor. An officer who is later               k PA
                     convicted should not be funded by the Police Authority                                 ^     9

             iv)    The extent to which financial support from the Authority, during the course o f
                     proceedings might preclude an award of costs in those proceedings in favour o f the
                     individual so supported. (It is clear from the assistance presently sought by the                             A
                     defendants that the Clerk to South Sefton Justices has not yet decided whether the
                     defendants costs can be met from central funds.)                                                              ™

             v)     The extent o f financial support previously granted to the defendants. During the
                    Judicial Review proceedings, HFSG became aware for the first time that both            /
                    defendants had their legal costs paid by the Authority throughout the 80 day inquest ' r M j U w t
                    Both had separate legal representation. The costs o f this must have been quite                  ^
                    staggering, Families paid £3,500 each for block representation at the inquest. Further,
                    the amount expended to date in the criminal proceedings must be quite considerable.
                    It is clear that open ended funding encourages delaying tactics and costmongering.

            vi)     responsibility to serving officers in South Yorkshire Police not to deplete the already
                    overstretched resources of the Police Authority..

            vu)     S outh Y orkshire P o lice, presumably with the support o f the Authority has always        ,
                    accepted that the deaths o f the 96 victims were caused by negligence.                          '

                                                             Page 2 o f 3
99 1 2 : 2 7      01512361936               H F S G              -->01132079001                       Pg




viii)      South Yorkshire Police have accepted, or at least have never challenged, the findings
           o f Lord Taylor that the negligence of which the defendants are accused was “a blunder
           o f the first magnitude” and an immediate cause o f death.

 ix)      The negligence o f which the defendants are accused cannot on any view of the facts be
          attributed to a “split-second decision”.

 x)       The PCA directed in July 1991 that the defendants should face disciplinary charges of
          necject of duty. Mr Duckenfield also faced a charge o f discreditable conduct. (At that
          time, Mr Duckenfield had been suspended from duty for two years.) Two weeks after
          the PCA direction, Mr Duckenfield, though suspended, went on “sick leave”. The
          Chief Constable retired him from the force on “medical grounds” in November 1991.
          The charge against him, therefore, lapsed. In January 1992 it was then considered
          unfair to proceed against Mr Murray. Next year, Mr Murray, too retired from the
          force on “health grounds”.

 xi)      The interests of the defendants and the Chief Constable may be different in this case.
           It is in the interests of justice that the defendants are represented by lawyers who are        f
           not paid for by a police authority whose Chief Constable has a powerful interest in
           maintaining exclusive control over so many documents o f relevance to the criminal
           case. Justice must be seen to be done.

 xii)          The DPP has decided that there is a case to answer. The Divisional Court has refused
               to overturn that decision. This surely is an indication of the strength of the case
               against the defendants and undermines previous decisions not to prosecute.

 * FUTURE CONDUCT OF PROCEEDINGS

 The Defendants are, o f course, entitled to legal representation and HFSG has no wish to deny
 them access to proper legal representation. If the Authority does decide to fund them, then
 strict conditions should be attached to the funding to ensure value for money. Checks and
 balances have to be imposed. Regular reviews should be undertaken by the members of the
 Authority themselves.
18/05 '99 12:28                                                H F S G                                                             P g . 05


                                                                               A n n ?v C



                                                          Manslaughter ond Misfaasatice

                       D a v i e D u c k er; field a^ d               ■»   ,
                          S^ ? sr«"tander.t in the South Yc-ksH'e P0T rSf peCt!vd>' a Cnief Superintends^                                    :
                             ;:!r:r=L'i’h S:ad|,iim. s ^ a w d , w j * ^ T m T        6 9 * " ? In* « c="™
                       —h 'vas io ce piayed b.t«,04« t •           ,   ?        when a serr.'-fira! ^     c A
                      Attached are c ta p t e , f ‘, 0 V 9                          Fores; football dubs"
                      tr.erein form the basis o f the all*™' '           me la -v lorRePon. The facts s - - ,•
                      ™            f™ra ,h=               - P ° n are S           S       ^    S   T    *   "       * • * ■»    T ta T

                                                        T* ^                                  criticisms of the po „ „    ^            and


                    L° rd Tay!0r Said « P"*S»*h 265 o f his report;                                                                              ^


                               * $ £ ? ? T ' ° f the i’TOSS o v e r c r o p a V                                         ••
                               J . 1 “hrs' When Ga* C was ooened to c -                                              * C,saster w*s
                                    ;cn were already overfull." *                                  ofT«ccess t0 Jne centra! pens


                   a lm o s t all c a s e s d e a t h                                 at tne m,ni fnq u e s : s in 1590 w a s th?r n
                  ^ ' t nsi * » fenow rt the in,^sh o f syi ; ™ “ C?n?'.?usr'K i ? « W * caused fev the
                      i-.cer to open the ijr.tes. and a M u-*         ‘.. ? * " cr :r'e :iv° raw. foilouiru
                  u““                                         * u . t ip.e incoming spectators from cer*3

                  M r D 'jc k e n fie id was in o v ^ a i :                       ■   •
              ! * * o f dec®ons which led to th-‘c S h i - °                                     r!5-=or‘sibi2 for the decisions a-d
              knew the ground better He had b ™                                                              * « * responsible;, "H,
               u>-“!ca. semi-final the year before wh°n t-e r                                 ^ t'OSitJOn 01 responsibility a: the
              Lepptngs Lane end ofthe-Tourc 'a " •»“
              “ < « W occurred but

              ,     , ^  ______                                    ~ 10 th° Se overcrowded
                                                                                     w mf
                                                                                              rp00'1SLiPPorTers were also at

                      < « < * » .* supporters from th'e tunreT vKcM , Z Z * " * ' * • » * ■ « 0 f di—
                                                                                             pcr*5
                                                                                             pens.
                                                                                                        '^ - p p o . e r s         3

                                                                                                                                       S
                                                                                                                                                 %


                   ckenfleid. Wi:ft ,he a=—                    < or                                             ^         *
18/ 05 '99 12: 29      01512361936                            H F 3 G                 -->01132079001                             Fg. 06




                      i he wuness statements already provided to the defence provide co^err e v ^ : - ;
                                    T min? T ? hrer and misfeasance allegations, combined with admissions
                     and'tneT^^                      fendant Ir; })‘f vanous statements, and evidence to the Inquest
                     uathe^n ^                      r Many exill° lts such as videos, photographs, plans etc,
                                                   •i0T    p-urposes o f the T^y!or Inquiry by the West Midlands
                     them over           "             ^                S° “th Yorkshire         have so far refused to hand
                                                                                                                                     V.
          Son, '/'.ittm l.\ o j the p i osecution evidence already served.                                                            S/
                                                                                                                                      h   .

                    HFSG                      £fter' thS “Sf dtiny"' many statements became available to the
                                       had,neVer S£er‘ before- because the South Yorkshire police controlled
                     : :      ‘1,e2:cmve e l e m e n t s and exhibits. The statements o f3 5 witnesses have
                    sp ecia l-a                                     ^    Sh° W 23 f° Il0WS- In 1928 PoIice officers dive-t<H
                    s S ? ,? .                ™   !ead!ng t0 th° Se PSRS' (e- HiIton>- The unedited
                        0 ‘r ‘  ;  officers White and Lang prove the same, and suggest that it b?d b - n
   *                    ^ o f s ^ o r officers to ensure that the tunnel was closed when th‘ i t
                    Co^        bT    ^       svT           beS.C6n e2Si,y ^ InSpeCt° r 'White f!'°m the s:ePs
                    edi>in«                  • a           6V1Qr    e WaS su PPressed unti!            (T h e question o f
                                                   “               * * • > hin i9 s 9 ; * ■ « «*»><«        m         .      *
                                      s p e . t a o r , s.ratgru into the tunnel, and it was impossible to turn back


                i here
                The
                           ^-hs i.q em ersion <iwsy rr-orn this tunns!
                    '.ad to «rO vVttn the CrnwH  f n r f*--          ...                                        . Spectators
                                                                                  cerfoot.                 Spectators were

                                         J^ T he centra, pens m m e terraces were packed at 2 . 5 0 prnl

                the                U£Sk f !d tna:. at 2 -4 0 !t w a s n o ^ going to be possible to acc ommodate ’
                              ,0UlSiae 1 ,C L e PPin=s Lane entrance in those pens. P.C. W a b o l e s^vs *hI
                u'/ercrowGing w a s ob viou s at 2 5 5 om P C B ro ok s               ‘p? r * \ •    ‘
                   2 .5 0 p m                         " ‘               ■orc°.<i says m e central pens were too rj!l


   *    1nt' position o f the defendants


               C ! o t T ‘f'd d and,M u m y “ ere lhe Cor‘" cl B ox Tlwy could see the central pens
               c osed circuit ,el=v,s,0 „ gave then, » even better view o f she per.s Five ^ u t e s a ^ r

               a; the mms-«es h Leha" h“ asked for helP t0 relieve Possibly life-threatening pressure
                                Leppmgs Lane, Duckenfield, with the acquiescence and tacit

               the already c w^wded
                         y cr°    d JPens.
                                      o ^ Thousands
                                           r f ^ T surged
                                                    ^     b' the
                                                          m:  ° P'deaths
                                                                  nCd W'Ih°   Ut people
                                                                         o f 96  closing were
                                                                                         ° ffac“
                                                                                              the“ >°
              in the Cont-o ?                   ^               ^     °" dUty at the semi' fina! in 5933
              DuckenfieM L r L r ° f P^ y           Sd “ 1989 t0 give the pr°Per and obvious ^vice.
              the C o n S Rn L° r^ ayI? r S7 ° rds' Ufroze” Both defendants admit their presence in
                     the T;v     2nf Ducker‘f-s!d admjts that he Iied about matters shortly afterwards.
              S ‘5 tL t        P° SUpP° rterS br° k£ °P £n the         If is a travestv o f the case to
              s-o^est that it concerns a “split-second decision."
13/D5   ‘ 99       12:29      Q 1512 3 6 1 936                                   H F S G                       -->01132079001                                       P g . 07




                             ■ .                                                  ^ the
                                                        d i s p o s e .all pens Before tneBBC   photosraphs
                                                                                           cate was             2=d 20!h=;
                                                                                                    o o e - ^ d and    h r r - vid-
                                                                                                                               'v ; -.___- _ -
                            ccvmus overcrowding »fier [he ga:e5                                      '£            • haS Dr^ided'-'C                                ..
                                                                   <**• < W              and surrounding c i r ^ t ^ f                                 “    “   S" " *

               A'Jmixvonx math by Ditckvnfiehl


                           {Tavior   u ^ l d /5                                           !° 0ked r° Und th£ £round 0n r ' A PriI ^ 3 9
                           tm td x lT Z ':-' «                               I m pre?ara£ton for the m alch - H e d o e s not dispute that he
                           fig)    *   1 F‘ 0Diemi                         01 tunne! and pens. H e w as aware o f the central tunnel, ( q '




               U           ro^ atcT th - ! !T fT                              ' ? ely *° graV‘UtC t0Wards the cen,ral        irthey IH-d
                           wav to the t e ° ?cin.                  m       tf       * ? * * 80,1 ( Z W m - p 119 >- and « w * e obvious
                        towards the - . n n » l \ w    " m'e                         in “ 0l!'d * rivitiw                                                                      A
                                    .unnel, w m m t or not r.c wanted to go directly behind the goal. .                                                                        ^

                        D^ ' e."'J d s ^ ‘""ce. at first, was that crowd management and fi'lin*’ o f c e r s w-s --

                        1-    0 -“   c 3 nS‘° '-y bU‘ thi- ° f ' he C,ub ( ' “ )• bu! Faier ■* “ W hS did aoprecirV7^‘
                       ttat officer's f‘t , h . Ub™ t-‘' ' s ' i T h T n° ° V*n T f f * i“ , h e p e "s ( I 3 4 B > K * m i
                       cro-le~ s                                    L e con cou rse ben,r.c tr.c tunnel, should k n o w the
                       e i - - ^ s' : t d I t . -                   W ,ne ' ° Cat,0n (1 2 7 ) - D “ = - « - e ! d ' s ow n doctnrer-
                                 s . s . c lfla, c u r j o o is to ensure the safety o f spectators” (! 3 7 )


                                                               b y r ' 30 :h2t i h M                                       f - P«™ 3 and 4 and
                                                                                  - nd spre- d a!ons ,h e t e r r 2 c e s '        (25/5       P?-S= I2 ' 3)
                       About 2 4                 .: n    v  ;? s                • '* ; * 0n. m ' “ VK* o t Superintendent Murray (2SA)
                       by 3 pm c p     a   ' p   ,       n“ t          °    r    S :,ear :h a :.the>'  n o : g o i n g to g e t all the crowd ir.




                                                                                                 t h i t   ^       *   “   *   *   w a s   " i i k e , y   10
         •7           Duc.Nen field
                                    c o n c e d e d that when the s ec o n d request came to o o e n the cates tha' w 's
                      the tim*> u
                      t;v= r-!- . - - ^ e - ’-eptn°^Ughr ?‘b° Ut WhCre                           W° U!d g ° ' ( 4 1 3 ) ' 'T hcre w°a's o f course"                            ^
                      that it was'prein;                            ^                       ^    COmrriand t0 ° P en the gates. He W
                      centra! s e c t i o Z that th                         LU,UraI s e c i w m ' and that the tunnel gave on to those the

                      X T '™           ? * * ' *"                                                                                                               t
                                                                                                                           m               °"s ia ck,x ,he
        !S

                     U o % u f e T -r Crac« 1 „ei - l ° 7 Ver- * T   M “ id “ his              “I watched the
                     H7D Fl -t ’              inten.Iy for any developments as a result o f the Rates o o - w "
                     K7D-E) I was concerned to see what the effects o f openin? the ~         ~    Inf'       S'
                     p«p_e into the ground would have." (47E-F.) -There was a 'p o ssW v o f                *
                     c» v .c .o w G m g ev e r y w n e r e .” (5 2 G )

        19
                     D u .k ..lJelG accepted that “I made a mistake but in faci other officers should have
18/05   '99 12:30                                    H F S G                                                      Pg.   08




                    remedied that mistake by using their initiative.” (9 2 B ). K e w ou ld have expected that
                    an jn sp ec tor or individual officers w ou ld have raced to the tunnel and taken action.
                    (■?j 3X (Or course, only th ose in the Control B o x had sight o f all relevant parts o f tha*
                    -, . g or the g round ana the area behind the turnstiles).


                    Or. / d'" May 19S9, Duck en field accepted that it was important to warn police officers
                    a.id ste w a id s inside tr.e ground tnst tne gates w ere to be op ened. Supt Murray took on
                    tr.e responsibility o f trying to contact L o c k o f Sheffield W ednesday, (p ace 1 0 - U ) . He
                    also told Lord Taylor that he knew w h en Gate A op en ed that a serial o f officers
                    termed a funnel to divert them from seeking to enter the stands, w h er e entry was by
                    special ticket. There w e re no such arrangements for the tunnel. This important
                    eviden ce s h o w s fo reth ou ght about the consequences o f op en in g the gates, and made
                    the possibility o f crushing eve n more obvious.


                    The prosecution will invite a court to conclude that these admissions sh o w gross
                    negligence, causative o f death; and furthermore, they will submit tha: they disclose ?.
                    w anton and perhaps angry disregard for the safety o f people in the pens, when, other
                    people, w h o m D u ckenfield regarded as o f the same ilk, w e re causing him ?. serious
                    problem outside the ground.


                           rnatively, th ese facts su ggest incompetence, and a very bad or crass attempt to
                    avoid an already dangerou s situation, attention is drawn to R v. Bateman { 1925)* 10
                    Ci. App. R. 3, approved by the H o u s e o f Lords in R v. Adaivako, in which
                inco m p etence in a person exercising specialised or expert functions \vas held capable
                Oi amounting to g r o s s negliger.ee (in that case the defendant w a s a doctor''


         Ly klcnce \K<-u)).sr M urray on M anslaughter a n d Misfeasance


                *- ‘S su^u.iited ii.at the respor.sioility or Murray tor manslauuhter and misfeasance is if
                anytmng greater than Ducke.nfield’s. T he following extracts from his evidence to the
                i ay lor Inquiry' and Inquest are relied on for the purposes o f the present review, as
                evidence o f tnese t w o offences.


                M u ray nad occupied the same role in 1988 and 1989 and had written a report on the
                match afterwards, in May 1988. He had taken a leading part in policing a Hillsborough
                game between Sheffield Wednesday and Liverpool in January 1989. (Taylor Inquiry,"
                ■i 1/ 3 , p 63). ( His involvement was well summarised in cross-examination at lsf June
                 1589, page I, by Mr Woodward: he had been involved in the 1988 semi-final; the
                review o f the 1988 semi-final; and the planning and preparation for the 1989 semi­
                final. A copy o f his review in May 1988 o f the 1938 game was read out at to him at the
                Inquest (Day 67. page 140)).

         25     The pens were often filled up in accordance with directions from the Control Box.
                Omcers would direct fans down the tunnel. This did not apply to the semi-final,
                however. No officers were briefed to keep a specific eye on the filling o f pens 3 and 4
                *5/4. (31/5, p 67). Neither Duckenfield nor Murray gave instructions at oral briefing.
13/05   '99   12:30      01512361936                   H F S G
                                                                                -->01132079001                          p g . Q9




                      Murray’s role was overall charge of the Control Room and adviser to Duckenfie’d.

                      Murray said his role w a s as “adviser” to Duckenfield. (6S D -E ). The policy was to let
                      rne^ans fine tneir o w n level" (/ S B ) . At about 2 . 3 0 pm, “I did not consider whether
                          c w a s room m any particular pen. I was locking at the rerrace as a w h ole and the
                   1      wtan^ an° me Wes: Stand.” Murray thought there were sa te s which supporters
                   used to m o v e b e tw e e n pens.


                   Murray c o n c e c e d that n o instruction was given to close o f f the tunnel to anv ooiice

                  ° irtl/ 7 / ? o ° r S^ T a^dS’ and that there may have been four reciu s sts to open the gates
                  U        'is ■>. p , _ ) . i he request was to open the gate s “ in the plural".


                  It :s submitted that Murray's account at page 9 3 G is in effect an admission to criminal
                  re c \,e ss n e ss . H e admitted at E, “When I saw the g ates opened I was obviously
                  . o o m that [pens 3 and 4] direction". Ir was put to him that '‘the obvious place to
                     ti.ern to g o w as d o w n the tunnel;


                             ^ It is n o w that I know. I know the ground. I k n o w where the tunnel is. I
                             .\novv w h er e C g a t e is. I had never drawn any s o n   of   realisation that cecoie
                                                                                                                                   %
                             com ;ng tnrough C gate would g o towards the tunnel, or whatever. I h a v e - e v e :
                             envisaged C. g ate as an entry gate o f course, but the tw o things did not register
                             c:d not tie up. It seem ed so obvious after the event but certainly I irav
                             tnougnt ana no realisation b e f o r e . *


                     c .o ss -e x a m m a tio n , Murray emphasised that he thought tha: fans could move from
                  :en to pen. H o w e v e r , he con ceded that pens 3 and 4 filled up first because th;i V W ;
                  popuiar; and they tended to fill up to the back ( 1 18D-F)


                 f: 15 su5mitted that rhls fact *^akes his assertions that suooorters could w - i - thr0 .-.*
                       gates b etw e e n the pen s meaningless and irrelevant, w h en thousands w=;c uuur
                 ^ r o u g n gate s that had b een opened to relieve a terrible and constantly intensifying
                  -! S “ . i lurray c o n c e d e d to Mr Woodward, for South Yorkshire c o iice that zj ~ 46
                 'icccrcinu to photographs', the terraces looked “ pretty full", (1 /6 /8 9 , pane 3)


                 ^ . answ er io q uestions from Lord Taylor. Murray seemed to a c k n o w le d g e that it had
                 oe^.i an option for the p o lic e to fill up the pens in series at the match (1 7 )

                 At iwe Inquest, Murray accep ted that he had full authority to take steps to avoid the
                           0CtCuPa n t s ° ^ the ground as a result o f opening the gates, had he recognised
                     ‘    riSK- ( D a y 6 7 , p a g e 3 1B-C). H e would not have b een dep endent on
                 D u ck e n iie ld ’s authorisation for any such steps.


                 Murray acc ep ted at p a g e 4 3 D that the police “had a role to play as regards the
                 distribution o f sp ectators across the Leppings Lane terraces.” S e e also 45A . At pase
                 ^ SL, he acc ep ted that the police had a duty to monitor the build-up and filline o f the
                              efore klck*u P- A t              5 6 B -D , he accepted that “ there may w e ll have come a
                 i ■ e w h e n it w a s n e c e s sa r y “ for him to divert supporters from the central pens. (It is


                                                                5
1 3 / 0 5 199 12: 31                                                     H F S G                                                               10




                                              CaSC that h£ shou!d have P*»t in hand this diversion in anv ev—
                         b ecause t e e o u ter p e a s w ere sparely occupied).                 '      '     '

               34
                                                     Haf be? br° Ught t0 his £ttention that the centra! cer.s w e -e
                        .•„*                        m r“ £ s , d e P e ns. he would have taken s o m e action 5SD ~ t.   ’
                        , . e pro secutio n c a s e tha, that fact was abundantly clear to a n ^ . e w h o l o c f c “ “


                               • h - D u c ' r a ' hr C0Uld have S0! manPo w c r 10 bl°<*        sunne! b the five
                        and 7SA)'                     WM c o "s,derirf '*■;= request that the g ate s be opened. ( 7 ' D
                                     i» n vv uiat wne tunnel was in tnat p an o f the concourse, (page 86C-S7E)
            JO

                        f i i n t t T C<i    ° nCe ~ ‘S Sh° Wn by Ph otoS r2Ph* video recordings and tslevis-or
                        film that the pens w e r e effectively full, or even nearly full, at the time the  ve -
                                        ° 2ieS againSr b0th Murray and Duckenfield becomcs very powerful The
                              u z2 0r0 m - f a c?il i t ivisible
                       z z s Vvun                        e s , in t from
                                                                    h a t B oihe
                                                                              x . c°n,roi * * - d -

           37
                       :k ? J !S e ^ e0Tb^ e ? !ati° ^                           Murray £nd Duckenfield is not manifest from
                                                          ? f yJ 36 IBierred that there was at   c o oln ess betw een them
                                                                  t0   l° f ! ° *V^ rray for £dvice and support. Duckenfleld had
                                                  a nigher rank tha" M ^ ay very recently. Murrav w as three ve.rs
                                        m -o re experienced at policing o f this kind. The Question by
                         ^“                  -pSn: hS GateS- Mr Duckenfield?" d oes not s h o w a w im * r ^                          ‘ ~
                       ^■peratu’e relationship.


                                                 •■nr‘'                  C te 8 Ph t e Authority rightly recogn ised that the c f c w e
                                            S f . • Tne reCKlC“ 0 r « « * * « * * ( • » decision to open the
                              -•    .vs.,.a Oil »ne pens w a s tne responsibility o f both defendants.


                                                              aVai.lable’ and Previo«sly concealed, about oractices in 1983
                                       ° ^ e eVlde" e - * SUggeStS that ° thSr Sv’d ence exists, proving
                    a-d i-res— V ^ ^ r Cl        f       Ko we v e r ' ev“n Without that n e w 1938 evidence.
                    e ; i d i r c ^ ; ^ r ^ ^ e “ e f ; h2f the Scuth Yorksh‘re PoHce is guarding much more
                    against both defe ndants.                                    U “ Submuted that th^ e is powerful' evidence

          40
                    -O ^uc*        0^    0   ^       t0 T     T        fj r t; ! r evidenC£’ given by other P ° !ice o n c e r s , about the
                     ^ C t h i t . n " ° ° efe n d f S- THe pr° S£CUti0n              Ca“ " « * o f th em as witnesses,
                    available      ‘ p p f 0 p n a t c after a revjew o f the Sheffield archive, o n c e it becom es



                                   I aCt- \ dx ? WrJ fr0m the Tay!or re?0rt and the avai!ab!e ev idence, are to be
                                     j       M r Dair.es inappropriate suggestion that funding by the S Y P A was
                         sary ; 0 maintain morale among officers who had to make “split second
                    decisions,”                                                    F       JI,L




                                                                                  6
SKELETON ARGUMENT ON BEHALF OF BERNARD DEAN M URRAY

SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY MEETING                          2 1   M AY 1999

     B D Murray.

               Police Career;
               Position without Hillsborough;
               Repeated statements o f sympathy;
               “On duty3’ until collapse of health 8 July 1992.
               Present health of BDM
               Source o f and present financial position;
               Assurances given;
               Summonses served 26 June 1998.

     The request - 28 June 1998.

     The response - 29 June 1998.

     The status and behaviour o f the Prosccutor.

     4.1.     Intervention before SYPA and Divisional Court (see extract);
     4.2.     Challenges to Chief Constable’s locus;
     A -3
              Consequential need for BDM to issue Judicial Review application rc: funding
              only because of 4.2;
              Laws LJ and Latham J in Divisional Court;


     Divisional Court.

     5.1.     SYPA have the power to fund defence of M and D and fund Judicial Review
              against the DPP (page 34 extract);
     5.2.     Laws LJ - D P P m a y Have la w fu lly decided to discontinue (page 22 extract).

6.   Profligacy.

     6.1.     Eleven in Court - the facts;
     6.2.     HFSG instructed Jones QC for submissions even before the issue o f summons;
     6.3.     Jones QC. at every hearing mostly supported by Junior Counsel;
     6.4.     Contrast, Harrison QC and Clegg QC at only one hearing, RBM and SBE
               substantially undertaking advocacy;
     6.5.      Adlington paid by Liverpool City Council on sccondmcnt;
     6 .6 .   HFSG started proceedings in wrong Court;
     6.7.      Continuous discussion with SBE/RBM to avoid duplication/keep costs down;
     6 .S.     QC’s advjccs that they would not have advised M and D any differently however
               the case was being funded.
  Estoppel/legitimate expectation.

 7 .1.       Laws U , original decision o f SYPA not ultra vires;
 7.2.        As decision lawful, binding contract;
 7.3.        Request, approval, acceptance and performance;
 7.4.        Broach o f contact for SYPA not to perform;
 7.5.        Expectation implicit and explicit;
 7.6.        Expectation manifested in inquest and prosecution;
 7.7.        Legal Aid not retrospective;
 7.8.        Further continuing detriment, no Legal Aid determination until the decision of
             SYPA;
 7-9.        Costs incurred in rcliancc upon approval by SYPA


 Prospects o f success.

 S .!.       After Taylor, two QC.’s and DPP “no reasonable prospect o f conviction”;
 5.2 .       Coroner's jury- accidental death;
 8.3.       DPP review as 8 . 1 ;
 8.4.       Stuart Smith LJ “ new evidence'1, no basis for prosecution;
 8.5.       Stuart Smith s scrutiny acccpted by both DPP and Home Secretary., further
             assurances, no prosecution;
 8 .6   .   December 1998 DPP rc-affirms view, no prospect o f conviction oJbeit declines
             to take over and quash because private Prosccutor docs not have to have regard
             to prospects;                                                             °
8.7.        Noted by Laws LJ that DPP may have lawfully decided to discontinue;
8 .8
   .        Opinions o f Harrison QC and Clegg QC.

Position of Chief Constable and South Yorkshire Police Authority.

9.1.         Chief Constable has duty to maintain an cffcctive and efficient Police Force for
             its area.
9-2-        Principle remains, a Police Officer should be able to carry out his duties in
             confidence that if he acts in good faith and exercises his judgement reasonably,
             his Police Authority will support him;
9.3.        Chief Constable has said that if this support is not given he will h a v e a discipline
            and recruitment problem;
9.4.        Association of Chief Police Officers and Superintendent’s Association both re­
            affirm 9.2 and 9.3 above;
9.5.        Through M and D this prosecution is an attack on the whole o f the South
            Yorkshire Police;
9.6.        Specific accusations by HFSG o f covcr up include conspiracy between South
            Yorkshire and West Midlands Police.

Decisions sought.

10.1.       As from 28 June 1998 confirmation and continuation o f payment by the
            Authority o f costs and disbursements on the charging basis already agreed in
            defending the criminal proceedings instituted by HFSG;
10.2.   Confirmation that the financial assistance in 10.1 above includes the costs and
        disbursements in the Judicial Review proceedings;
        10.2.1.        Against the DPP and the costs awarded against M in this regard;
        10.2.2.        In relation to the funding subjcct to the reimbursement o f any
        costs recovered under the Order for costs against Ann Adlington;
10.3.   In the event that the Chief Clerk South Sefton Magistrates’ refuses to meet M’s
        costs out o f Central Funds then the payment o f costs and disbursements for
        Judicial Review o f this decision.
10.4    If M is found not guilty or proceedings are dismissed or withdrawn and an Order
        for Costs is made either against HFSG or out o f Central Funds then the
        reimbursement to SYPA of all costs recovered less the cost o f enforcement of the
        same.
i3.MPY'SS 17:13
                                                                                       P .S




  MR A JO NES QC and MR ,J_LSWIS (instructed by the Hillsborouch
      F am ily Support Group, Liverpool) appeared for the Second
      Respondent.


                                          PROCEEDINGS
                                (A 3 Approved by the Cour t!
                                        CROWN COPYRIGHT




  LORD    J U S T I C E LAWS: Ms Eaxendale,             I an*. sorry but before vou

         snare     there        s a preliminary matter I want to raise.                    v,7a

         'ncici 2. fax f

         saying tLh.c„t             ; is right Mr Jon.es, you may be rs

         to be     in Lh            jrdships House this afternoon and

         wo uld wi she'

         h$   rd   V
                   -’*.#•1«*W                           .he ordinary way the

         would at or.                                   out -l nsvs a ceeper

         uroble m .        A        cem ent             not understand what ye:::

         client    '9     lei

         int ere st in

      'ONES : M y L c

                   If I (

         ir.stan t m a t

         L a t h a m J.     \

       was gra nte d on Friday 1 2 t h .Fe br u a r y .                 We had sent in a

       note on that day or the day before indicating that we

      w i s h e d to be heard in opposition to the application or




                                              Pacre 2




                                      ^ L t+ ta /        dal Ce**nReporter*
 had rightly said without any opposition at the time.

 however,   did net have in mind that your clients would be

 pu t tin g forward any arguments which were the arguments

 of the Police Authority.          You would simply be there to

 deal with any discrete point which m a y affect your

 client and no one else.          That would be the normal course

 that one would expect of the second r e s p o n d e n t .                         So

 I would certainly feel that you ought not to be under

 misapprehension when I directed that you be made second

 respondent because that was afforded to enable you to

 range widely in the debate,            again in relation to any

 discrete point that your clients felt you ought to

 raise.

'nN S S : Kv Lords I   3   m crateful    for the indication anc

 I will put that argument         tomorrow morning.

JUSTICE CR2S3W2LL:         Mr Jones,    for my part,                     as my Lord has

 oointed out,    the   court    has your skeleton and                        I   would

 encourage you to reflect on the position and the role of

 a prosecutor and the importance of the position taken by

 a prosecutor.     It would be most extraordinary in my

 experience if any prosecutor attacked the funding of the

 defence.

JONES: My Lord,    if I may say so, jrty. Lord,                          it is now a

 regular event in prosecutions by the Serious Fraud

 Office and the Crown Prosecution Service in cases in




                                Page 6




                                        Officio/ C ourt R tp e r ttr s
            i 3 . r ^ f l Y ' 9 9 i ? : 19

        7                                                                                    ^ Sa^ Ywiodr* fofca



                                 fiCCll - (41) t i e V°i a t « °* otily ieUM * * *“" * ^ 14^ Th°S*
        p e« W » s, - k « » » * s6 « 2} ”      „                            role « „ * , d s t e rather

                                                     e_   fc £ le i 5 d e« d y t d i ^ t o » « » ^ ,!“ 4c*y i s ”
              powers, though in sane                                             fariudiBg tiio* eotfsw d in
        * , —                   « . . . —          * ■       r           r       £      2     -    ^                .


        die exrent that rottsvrts * ctc                        ,          in * fctipful note
                          a^» ^ 1 9 7 2 The powers so conferred fft nsicu
        s. 145A(1) of A t A .          •               t0 « t th m o ut Tbty include
        prtmd** by Mia* Btxendtle.       » 11                    ^atm cat of staff ted fee
         * * * s. 111C1» « A                    matters--as ^ ; ^ o u        «d « » >

         tcqiiisition and disposal of land.


                                 -Tie Critical point which in a y p i p > ^ ' mcgW &° ® 1 COT^ eraBon
T2
         0f * e interlocking ro l« of Chief Constable. S e= e« y of State *»4 P°u“ 1                                    “
         * « * csnaot have been wi^in the contanplarion of M * « * »
         ,e h « « . and m en*ra=ia*                       it S.11H1). t o the police autfconty should      o n ly       b*
1   o
         OTpTO- « d to incur expenditure in support of those duties, and a n g a ry powers,
          which are specifically conferred upon it, The police authority holds the * » b ftom

18
          which expenses for fe local police force wffl he supplied: s.14. It is inherent m the
          system (as Mr Baker E m itted in «pW that the O fef C onsole will appty to fce
          authority for authorisation to incur expenditure; it maybe 6 r the use of resources reck

21        as helicopters, or the installation of video surveillance systems in                    ^eets, ° T 1
          of other things. Mo doubt the Chief erasable presents s general budget. We were not
          referred to any provision la S trn t which show or suggest! that the police rahonty s

24
          power to acccde to such requests rests in anything other than the eombraanon of s.6(1)
          ta d s, 111(1). Given this, it stems to me plain that, in the particular context before us
          in this cu e, the                        s^S* < * * * ancillsty power provided by s.U 1(1) cannot be

27
          restricted so as to support only those powers tad dntjea which are expressly coofeued
          oti’the police nflhority. Those powers sod duties tre thtm ahes aurillsiy; though they
          a n w y impoctmt, they lake s e c ^ i place to i t Chief C - j- H e ’a taaieal role, and

30        second place also to the S m eary of S t^ ’a a * * * * wle. S.1U(1) must in contott
          (wfcttevw it does in a & tr c*s«5)                     ^ P01^              » support whit its cxpetxx
                                                                  .31-
          Dn* a             \m k u

                                             RECEIVED TIME30. MAH^
                                                                                                       t-y «»-AT mm
                                                                                                                                          P. 9
                                                                                                                 .«< s—**■
                                                                                      *’                                       mm     *

     g g S S E S * * * * * * ^                                                                               ,               co n te n d

                           , «m «rt;o> li* isi3B 0l‘S lto lB S ,      *md Oficen’ tegal
     .o w e * «ad i a o a «1» sapped            . priaciple * side t0          , . . th_                                                         /
                                                                                                                                                 /
     V s y 3 .« « - I f * * l u D 8 ^                    , - s * « * e y » * > ,to d ,0 y                                      . „f .B
         C tirf C
         Cfcief   o n n i e m ri*
                COnyawi'-     ^ p.                                -     - ,w



0                                                   m d. if only a «'(8WW> by * ' d' a a °n ^ ^ ^
                                 TU, rtsul’. « * W ° m * ■ »                  I9S», w repon-i save »

          fa * v f r A f d * ' FoU“ AU* ° rity “ £                     t ' toisiott of the police - t o * not »
          I * rfm «). The conn had “ ‘ “ f                                      officcn * , * & » to *n * u t a s
          — tribute to tic legil rtpm w 5 0                                                              ^          edcj aS ar of s.6(l))

          r     "       , »      « , —                                                                           #’ . * *        *        -

12
           provided the po«a to * - »                                   o4e                              ta l962 lie repcn of f t.
           Mt ^                  The                                                       ^                 *e * —
              K oval Cotm32ls5i°C’ on                                                    officers is ci^d proceedings,
                ^                                    t                sutKKJtt to police o m c « i
15            b rtu to n to the                                   H c o b b l e mat t h»ve « * - in S° ° 4 “ fll ”
              which jiictwJed a r*       _                            l%{&)) ?a^ l97 stUcd:
              Intended execution o f h b oty”                                 _            * * ^ een a private p r o te c tio n ,
                         “In Bnglftod m d W t M * distinction « * ’                            constable wW be taken on the
    18
                         I* Which the                                                      « * • Pttb„r,C                            br0Ugt,t

    21


                                                                                       1 .f.n ito r v             duty to maintain *n
    24
                          u       lCtjn g in p u riu tn e* of its *en*™                            f         ^     police authority has
                                         *W “ *                              ^ a ' V officer, £ .n kind, of * * >
                          dfceretion to « e t                            ‘”Cv t , cttd in good fttth in p « n w ii« of
    27
                                             Z                            fo ri* U . whoIe .r e — Wed...

     »                                           h c v f c g 'W         d         r        t   t         a         in the » « 114« c e the.,
     30                   X T uT om cer                     b.                                                     r— »Wy. *
                          5     to « « , b, , 0 * 0 * *       “ <*                             • 1— * - * ? ■ * * £
     33             '         £u U *m
                              *utW    y will
                                    r«y  WU«                  ,                   _  tie * ttthomy
                                                                         ofl-Ic. r, the ..th o rity i,
                                                                              - 1                               ,_ ^ i

                              b!? * >
                              b^    t ,‘ r pr!^ ! ! 2s a “ t K          «“ t * * 0^                    ,h0“ ,d P
                                                                                                       >h° “id prOTid‘ ° r
                              effker    *****           *
                              .dvice md/or rtpre«at*w n.
     36
                                                                            . 33 -

                 D « y i# W h * IW l^
                                                               ;;;.            ^                 wu p o b ^      « ■» » »
                                                            rvffifv* Circultr- 4/199
                      fita a y            1W    HW1S                         ^      ^          rf » p o*« « o * « W ”
          On
                  ~ *• .fi<a <»
                             «i *
                                * et ft®0®
                                     f« » « “ ^    * * * T ^ „ « « My v oorr** •e.«o ** «t r■<
                                                                                             'IPon
                                                                                               *»
          p ^ e s o r a W *«“ « *           v w MBo s a w « rf&c{“ “ ^                           r
          * * » « to                                       ^     ubvimuly « * » w « e •
          thciaw sm tfceje p r o e * * ^                                                 4* prnposes to be f c l S ^ ^

          Uw, m y V * W                   P»“ “      t r t S c . Act 1964: »ee P= « - * “ ^
           ,.«CQ*. P ^ « sor “ t Kl )      '- ‘                              976 r tf ta r f to to W o n . But there a e
           « u m Bristol D C v Clark [19 1 J                                       ^       h o o v er help&l « «=■ ** K
           * « * * * » * « « * « g07 ^ : ^                                   6 my                   f t * 5.111(1) » P r in c ^
           statutory coastmrtton. I wool pie ^                                                 ^    ^      pJrticipjlli(m to
           onpowcts tie SYPA to “ » “*                                       ^          ^ d c t i c m s touching .** coned
           judicixl review ;*g«i»* ^                                )l"Uf° . ,                               set out
1 2
                                  f                     I   .   •




                            •   !f * * L o * « « e ^                      t o a * * .* * * * * * # “                            °f   6 0

            ca« b th* sppiicsats’ fitvoc. However we he*d « *                                                  « the quesho.
15          case a              appu                                                    ^ v ^ o w e r ia say cu cu m sicices, to
            w te to , « » eoafentd o , tie poUce » *                             ^   B«=ni*le's
                            ♦ ^ ^ t c .c x c r e s s l y authorised- TJus engage
            uk* tefcon £o                                               ^ on ^ exprasio unius esi
                   ..    , . ias t w * . deserted it, trud her reliance on me a p
 !    8     proposmcm ( )                                                                                 hold, as   1   h*ve dene,
            txcliaio aherius doctrm*. ft only t o itlevsnce if 1 8111 ****0               ^ ^       .     rtT
                                              ui • cvda tn *^nd D and M even if 5.6(1) docs not
            thai 3.111(1) in-prindpU enables ttft SYPA to
                                      V -nrfn rt-» «vthhfi In tbis contest I will deal ofliy (asd that
 21         itself empower the anionty to do aaymng. ^
            shorty) w iis i8u( 4 ) o f * e AAc i off 1996.
                                                     -i(vv: which ts I tsvc siid is tiic high
                                                            whidifSiMv                     *- 'watcr-mzrk of

            rhis part of Miss Baxendilc’s argnfflrat
 24
                                 s i s ccmtiios . compid>ensive K b « « « to liability on the p u t of the
             p ,B «                        By ,.( 1 )               chief officer o fp o .ee fbc « poHce «               is ^
                        of m i e o ^ f l t d by e o a ^ l a « i e r hi, f e e t o m *                                           » *e
 27
             X          -                           f—                 - rf< ^ —               * ■ " * - •*
             wo» U b . « « k s ^ b « ^ t p o ^ < ^ m ^                                              Sm ,B abU t0ffi                        ■
 30          S$.(2) provide* o a p « t
                      “ X bcns                 b* p tid w t           ^    police          •
                                      !                                      -u -
     *Q         'CCJ 17:^1                                                                                   3
              =. — ^                        «*ut                  *v                rf*              rMi««
                                         lS-5Sm                        8x^«»Sau«a'f*»W>pr* ftpid <     h1

                       Lady on fhia F«« ° f * e « « Mt-Hw Jjoo sibniitwi <b« ** r=fia»i to
                   w&s jimply pavase. P » « «* “« ° r a w* ird*«" of 4 e Public im=rm
 consi<itr*ticas going the otSiO*way-


                       The DPP might, in rsy jadgraeo^ lawfully have                   to dMcontumc-
 The tragic ev era » Hillsborough have beta the subject of r e p e a l detailed* thorough
 inquiries. Nearly tea years htvc passed But the judgment w a s for the DPP to make. If
 viz zcotded to          Mr Hacrison’a ynfesisiion, wo wouW I think usurp the role o f the
          *
primary dccisian-miker.
                                                      1
                       In my judgment the-decision not to discontinue is no more unlawful th*a

fcs the policy which the D?P applied.


                                                     «*



ThzfirU applicant; stscmpting to                      the course o fjustice


                       Mr H irriioa discretely submits th*t the decision to let the charge of
trtssp d n g to pervert the cocne of ja rb « go                 wxs unlawful, bccsuse it iuns fl*t
counter to the ‘‘no         cjlsi ?o   sruwer” test in his own policy. It will be recalled that the

reasons letter ssicb
       “I concluded further tb*t it woold not be right to intervene in respect of the
       one red linin g ch irg t tg aiist Mr Ihickeafieid, of ittem pting to pervert the
       course of justice, i l b d t I htd formed the vkw th*t there w *j clearly no ctee
       to tm w er on t h i t charge skriew in the contcxt of the c u t * 1 * whole that
       ch*rge is not the gr*vtm«n of the crimlntHty »tfeged against M r
       Duekenfietd * ad I concluded that my *pproach to that efearge should be led
       by ray conduiion* o« the chargt* of measUBghter *nd wilfiil neglect to
       perfbrm it public duty.*

P tlls 5 and 6 of Mr Newell’* »£6d*vir rttfe u fallows:
       “5. I w t) fully iw xr* of the lerio iu *** of the •ddlHao»l charge. I abo
       te*titivtfy eondmded that partial Urterveaticjk.. was t» law open to the CPS
       tad I prreeted ta thit M«=ptloa* Hewenr, tie axiitinf pdiey did *ot
       caver A m *H w tio B ,w ^ strw e fa fU» « a * wmrfy                    *****   * • eaedusfen
1 5 -MP.Y-1S S 9       1 1 ; 2S        FROM          UJINCKluQRTH SHERWOOD                                                                                                      P .02/02

          W IN C K W O R T H SH ERW O O D                                                                                    35 C rc.it Peter Street
                                                                                                                             W estm in ster
          solicitors ano parliamentary agents
                                                                                                                             L o n d o n S W 1 P 3LR.


        Our ref:              SBE.'24332/l.'jeT                                                                              T c lcp h on e:                      ~
        Y our ref:            D M H /C X B                                                                                   Fax:
                                                                                                                             DX: 2312 VICTORIA

                                                                                                                             Direcr Line:
         BY FAX
         Garretts                                                                                                            Direct Fax:                     ______

         1 City Square                                                                                                       Em ail:!
         Leeds LSI 2AL
                                                                                                                             19 May 1999
         For the attention o f David Harlock
                                                                                                                                             Please note our new
                                                                                                                                               fax number above


         Dear Sirs

         R -v - South Yorkshire Police Authority ex parte Chief Constable of South \o r k sh ir e
         Police

         We re fer to recent correspondence, and Mr Eastwood’s discussion with Mr Harlock in
         regard to the further Opinion from Mr Clegg QC we have provided. We confirm that this is
         to be treated as confidential to your firm and the South \ orkshire Police Authority and not
         to be released further without reference to ourselves or Leading Counsel.

         We are grateful for your fax confirming the venue for Friday’s meeting and will await
         further advice as to the time when we are expected to attend for the oral submissions. In
         this regard, we have o f course seen the Skeleton Argument submitted on behalf o f Mr
         M u rrav. and have discussed this at length with Mr Manning o f Walker Morris. In the
         interests of cost-effectiveness, and given that much o f that Skeleton deals with matters
         relating to both Defendants, we will not be submitting a separate Skeleton Argument but
         naturally will adopt the submissions made by Mr Manning. We will, in an oral ^submission,
         deal with particular aspects relating to Mr Duckenfield,             set out m previous
         correspondence, and one or two other aspects which arise from the history o f this matter.

         Naturally if you require any further information or assistance prior to Friday s meeting
         please let us know.

         Yours faithfully




       /W in ck w o rth Sherwood




                                                                                          7 |V. "<VATT5                        The firm j> a m em b e r o f E H h H f tA iJ .
          haktkers                     STKJ»HJsN W I6 G S     TIOGFR. r i T T O N
                                                                                                                               cn in iem duonal netw ork o f lawyers.
          NICHOLAS OW>TnN              M
                                       UCH1 MACDC'JOAr.n      PA UL IK.V1NG               T A X CO. n' S w L T A N T
          tlM A N r lO O O             J O H N ' H.F.ES       1VONAI.H FaHR-ANTS          G CO k CE Tiu r.r -                  Tlic firm in repeated by Th« Law Society
          :*AUL M O ! U U S                                                               CO NS U LT A N T                     in ihc conduct o f tnvcsnneni business
                                       f-ETETV WIL LIAM S     ROBERT BOTKAI
          m iu I a LL T H A T “■HE?.   ANUKXW M U R R A Y     s im o n   Ea s t w o o d   fk -a n k ; k .o   2 ? o m o p,-
                                                                                                                               *Svrf?oUciu*r
          All.SMN           CiV        onusTomrfc. v!ne       kaomi      C O O U li


                                                                                                                                                                       TOTfiL P . 8 2
 W IN C K W O R TH SHERW OOD                                                                                         35 G re a t P e te r S treet
                                                                                                                     W e s tm in s te r
 SOLICITORS            ANO      PARLIAMENTARY       AGENTS
                                                                                                                     London SW 1P 3LR


   Our ref:              S 3 E \N A F O \2 4 3 3 2 -l                                                            Telephone:)
   Y our ref:            Y B F \33 41\S9                                                                         c    f      :--------------- 1
                                                                                                                  rax: |_______________ |
                                                                                                                     D X: 2312 V I C T O R I A
   CPS Central Casework
   United House
   Piccadilly
   York YOl 1PQ                                                                                                  9    October 1998

   For the attention of George R Croston
   Prosecution Team Leader


   Dear Sirs

   Hillsborough: Adlington -v- David Duckenfield & Murray

   We refer to previous correspondence in this matter, in the light of the requests made on
   behalf o f the Defendants for the Director o f Public Prosecutions to take over the conduct
   of proceedings, pursuant to Section 6 o f the Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985 and to
   discontinue those proceedings pursuant to Section 23. You have kindly provided copies
   o f the exchange of correspondence between your office and the Hillsborough Family
   Support Group (HFSG), and we refer specifically to your "policy letter" o f 27th July 1998
   outlining the policy to be adopted in cases o f this type, i.e., private prosecutions. We have
   been provided with copies o f the representations made on behalf of MURRAY by Messrs
   Walker Morris and would adopt those submissions on behalf o f Mr Duckenfield insofar
   as they relate to matters o f relevance to both defendants.

   Introduction

   The power o f the Director to intervene under Section 6 o f the Prosecution o f Offences Act
   1985 is unfettered. It is not limited to_a consideration o f the strength or weight .of the
   evidence but embraces a consideration of the wider public interest in whether a trial ought
   to take place.

   All the submissions o f the HFSG have concentrated on a perceived evidential basis for the
   summons currently issued. If the existence o f a prima facie case were the only basis upon
   which the Director could exercise the power under Section 6 then the effect o f the section
   would be largely redundant. If no evidence existed an information could not be properly
   laid and if no prima facie case was made out then the magistrates could not commit for
   trial. Were these the only circumstances in which the power under Section 6 would be
   exercised then there would never be any need to exercise the power. It is submitted on
   behalf o f Mr Duckenfield that the power o f the Director J s far. wider than a mere
   assessment of the evidence and embraces a consideration o f the wider public interest.

   The Director is well placed to assess where the public interest lies having had involvement
   in the case over a period o f nine years and having seen the Taylor Report, the Stuart-Smith
   Scrutiny, the coroner’s verdict, the judgment o f the Divisional Court and the review of
■•AKTNKRS                         S I riMIIIN WICGS           ROOMt HT I ON           I IM WAI IS                          fi«« is» member of S p S S i ! '
NH I mi AS I >'.!/■, I 1IN        IIUCII MACDOUCAI I)         t’AUI. lit VINO         HF-AD OF TAX                    j.i iii^nianmu              ’ -m”
llltl«N IKUIII                    |ill!NHH.S                  RONAI ]) I ARRAN I S   Cl'ORCI. I1L!I I ■               Tin: firn. » icgubMal by The IJWS«CKI>
t>Mfi MOKRIN                           HR Will IAMS           ROIil ,R I IIO I KAl   CONSULTANT                      ,„hc             of » » » « • « W
Ml.’I IA.....................               ANI1IUWMURRAY SI M< )N li AS I W<KII)    I It ANK It <>»S>>N <>111
                                  ( f 1It IS ! <H*l li:K VINI NAOMI                                                            tMt »
evidence and the advice o f leading counsel obtained when the Director made the decision not
to prosecute.

We understand and sympathise with the sentiments of the bereaved and injured who feel
understandably that someone must be made to pay for the disaster. We also understand the
disappointment they feel when at every stage the decisions made have been against any
recommendation for prosecution. It must be recorded that the lives of everyone involved in
the disaster have altered as a consequence of these terrible events, including that o f Mr
Duckenfield.

On the date o f the disaster he had only been in his post o f chief superintendent for 21 days
and this was the first operation o f this type where he had been in command. While the
impact of the events on him cannot be compared to the impact on those on the terraces they
were nonetheless personally catastrophic.

Until the disaster he had been a highly successful career policeman with 21 years o f service
to the community and 3 commendations for good police work.__________________________




Many factors combined to contribute to the disaster as Hillsborough and these have been the
subject o f the most exhaustive investigation by Lord Justice Taylor. One of them,-not
mentioned hitherto in the correspondence to the Director, is the construction o f pens on the
terraces with inadequate gates to enable fans to escape in the event o f an emergency. No-one
appreciated at the time the danger these structures presented although as a direct consequence
of this disaster they have been removed from every football stadium in the country.

We do not intend in this letter to repeat all the points made forcibly by Lord Justice Taylor
in his report nor analyse in detail the scrutiny of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. The Director is
well able to assess each and decide where the public interest lies in this case. Nonetheless
in view o f the assertion by the HFSG that a clear prima facie case exists, a view we find
ourselves compelled to "disagree with, and in the light of a number o f important factual
inaccuracies in their submissions o f 24 September we feel it necessary to set the record
straight at this stage.

The Stuart-Smith Scrutiny

One of the terms o f reference o f Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was to ascertain whether any
evidence exists relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough Stadium which was not available
to the Director or the Attorney General for the purposes o f discharging their respective
statutory responsibilities and to advise whether any evidence not previously available is of
such significance as to justify their attention to be drawn to it. There was none. As part of
the Scrutiny, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith read the joint opinion o f counsel dated 6 August 1990,
he considered the resume of evidence and the statement o f law set out therein. The
conclusion reached was:
       "I do not consider that there is any material which should be put before the
       Director o f Public Prosecutions or the Police Complaints Authority which
       might cause them to reconsider the decisions they have already taken".
                                                                     (Chapter 7 p 103(5))

It would seem that the submission made by HFSG that leading counsel, providing the joint
opinion, would have misapplied the law relating to manslaughter to the facts o f the case
is wrong. (HFSG submission 17/8/98 para 14). No such viewrwas formed by Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith and the Director has available the opinion to assess for herself the merits of
this submission advanced by HFSG.

All the evidence alleged to be "new" was available to the Scrutiny, it is inaccurate to
suggest to the contrary.

       "South Yorkshire Police have an extensive archive o f material about the
       Hillsborough disaster. There is a substantial storeroom full o f investigation
       files, statements, photographs, videotapes and computer records. They have
       given me and my team unrestricted access to their archive for work on this
       scrutiny".
                                                                        (Chapter 5 p89(27))

Further Lord Justice Stuart-Smith considered the editing o f statements by Messrs Hammond
Suddards, the fact that the statements had been edited was known by counsel to the Taylor
Inquiry (Andrew Collins QC) and the Treasury Solicitor (Mr Whitehurst). Having
considered the editing exercise Lord Justice Stuart-smith concluded that "for the most part
the suggestions for amendments by the solicitors are not open to criticism". (Chapter 4
p93(101)) and "I am quite satisfied that the exclusion o f these comments could not possibly
have affected the Director". (Chapter 4 p84(105))

It is wrong to allege that "the statements and documents sent to the DPP in 1990 were the
result o f a calculated selection, from which many statements o f central importance were
excluded and which included edited statements o f police officers". (HFSG submission
24/9/98 para 1 1 (d ))---               -        _

The conclusion o f Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was to the opposite elfect, furthermore he
investigated allegations o f improper interference with witnesses made by the HFSG
(Chapter 4 p63) and concluded that the allegations were "not substantiated". (p84)

It is also wrong to allege that any evidence exists disclosing "prima facie such a thorough
manipulation o f the evidence to the past benefit o f the defendants and South Yorkshire
Police". Lord Justice Stuart-Smith again arrived at-the opposite conclusion,.

Much o f the submission made by the HFSG involves an attack on the Stuart-Smith
Scrutiny and the conclusions it reached. It is alleged to be "economical with information ,
it is suggested that "caution has to be employed in accepting facts set out in the report and
that "the conclusions about the edited statements are seriously wrong" (HFSG submission
24/9/98 paras 114 and 112). The Director will be able to form an independent view about
the criticism o f the Scrutiny. What is clearly exercising the minds of the HFSG is that if
the conclusions o f the Scrutiny survive then no new material exists to justify the current
charges.

We do not intend to correct each and every factual inaccuracy in the submission of the
HFSG as it is known that that task is being undertaken by those representing Mr Murray.
We would like to draw the attention o f the Director to one false statement relied upon by
the HFSG, namely that Mr Duckenfield met Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, notwithstanding tna:
the latter did not see fit to refer to it. This allegation is untrue as the two men have never
met. It follows that the criticism o f the Scrutiny for not recording the dejtails o f the
meeting are unfounded. It is also an example of the willingness on the part o f th^ HFSG
to rely upon conjecture as if it were uncontroverted fact.                         |

Analysis o f new evidence

The HFSG concedes that the findings of the Taylor Inquiry fall short o f those needed to
establish a "prima facie" case.

           "The Tavlor findings themselves amount almost to a prima facie case".
                                                     (HFSG submission 24/9/98 para 12)

The further evidence relied upon to support the prosecution is analysed in paragraph 17 and
all was before the Taylor Inquiry including the action o f the police in 1988 (Taylor
Chapter 11 para 230). What is o f critical importance is that there is no evidence
whatsoever that Mr Duckenfield was ever told about the police action the previous year,
or should have been aware o f it.

Reliance is placed upon the editing of statements for which it is asserted "there can be no
honest reason" (HFSG letter 24/8/98). This allegation is wholly inconsistent with the
conclusions o f Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and cannot survive even a simple exercise ot
 analysis.

 The editing complained about to the statement of PC Woodcock excludes material that is
 clearly hearsay and relates to a conversation he had with Inspector White at the debrief.
 Inspector White makes no mention o f being given the instruction spoken about and no
 other officer at the debrief apparently heard this conversation. In any event, Woodcock’s
 reference is not to the diversion o f fans moving from the concourse to the tunnel, but to
 the general dispersal o f fans on the terrace from one pen to another. We note that not one
 o f the deletions identified relates to any admissible evidence probative o f guilt against
 either defendant but consist mainly o f the type o f deletions described by Lord Justice
 Stuart-Smith as "quite trivial and o f no consequence whatsoever" (p82 para 99) and were
 o f a type which he concluded "were properly excluded".

 By reference to HFSG submissions (their letter 24 August 1998, submissions o f counsel
 24 September 1998) it is self-evident that the question of the 1988 events are central to the
 submissions made by HFSG as they say that these events "prove foreseeability, which is
 o f course critical to civil and criminal allegations of negligence. They are o f the most
 obvious relevance to the manslaughter issue in the prosecution".
It is suggested by HFSG that the evidence of police officers concerning 1988 indicates that
senior officers monitored the pens, a diversion from the central pens took place in 19S8, and
that there was a failure to take this "known and obvious precaution" in 1989 resulting in the
96 deaths. The HFSG suggest that "the South Yorkshire Police claim that the diversion of
the oncoming supporters from the central pens in 1988 was unknown to senior officers”.
They fail to refer to the findings o f Lord Justice Taylor and the Coroner (see HFSG annexure
H - Summary o f variances between findings o f Lord Justice Taylor and summing up of
coroner Dr Popper - page 5) that the South Yorkshire Police "claim" was correct.

The evidence which HFSG says is so important to the present reconsideration adds nothing
to the foreseeability case against the defendant. When viewed against the findings o f both
Lord Justice Taylor and the inquest the evidence referred to by HFSG (the new "unrevised
evidence") cannot assist in any way in establishing that any failure to divert fans from the
central pens simply involved a "known and obvious precaution". In the circumstances we are
bound to submit therefore that much o f the submissions made by HFSG, in relation to the
events o f 1988, adds no strength to the case against the defendants and if HFSG believe that
this issue is at the "heart o f the case", we say that it must patently fail even on the
prosecution’s own assessment.

Evidential Matters

In your policy letter you advise that the Code for Crown Prosecutors (Code), which contains
the principles applicable to CPS review of criminal proceedings instigated by the Police,
provides the basis for the policy applicable to private prosecutions and as to whether-the
Director will intervene.

More specifically, you advise that in regard to the evidential requirement o f the Code a less
stringent standard is to be applied to private prosecutions, to the effect that the case will be
taken over and discontinued where there is clearly no case to answer.

By comparison, when applying the Code to criminal proceedings generally, the evidential test
o f "a realistic prospect o f conviction" is a clearly more onerous standard. The implication is
therefore that in the terms o f the evidential requirements o f a private prosecution, the Director
may allow those proceedings to continue in circumstances where the evidence wrould not reach
the Code’s standard for a realistic prospect of conviction.

We note from the policy letter that "it has been considered that to apply the Code test to
private prosecutions would unfairly limit the right o f individuals to bring their own cases".
We take issue with this statement o f policy, and its applicability in the present circumstances.

We accept o f course that the Director is bound to consider, as part o f the review, whether the
evidence is sufficient when considering intervention pursuant to the Prosecution of Offences
Act. We are also aware that in the past the Director has adopted a less stringent test than the
CPS apply when considering whether to intervene under Section 6 . Having considered the
observations made by the Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure ("Phillips Commission")
(CMND 8092) (1981) Para 8 : 8 and 8:9, and the Law Commission, Criminal Law: Consent
to Prosecution C.P. 149 (Para 6:5-6-17) we are uncertain as to the justification for the policy
as applied in the past and request clarification accordingly.
Criminal Law: Consent to Prosecution C.P. 149 (Para 6:5-6-17) we are uncertain as to the
justification for the policy as applied in the past and request clariiication accordingly.

       "The test applied to the Director’s cases (ie, whether or not there is a
       reasonable prospect o f conviction) should be extended to all cases and
       applied by all who make the decisions that bring a case to Court".
                                                        (Phillips Commission para 8.9)

In any event applying either test to the relevant material, such as that referred to on page
3 o f the policy letter, together with any further material provided by the HFSG, and
additional material made available by the Home Office and any other source, will lead
inescapably to the conclusion that has been previously reached by the Director, to the effect
that there is insufficient evidence for a realistic prospect o f conviction. If that be the case,
pursuant to the Code, the Director will be bound to take over the conduct o f proceedings
and discontinue "no matter how important or serious" the case may be.

On the basis that the Director proceeds as indicated in the policy letter and therefore
applies a lesser standard, we ask the Director to consider the two specific questions posed
in the Code as follows:-

1.     Can the evidence be used inCourt?

2.     Is the evidence reliable?

We invite the Director to consider those questions in the specific context o f the 4 charges
against our client as follows:-

1.     Unlawful Killing

        In the broadest sense it is right to say that the question o f unlawful killing, in the
        context o f involuntary manslaughter, requires proof o f the following:-

       -   duty o f care     — .                     .
       -   breach o f duty of care
       -   breach causing injury or damage
       -   breach o f sufficient gravity, that is grossly negligent, to amount to. a criminal
offence.

        At the time o f making these submissions, we have been served with 3 folders of
        copy statements and transcripts o f evidence served in support o f the prosecution.


        A bundle o f 35 statements, largely comprising the recollections o f spectators at the
        game on 15th April 1989 relate in general to the buildup o f the crowd outside the
        ground, access to the ground, and the crush at the Leppings Lane end terrace. 3
        Statements included by Police Officers do not involve the direct operational
        management within the control box on the day.
We are bound to emphasise that no evidence has been served by the prosecution of
any person other than the Defendants, that will assist a criminal court in considering
the issue o f the particular duty o f care to be alleged against the Defendants, and as to
whether their conduct amounted to a breach thereof. To be specific, there is no other
evidence, apart from the transcript material, relating to the circumstances and activities
within the control box on 15th April and Mr Duckenfield’s role on that day. HFSG
correspondence has pointed to Lord Justice Taylor’s conclusions in regard to the
involvement and actions of certain individuals on that day. His conclusions were
based upon a mountain of evidence which it would seem is not to be put before the
Court in the context of the present prosecution. The hearings by their very nature will
be completely different and the evidence that can be adduced in support o f a private
prosecution for manslaughter will be considerably narrower than that heard by Lord
Justice Taylor.

The HFSG, in their most recent submissions dated 2 October 1998, comment on the
"Evidence against Duckenfield on Manslaughter and Misfeasance" purely by reference
to the 1989 Taylor transcript material, which of course the Director will have
considered previously in the context o f the consideration o f which charges, if any,
should have been brought.

On the available evidence submitted in support o f the prosecution, we therefore urge
the Director to consider that there is a clear paucity o f evidence relating to vital issues
that would need to be proved. As L.J. Stuart-Smith pointed out in his Scrutiny report
at para. 56:-                                                                            "

        "Any prosecution o f an individual police officer would have to
        establish his individual responsibility. It would not be enough to prove
        the composite failure of the police operation."

Notwithstanding the comments made by HFSG (eg see para 15 Submissions 24.9.98)
any admissions o f liability by South Yorkshire police in negligence proceedings can
only relate to those proceedings and South Yorkshire police. They can have no force
in relation to the specific actions o f individual officers and charges brought in separate
criminal proceedings.

In terms, o f reliability we must take issue with the observation o f the HFSG (their
letter 27th July 1998) that all the facts are clear and that no-one will have forgotten.
The events in question were obviously traumatic for all concerned, and the passage of
9 years since those events is a considerable period o f time. By definition, the
recollection o f any relevant witnesses must be expected to have lessened either because
o f the passage o f time, or indeed the natural mechanism o f avoidance of the memory
o f the horrific events that occurred. In those circumstances, we suggest the Director
treat with great caution the reliability o f the evidence that is or may be served in
support of the prosecutions.

No evidence exists o f the current ability o f witnesses to recall the events and those that
were heard by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith were described by him variously as "vague
and confused" (per                   "version changes in various ways over the years"
(per Paul Taylor) and "unable to accept Mr Holdsworth’s recollection o f events as now
being accurate". There is no reason to suspect that the memory o f other witnesses is
any more reliable than those seen by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

Misfeasance in Public Office.

As indicated by the submissions as to issue of summonses, from the HFSG, the same
facts are to be put forward in support o f the allegations for this offence as for
unlawful killing. The prosecution have referred to the case o f R -v- Dvtham (1979)
69 Cr.App.R. 387 as indicating the relevant standard. Our only observation in regard
to this case in the present context is that it clearly indicates that for culpability to be
established concerning the misconduct o f an officer o f justice, mere misfeasance will
not suffice, but a deliberate failure and wilful neglect will be required. We raise again
the issues as to what reliable evidence the prosecution intends to adduce to satisfy this
onerous test as indicated by the reliance o f HFSG (submissions 2/10/98) on alleged
admissions made by the Defendant in 1989 transcripts which the Director will have
considered previously. From the material we have been served with so far, we believe
the evidential test is not satisfied either on the basis o f "a realistic prospect, of
conviction" or in the alternative that there w'ould be "clearly no case to answer",
justifying the Director’s intervention and discontinuance.

Acting with Intent to Pervert the Course of Justice

According to the HSFG submissions as to issue of Summonses, this relates to the
alleged false and deceitful allegation by Mr Duckenfield that the gates had been
broken by the supporters. It has never been suggested that the words complained of
were ever uttered by Mr Duckenfield to anyone charged with investigating the disaster.

In terms o f the evidence so far served, we point out once again that there is no
evidence apart from the transcript o f the Defendants’ own evidence, regarding any
such discussion. The HFSG (submissions 2/10/98) have referred to the Taylor
evidence of the Defendant which the Director is aware of. We note that further
evidence will be called but emphasise the prosecution have not served statements from
other witnesses in relation to this charge.:; -                            ~

The thrust o f the recent (2/10/98) submissions appears to concern the "transmission"
of the alleged comment o f the Defendant to parties who were not present at the time
the alleged words were spoken. We are bound to point out that no evidence has been
served to support the contentions made ..to the effect that the Defendant played any role
in the "transmissions" referred to, or in the alleged "limitation" activity (paras 5-22).
The HFSG’s critical reference to the                [statements when subject to realistic
appraisal can not be justified. In the context of this charge, we submit the true import
o f his recollection is that between 3 and 5 pm on the day o f the event, the question
o f "how" and "why" was not at the forefront o f the minds o f those in the control
room, who were "all deeply shaken" officers endeavouring to carry out their duties.

We think the argument is overwhelming that proper analysis o f this charge cannot
satisfy either o f the evidential tests that might be applied in this case and accordingly.

                                         8
the DPP ought to intervene and discontinue without need to refer to public interest
issues.

Public Interest

We have noted the exchanges in correspondence between your office and the HFSG
and for the purpose of your review would like to point out by reference to the
individual components set out in 6.4 and 6.5 o f the Code our views as to the relevance
or otherwise o f the public interest factors set out therein. We are o f course mindful
o f the fact that this exercise is "not simply a matter o f adding up the number o f factors
on each side".




Conviction is likelv to result in a significant sentence.

Cases o f manslaughter vary enormously and in many cases a non-custodial sentence
will be passed. We believe in all the circumstances o f this case, the prospect o f a
sentence o f immediate imprisonment is remote. The Director will be aware that
prosecutions for involuntary manslaughter, such as in the House o f Lords’ leading case
o f R -v- Adomako, notwithstanding a conviction, the Court imposed a suspended
custodial sentence, as did the Court in the associated Court of Appeal decision R v
Prentice & Sullman.

A weapon was used or violence was threatened.

This is clearly not applicable here.

The offence was committed against a person serving the public.

Once again this is not applicable. It is relevant that the alleged offences occurred
whilst the Defendants were engaged in the conduct o f their public duties.

The Defendant was in a position o f authority or trust.

This strictly speaking is true, but the import o f this factor is, we submit, that authority
or trust has been abused. There is no evidence that we have seen that suggests that
the Defendant in any way consciously acted so as to abuse the authority or trust placed
in him, and rather to the contrary, acted to the best o f his ability to discharge his
public duty, in the most difficult o f circumstances.

The evidence shows that Defendants was a ringleader or an organiser o f the offence.. .
This clearly cannot apply.

There is evidence the offence was premeditated.

The allegations in this case relate to the actions taken by the Defendant, in a life or
death context, without lengthy time for consideration. Judgment was exercised and
decisions were taken. There can be no element of pre-meditation in the normal sense
relevant to a guilty mind.

There is evidence that the offence was carried out bv a group.

Whilst the Defendants were working together as part of an overall police operation,
we have not seen any evidence to suggest a conspiracy or joint enterprise to carry out
a criminal activity.

The victim o f the offence was vulnerable, had been put in considerable fear, or had
suffered personal attack, damage or disturbance.

There can be no doubt that the loss and suffering of the deceased and others involved
in the Hillsborough disaster is a terrible tragedy. We would not wish to diminish that
in any sense but emphasise that there is no evidence that the Defendant intended to
place the victims in this situation. Rather quite the contrary all the actions that were
taken by the Defendant were taken with a view to minimising personal injury and
suffering.

The offence was motivated bv anv form o f discrimination against the victims ethnic
or national origin, sex, religious beliefs, political views or sexual preference.

This cannot apply.

There is a marked difference between the actual or menial ages o f the Defendants and
the victim or if there is anv element o f corruption.

Whilst strictly speaking true, we cannot see that this can have any relevance in the
present circumstances.

The Defendants previous convictions/cautions are relevant to the present offence.

Once again, not applicable.

The Defendant is alleged to have committed the offence whilst under an order o f the
Court.

Not applicable.

There are grounds for believing that the offence is likely to be continued or repeated.
for example, bv a history o f recurring conduct.

The allegations o f criminal offences arising out o f Hillsborough are o f course in the
most unusual o f circumstances.       The Defendant has long since retired from
employment as a Police Officer, and there is no real possibility o f a recurrence. The
circumstances, as all the subsequent inquiries have revealed, were unique.
The offence, although not serious in itself was widespread in the area where it was
committed.

The alleged offences o f unlawful killing, in particular, are serious, but occurred in a
limited context in unique circumstances,. This factor is therefore not applicable.

It will be seen by reference to the foregoing comment, that the only factor tending to
support a prosecution pursuant to 6.4 of the Code is the seriousness of the charges.
It is in that light that we believe the previous enquiries, review's and the like that have
been conducted into the events of Hillsborough are particularly relevant. Previous
correspondence with you from ourselves and the Solicitors for Mr Murray highlighted
the outcome o f those reviews and the consistent conclusion, notwithstanding the real
concerns as to the events of 15th April 1989, that no good will be served by pursuing
criminal proceedings at this time. We emphasise that point in the present context.

Further we offer the following observations with regard to the common public interest
factors that may tend against a prosecution, set out in the Code.




The Court is likelv to impose a verv small or nominal penalty.

We reiterate the comments made above in regard to 6.4(a). We think the likelihood
is, even in the event o f a conviction for unlawful killing that the appropriate sentence
in this case would, effectively, be non-custoaial.

The offence was committed as a result o f a general mistake or misunderstanding (these
factors must be balanced against the seriousness of the offence).

Once again we emphasise that the allegations in this case concern decisions made
under the pressure o f the moment in the course o f employment, at times when serious
injury and death was threatened. To prove gross negligence manslaughter, the
prosecution has an onerous burden to prove to a high standard that any negligence
ought to be considered criminally culpable. The relevant authorities (see R v
Adomako (H/Lords), R v Holloway & Others (Court o f Appeal) make it clear that
mitigating circumstances are particularly relevant in this context. Furthermore the
contribution to the disaster of the unexpected late arrival o f so many fans, the refusal
by them to heed requests to queue for entrance in an orderly manner and the physical
construction o f pens on the terraces without sufficient gates to permit escape in the
event o f an emergency all contributed in some way to the disaster.

The loss or harm can be described as minor and was a result o f a single incident
particularly if it was caused bv misiudgment.

Once again we would not wish to diminish the suffering caused by the victims, or
others involved in the Hillsborough tragedy. We would point out, however, that the
case against the Defendant is in essence one of gross misjudgment on a singular
occasion.
T h e r e h a s b e e n a l o n g d e la v b e t w e e n th e e v e n t s ta k in g p la c e a n d t h e d a te o f trial.

The    offences are serious.
The    delav has been caused in part bv the Defendants.
The    offence has onlv recently come to light.
The    complexity o f the offence has meant that there has been a long investigation.

It is clearly o f great concern that a private prosecution is being commenced more than
9 years after 15th April 1989. The material we have been served with in support of
the prosecution in relation to the transcripts has been available since 1991 at the latest.
The 38 statements served by HFSG in our submission, firstly, do not raise any
substantial new matters that could not have been dealt with by evidence available
many years before and secondly, do not go to the heart o f the cases, in respect of
unlawful killing, neglect of public duty, and perverting the course o f justice as raised
before in the context o f evidential issues.

Once again the seriousness o f the offence is relevant, but on balance we submit this
factor should not outweigh the significance of the very considerable delay.

As we have noted the HSFG are o f the view that the recollections o f witnesses will
be accurate notwithstanding the passage o f time. It is interesting to note that in the
context o f the Judicial Review o f the inquest (which o f course was a hearing on oath
beforea Jury considering issues of unlawful killing) the Divisional Court, commenting
on whether an exercise o f discretion to order a fresh inquest was appropriate,
observed:

           "I have to take an objective view and I have to consider the
           interests o f all concerned, including those of all the witnesses
           who w'ould have to come along 5 years later and try to cast
           their minds back to events that they must have been trying to
           forget. Taking that objective view and considering the interests
           o f all concerned, I would in my discretion conclude that this
           w^as not a case in which it would be right to order a fresh
           inquest."-              - - -

           - R v HM Coroner for South Yorkshire Exp Stringer & Ors. 17 BMLR 92 per
           LJ McCowan.

We submit similar considerations apply with greater force now that a further 5 years
has elapsed.

A prosecution is likelv to have a verv bad effect- on the victim’s physical and mental
health alwavs bearing in mind the seriousness of the offence.

Although some families o f the deceased clearly are anxious to pursue a criminal trial
against the defendants others we suspect have been anxious to put these terrible events
behind them and will be distressed to find the facts yet again rehearsed in public and
have the memory o f the disaster revisited.
(0     T h e D e f e n d a n t is e ld e r lv o r is. o r w a s , at th e t im e o f th e e v e n t s s u f f e r i n g from
       significant mental or physical ill health unless the events are serious or there is a real
       possibility that it mav be repeated.

        Crown prosecutors must balance the desirability of diverting a Defendant who is
        suffering from significant mental or physical ill health with the need to safeguard the
      ■ general public.

       The Defendant retired from the Police Force in 1991 on ill health grounds. We have
       noted with concern the HFSG comments regarding our client’s health, and advise that
       he continues to experience ill health as a result o f the Hillsborough disaster.

(g)    The Defendant has put right the loss or harm that was caused (but the Defendants
       must not avoid prosecution because they can pav compensation).

       This does not apply. It of course was not within the Defendant’s gift to redress the
       loss and injury suffered by the victims.

(h)    Details mav be made public that could harm sources o f information, international
       relations or national security.

       We do not suggest that this factor is applicable.

On an overview basis, therefore, our submission is that the factors contained in 6.5-when
applied to the present case against the Defendant, strongly indicate the prosecution should not
proceed in the public interest.

Further, when paragraphs 6.4 and 6.5 are looked at in conjunction, we believe the public
interest is overwhelmingly shown to be served in this case by proceedings being discontinued,
as the public interest factors tending against prosecution clearly outweigh those factors tending
in favour.

We appreciate that such a decision would cause considerable disquiet with the prosecutors,
but with respect, this is not a relevant consideration. The-criminal prosecutions arising out
of Hillsborough are by their very nature unique, relating to specimen charges of manslaughter,
as well as the lesser offences, in circumstances where 96 people died. It seems clear that if
a criminal prosecution w’ere to proceed, such a trial would not take place until more than 1 0
years after the events in question, and it is relevant to point out that any trial subsequent to
April 1999 would take place against the background of the 10 year anniversary o f events
having recently passed.

We believe that the case for the Director intervening, and discontinuing proceedings pursuant
to the Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985, is in this case compelling and that the circumstances
are exceptional, and we urge the Director to so conclude prior to the.next hearing of the
Magistrates Court proceedings at Leeds on 30th October. If the Director wishes to clarify any
matters arising out o f this or previous correspondence submitted on behalf o f the Defendant
we would be grateful of the opportunity of confirming same. We are, of course, aw-are of the
significance of this decision, and believe it entirely appropriate for the Director for clarify any
outstanding issues or concerns before a final decision is taken.

In view of the importance o f the decision, we are of the view the Director is bound to give
full and detailed reasons for the decision taken addressing the issues raised by all the parties.

A c c o r d i n g l y , we look forward to hearing from you once the review is completed.


Yours faithfully




Winckworth
18-KAY-13S9              11=11          FROM           UINCKU1CRTH SHESWCCD                                            •Q      901132079031                                                          f . S2


       W IN C K W O R T H S H E R W O O D                                                                                              35 G reat P e te r S treet
       SOLICITOUS            AND     P A R L ! A M EM TA RY      AGENTS                                                                W e stm in ste r
                                                                                                                                       London S W iP 3 L R

      Our ref:              S3E/24332/i/jet                                                                                            1 eiap no nc:
      Y o u r ref:          D \fH /C X B
                                                                                                                                       Fnx|                                                  |
                                                                                                                                       D X : 2 31 2 V I C T O R I A

      BY FAX AND POST                                                                                                                  D irect Line:
      Garretts                                                                                                                         D irect Fax:
      1 City Sauare                                                                                                                    E m ail: s b c a s tw o o d @ w i n c k u o r t h s .c o .u k
      Leeds LSI 2AL
                                                                                                                                       18 May 1999
      For die attention of David Harlock
                                                                                                                                                           Please note our new
                                                                                                                                                             fax number above


      Dear Sirs

      R -v - South Yorkshire Police Authority ex parte Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
      Police

      Further to our recent correspondence we are enclosing herewith farther advice from
      William Clegg QC daied 16 May 1999 in regard to the criminal prosecution. In v ie w of the
      contents of this advice we request that copies be circulated to members of the Authority
      crior to the meeting on Friday. Please lei us know if we can assist further.

      Yours faithfullv




  V   W inckworth SiWrwood




      i’ A R T N F R S                 STf;?HfcN WIGGS                   KOCF.R H 7 T O N                T iM W ATTS                   The fmi: is t :nanbcr c f
      N JC lfm    AS O W S ' C I N      WUCI-t M A C n n u r . A l . n   P A U I . 1R. VI N*C            TAX CONSULTAN T                    i r. is rn a & c nel n e t w o r k c f l a w y e r s .
      IJ KIA N I !<.*< ' O             JO IIN RG U S                     k . ON' At .0 T a R R a N T S   C.VCOR02                      The        rt reuvhitd i>v T ’** ^.4** Sa^>ct\
      PAUI. M O k R J S                PCTCR. WIL LIAMS                  R . G 3 L ^ 7 BOTXAl            CONSULTANT                    '«       cwiduc: of i rvcjyrwnt b u i i r . a r
      m k ’. h a P.I TMAT GM E rv       a N.’I R E W MUTVfV.AY           MMON SASTWOOD                   P R A N K D . 0 3 5 0 N ODE
      Af !:>ON C OU.I.OV               CHK. S 5 T OP HE * . VINE         NA OMI C O O O S
      I,nsi<:
UJI NGsbJCR i H SHERUiCOD         TO   901132075001




               adunqtoh




                      . v -



              DUCKENRH-D




                     A D V IC E
iS-MSY-lrS'   11:12    FRCM   UJINCKUORTH Sr-£=UCGD              TO   501132375801




                                  ADLIKGTON -v- DUCKH2TPIELO




                                                ADVICS




                1:1    The    purpose    of    this    advice         is to   assist     the

                Authority       in   understanding           the      evidence       against

                Duckesfield or. the three outstanding charges and to

                consider the merits of his defence*




                1:2     Duckenfield has beea eurmonsed on tvo charges of

                sanslaughter and one chsrge of misfeasance in public

                office,       The bagia of the r a s a laughter charges                  are

                        the two victime died a.0 ®- consequence                       of the

                 grose negligence of Duckeafield in opening Gate C st

                 the   Leppings      Laa*     end of       the   stadium which        caused

                 grose ovejrcroyding in the two central pens behind the

                 goa.lipDu.rh and vas & diract cause of the tvo deaths.


                                                       1
Tie       charge       of nisf*asa*ce   is confined       to    the     sane

facts but, is not dependant on the deaths char g e d being

‘caused- by'the action of Duckenfield and is a leaser


charge dependant upon the sane allegations.




~TE5' F A C T S

2   ;i     it     is   consaon. ground that    Duckenfield        was    the

 senior officer in charge of policing the stadiun oa

 the dav of the disaater»               it is coimscn ground that he

 gave the instruction to open Gate c and coir^r.cn ground

 that the influx of people resulting from that caused

 gross overcrowding in the central two’pens from which

 each of the victine the subject of the two suESaons s.Bd

 ninety three other people died.




    2:2     Other facts are however crucial in determining

    whether        any    criminal   offence    has   been      cororaitted.

    Dnck.ejifi.eld ha4 only assumed responsibility for the

    match. les§ than three weeks prior to the disaster.                      He

    was npt familiar with the stadium- and was dependant

    upon information being given to him by others vith

    more        experience-      A   detailed     plan,        used     as     he

    understood. it# with success in the past was put into
: 3 -tr.QY-:sss    11:12    ^rcm      ui   nckugrth skeswogd              to



                                                                    v ^ *t 11r*\c* ^ C ^ Cm CXTULS
                  place tic, police the natch.                A            jneit--

                  of people forced outside the Lepp-ngs Lane

                  ■ and despite all efforts to encourage an. orderly <!««>*

                   th. c x * i     becsaae so great that a radio i.easage « .

                   sent to the control room where Ptekenfield was baaed

                   pleading       for       Gate    c to be         opened     assaying         that

                   failure       to    open        the    gate would      result      in    serious

                    u j n     or death outside.                This placed Ducksnfield in

                    « poaition of             « .»        difficulty and under             increased

                    pressure       from       his    officers       positioned        outside        the

                                           for the cates to be opened,
                    stadium gave the o.der to. wne




                    2:3     There is n o 'evidence to suggest that Duckenfield

                    ves ever,told of any earlier p r o b l e m at the stadium

                     in previous aatchea.                           is no evidence to suggest

                     he was      w arn ed     about the danger of gross overcrowding

                     in    the    central          pens    ajid there was        no    evidence        to

                     suggest       that       he    was    warned     about     any    shortage        of

                     stewards or police on the inside of Gate C.




                      2:4 • It was clearly reasonable for him to rely upon

                      the   experience             and     advice    of   others.          It   is    not

                      suggested that he went against any such                              sdvice      cad
11=12     FROM   UINCKUORTH SHERUOCD                TG




anyone      in   his   position        suet     inevitably       delegate

responsibility to others.              It   is sot suggested that he

■was negligent In doing        b   o   or. this occasion.




2:5      As the disaster has been the subject: of continued

 examination, over the last ten years it is perhaps not

 surprising       that the basic            facta    have been     clearly

 established and arer so 2 uaderstasd it, basically

 a-ccep-tad by the prosecution.




         I nov aaove to consider tfe.e relevant lav berore

 taoving to consider- the application of the lav to the

 facts.




 TH2 U W

  3:1     For Du.cken£ield-to b* guilty of &3.HE laughter the

 prosecution would seed to prove four crucial elements.

  {i)            Tfc* axisteace of a duty of care.

  (ii)            branch of that duty.

  (iii)          A. breach of aueh, gravity              as to amount to a

  crisis, scsaeti®^3 referred to as                  a ’gross"breach or

  'groBB n«gliseace“.

' (iv)            Caueation.
 11-12         rrtLiM    l<j 1NCKL'ORTH SHERLIGGD                TO




& T > P T ,IC A T IO N    OF LM*     TO        T5S    FACTS


4:1       It       is     this       crucial              exercise    that    determines .

whether a prima facie case exists agaiasr Duckenfield.




           First it is           c   l e   a   r   -that a duty of care exists and                 .

 secondly, at least for the purposes of committal it is

 conceded, that the deaths resulted from hxs decision.

 In other words for present purposes elements one and

 four        are         agreed.               It    is    element    two    that    is    the

  crucial factor in this case.                                 The prosecution would

  need        to        prove    that              the    decision    to     open    Gate     C

  amounted to               a breach                of hia    duty of       care.     In czy

  judgement this essential ’element cannot be proved.




  4:2        It is of course applying entirely false logic to

   look at the consequences of -the- decision and to. say

   that because 55 deaths resulted there roust have been

   a breach of his duty.                             When the S.S. Titanic sunk in

   mid-Atlantic the reaaon for the sinking was steaming

   at night in waters where Icebergs may be f o u n d ,                                    That

   vas a decision of the captain but that decision would

   not       necessarily amount to a breach of                                his    duty     of

    care.          In the light of hia knowledge at the tim« he

    may       have        made       a         perfectly       reasonable      and        lawful
::--HY-i3Sg   11=13    FROM    U!INCKUCRTI-                                                    P, 09




              deelsian which. had tragic consequences.




              4:3     I asi conscious that no analegy ia perfect: and in

              this     case         analogies        are       particularly    dangerous.

              However I aa anxious to illustrate tha fact thst it

              lew you need to separate the decision to open the gate

              frost the consequences.




              4:4      in this       case Duckenfieid vas told by officers

               outside the Leppinga Irane entrance that people would

              die in the cjpiah outside unless he opened the care.

               In t&e agony of the aonent he had to sake a decision

               in the     light of the circumstances                      as they    existed

               then*     Judged sccinst the evidence in the case in ray

               opinion        it.    cannot     be     argued      that    that     decision

               amounted to a breach of duty.




               4:5     It rauftX be reneabared that Duckenfield ca-^ot be

               held vicariously liable for the failings of others.

               It is not: alleged against hina, nor could it be, that

               he failed to arrange adequatn policing outside the

               ground to avoid the crush of fans developing, nor is

              .
              ■ it alleged, nor could it be, that hie reliance on the

                                                           6
               jn    Ui INCKUi'CkTH s h e r u g o d




police plan as uaed in earlier saatchaa amounted to a

breach of duty.                  I emphasise that tie p r o s e c u t i o n              do

aot     rely        upon      cither        of        thaae    as     evidence    of    assy

b reach        o£ duty by Duokenfield.                         They say, in c e m a i n

circumstances, $jsount to a breach of duty by tha force

for the p u r p o s e s of tha civil lay but they cannot x o m

tha       basis          of      a      case          of      manslaughter        against

Duckenf ielsi.



 4; 5     It    ie £ o -       this r e a s o n . t h a t       it    is possible that

 negligence            could be proved for the purposes                            °t the

 civil cc^rta vhile no crine could be proved against

 any individual>                     Indeed this has been recognised

 Lord Justice Taylor, Lord Justice stuart-Snith,                                         the

 coroner and the past and pressst D.p.p.




 5:1                follows fron esy analysis of the charges and

 the      evidence            in support of them that                      I an    of the

  opinion that putkenfield has ja. good defence to the

  charges*           It is never pose ibis to be certain, a b o u t any

  litigation but X consider that an essential element o f

' ti\e     c££ances              charged              cannot     bs     preved     by     th»

                                                       7
1 1 ’ 1J>     hKUfl          UINCKUGRTH SHtRUiCOD                         TO




prosecution.                       In i=y opinion the jsagistrate ought to

d i.5 7 n i.S 9    the charges.



5:2         I h a v e not addressed the t h i r d                               ele m en t         th a t       th a

CrcrxTt need to prove nanaly t h a t the b r e e c h                                          o£ d u t y xa

 groas.                T liis      question d o e s       not a n * *              if t h e          p rusary

 su b m issio n               succeeds -         Hovevor             it    w o u ld          be     arguable

 th a t      a     d e c isio n       sade i n      “t h e        agony o f           th e    la o n en t*        in

 th «       circumstances                   prevailing a t                th e     tir r e        couj-d n o t

  aaoaat               to      groaa     n e g lig e n c e .            A lth o u g h         normally                 a

  n a tter         f o r a jury to d e c i d e               it    is     c a p a b le o f b e in g th e

  b a sis         o f a su b m issio n b u t            if        th is    w ere t i e            o n ly    b a sis

   open           to        th e    d efen ce    X * c u ld          be        le ss     c o n fid e n t           of


   su ccess             th an      I £E-«



   5:3            puckenfield also haa open to hiia strong arguments

    that          the         prosecution          astounts               to     an     abuse              of     the

    process of tie court, th&t is because of the delay of

    ten years h.e cannot have a “fair                                             trial,            wha*. p~e

    trial publicity has so prejudiced the potential jury

    pasel'that a f*ir trial is not possible and that the

     trial would be oppressive.
             r RGM       i I NL^ wURI H bH^r




5-4        iv«*a         submissions                      vil'l also fox*        P arC

argents              p   r e   s   e   a   t e   d   to the rcegistrata.              The lav

relation no this area is new aettled and the succee 0

o£ the submission will <3*P«nd                                        u?oa    ths application of

the facts of this e&sts to the law.



 5   ;5     Although                       this          is     &rx    order,    to      a ^ay    the

 p ro ceed in g s,                 that a magistrate can rake and in tie

 pas* has                Toad® experienceindicates that decisions 'to

 stay are                aore frequently cede; by the trial judge than

 the magistrate■



     5:6     i do not consider it profitable to speculate as

     to why t h s t 16 but I 63 satisfied tist in this case

     conpelling                    argmeat.               exist to stay.               Vf-her the

     leagistrote v i U taXs such a course i» souethiag I feel

     very difficult, to assess.



      5:7     i          have very vide                         experience in         the   field       *£

      criminal law and I .fiad mucli                                            the «i*cuiaeMncee

      of this prosecution abhorrent.                                         I aa afraid that -it

      euggeora more of a d«sire for revange than a desire

      ■cor     justice.                              I   feel    that    the    nedia       are   being
rcanipulafced        t©     present    a picture       adverse to         the

defendants        and     that    having     failed      to     acn'sv.       a

recotsaendation           for    prosecution      fron    Lord     Justica

Taylor, the coroners court. Lord justice Stuart-S=ith

       two Directors of Public Prosecutions                     this   is a

last daaparate throw of tie dice to atteznpt to see

someone pun.ish.ed for the tragedy.



 5:8    While        avaryone       will be understanding of              the

 feelings      of the bereaved             the fact   resins      that        no

 prina facie evidence o£ crine has been found against

 anyone or. the day of the disaster.                  That v i e w has been

 expressed           to     the    Souse of Cossamm        by    the      Hone

 Secretary end tha Attorney-General - It is a view that

 with respect I share for the reesons aet out in this

 opinion.        If that view is correct and the magistrate

  correctly       applies tbe lav to the fact*                  then     id

  opinion       Duckenf ield        will     be   discharged.       on        the

  r w a a i n i a g suasvane.




                                                      W IL L IA M CLEGG Q . C .
      W IN C K W O R T H SHERW OOD                                                                                           35 G reat P e te r Street
       SOLICITORS               AND       PARLIAMENTARY         AGENTS                                                       W e stm in ste r
                                                                                                                             London SW 1P 3L R

    Our ref:                  SB E /2 4 3 3 2 / 1 /jet                                                                       T e le p h o n e :
    Your ref:                 DMH/CXB
                                                                                                                             Fax
                                                                                                                             D X : 2 31 2 V I C T O R I A

    BY FAX AND POST                                                                                                          D irect Line:
    Garretts                                                                                                                 D ire c t Fax:
    1 City Square                                                                                                            E m ail:
    Leeds LSI 2AL

                                                                                                                             14 May 1999
    For the attention of David Harlock
                                                                                                                                                  Please note our new
                                                                                                                                                    fax number above

    Dear Sirs



♦
    R -v - South Yorkshire Police Authority ex parte Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
    Police


    Further to our letter of 13 May we write in response to your letter o f 12 May raising certain
    queries, and confirming the meeting is to now take place at 4 pm on 21 May. Adopting the
    headings in that letter we comment as follows:

    Meeting of the Authority

    The details are noted.

    The role of the HFSG
    We note the intended course. You will appreciate from our previous correspondence and
    discussions that it has been our view at all times that the role of HFSG in this matter has
    been entirely questionable and we would not agree that it would be appropriate for them to
    attend the meeting.

    South Sefton

    We have provided previous details with our earlier correspondence.

    We enclose herewith a copy of the letter of 11 February, and a copy of our terms of
    engagement. The latter correspondence is provided strictly on a confidential basis. We do
    not believe any other parties, save your client, are entitled to this document, and would be
    grateful if the document could be treated on that basis. If it is intended that this document
    should come into the public domain we would be grateful if you could advise us by return.

    Costs

    We have dealt with this matter as far as we can. You will appreciate that in due course
    detailed bills of costs will be drawn, but this will involve a great deal of time and costs from


    PARTNERS                               s n;m i;N w io cs            RO CJiR TITTON           T I M WA TT S               T h e firm is a m e m b e r o f E u r e s e a U .
    NICHOLAS O W S I O N                    HUGH MACDOUGALD             I’AUL I R V IN G         TAX CONSULTANT              a n i n t e rn a tio n a l n e t w o r k o f l a w y e rs .

    ItKlAN H O O D                         J O H N KUtiS                R O N A L D WAR RAN TS   G E O R G E BULL*           T h e firm is regulated by T h e L a w Society
    I’ A U I   iV.OKKIS                     I’l -. n-K WILLIAMS         K O U E R T UO 1'KAl     CONSULTANT                  in the conduct o f investm ent business.
    M I C I L M .1   1 1 1A I C 1 I L R    A N D K li W M U R R A Y     S I M ON HAST W O O D    l:K A N K R O B S O N OUE
    Ai I S O N C O i U O V                 C H R I S T O P H E R VINE   NA O M I G O O D E                                   •NdH^soHcitar
    m X e d d w f hMST n P°™ f          ™ w and « w i" ^ some time before the documents can be
    commhtal.               P              eSt‘ma‘e ° f fUt"re ° ° StS t0 the « « clusi°n o f a two week

    Funding for the Police Superintendents Association


    w e .I’T dealt " 1 * this, i,n 0ur previous correspondence. If there are any queries please do
    attendance o f Mr w fl 1.          we '™uld be grateful for your advice about whe“
    attendance o f Mr Williams at the meeting would be of assistance to your client.

   Legitimate expectation


   lu b T to ^ d ie n r h ^ h 7 * , ^           ^       ^ W M      ~        there « “>
   the letter o f 5 V f a l 1 Q M f       e,xpec,ation t0 have  «=« paid on the basis o f
    ne letter ol 3 March 1998 from the Clerk and the Treasurer. The letter expresses the

   COTespondence’
          P         from  “t Police
                     rom the  e P Authority
                                        o f early
                                                T    °inPriVaK  t e iitS 'was
                                                         January,          andunderstood
                                                                               &0m tilat time
                                                                                           that until tile
                                                                                                 subiect
    o proper reporting and approval, we would take all neces^ry steps to provTde proper l £
   assistance to him as necessary relating to and arising out o f the c r im in a l prosecution       °

  h ln n ,',r  ^           SUggestion tilat we have had that the Authority may not wish to
  honour the commitment made in the previous correspondence, notwithstanding that the
  legal power issue has been resolved in favour o f making the piiymen ^
  specific advice by return as to the reason for this change and how it is that you slv ?he
  < Uthontv is not committed to making the payment, if that is the present position.

  Legal aid


 Valker Morris have been in contact with the Clerk to the Magistrates Court and w e
 undei stand they are confirming details. We can confirm that on the basis of the
 understanding that the question of funding has to be finally resolved with the Authority Mr
 Duckenfield has not at this time made a legal aid application. It is of course not o^en to
 him to make an application for retrospective assistance.             ’                P

 Our client’s financial resources




101ox                                             ~>
We have set out the position previously in regard to the potential legal aid implications. In
the event that South Yorkshire Police Authority does not resolve to provide financial
assistance for Mr Duckenfield’s legal costs, the clear implication is that Mr Duckenfield
will suffer considerable financial hardship, and that his economic resources will be greatly-
depleted without any real prospect of rebuilding them.

Opinion of Counsel

In our previous letter we asked for clarification as to what matters required attention from
Counsel, given that both ourselves and Walker Morris have provided copies of the detailed
submissions to the DPP which dealt largely with evidentiary matters. In view of your
comment that you "remain of the view that the material does not meet our requirements”,
we have referred to Counsel as a matter of urgency, to see if it is possible to provide further
submissions by the Tuesday deadline.

In regard to fees, we are bound to raise the question as to the costs involved generally in
regard to these submissions and the attendance at the Authority’s meeting. The solicitors
for both defendants are being put to a great deal o f trouble in satisfying new requirements
that have been raised by the Police Authority since January 1999 in regard to funding
matters. In our view it is entirely proper therefore that in the event that the Authority
resumes financial assistance to Mr Duckenfield, it also agrees to pay the reasonable costs
associated with dealing with the Authority’s queries and requests since January 1999 on
funding issues generally up to and including representations made in respect of and
attendance at the forthcoming meeting.

You will appreciate from this and previous correspondence that we are doing all that we can
to satisfy your requests for information. If there are any other potential concerns that you
have in regard to the funding issues, we naturally request the opportunity to address those in
good time for the meeting to ensure that the Authority arrives at a fully informed decision,
whilst maintaining the opportunity for the Defendants to make proper submissions on all
relevant matters.

WTe await your further advice accordingly.

Yours faithfully
 SOUTH SEFTON MAGISTRATES' COURT

         The Court House . Merton Road • Bootle • Merseyside . L20 3BJ


D. Lut}', Solicitor                                                           Tel:
Clerk to the Justices                                                                Ext. 212

                                                                              Fax:
My Ref: D U JM H         Your Ref: 24332/1/SBE/jet                            DX: 707620 Bootle 3




                                                                               1th F eb m aiy, 1999




Dear Sirs,


                        ADLINGTON -V- DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY



        1 refer to our earlier correspondence in this matter and apologise for the delay in
reaching a conclusion. 1 have o n ce more perused the decision in R. -v- Miller and although I
acceptthat the situation is arguable, 1reach the provisional conclusion that the defendants have
not them selves incurred costs.

         However, 1 have n ow b eco m e aware both through the national new s and other m edia
that the South Yorkshire Police Authority has d ecid ed to reverse its earlier d ecision and has
withdrawn funding for the defendants. I am also aware that this decision is to be challenged
by judicial review. If that challenge is unsuccessful, then any argument which I might have that
the Police Authority are responsible for the defendants’ costs would fall. Accordingly, I propose
to await the outcom e of those judicial review proceedings before I m ake a final decision.




                                          Yours faithfully,




                                      Clerk to th e J u stic e s.




Private a n d C o n fid e n tia l
Messrs. W in ckw o rth & Sherw'ood,
Solicitors,
35 Great Peter Street,
Westminster,
LONDON. .SW1P3LR
                                  WINCKWORTH & PEMBERTON

              M EM ORANDUM UNDER LAW SOCIETY’S PRACTICE RULE 15
                               (C l i e n t c a r f .y

    CLIENT         Mr David Duckenfield


^^M A T T ER       Hillsborough




    A cop> of the Standard Terms o f Engagement with the current charge-out rates is enclosed.

    The partner responsible for the overall supervision and conduct o f this matter will be Nick
    Owston. He will be working closely with Simon Eastwood and Ailsa Lawrence.

    If you have any problem with the service provided you should approach the person specified
    in the Standard Terms of Engagement.

    As Mr Owston is Managing and Senior Partner of this firm, in the event o f a complaint you
    should take this up with our Partnership Chairman, Mr P.C. Morris.

    I acknowledge having received a copy o f this Memorandum and its enclosures the J2.     dav

•   ^ /y jjC '^ f               1998.




    DAVID DUCKENFIELD/
  Mr David D u ck en field




                                                                           2 6 M a y 1998




 Dear Mr Duckenfield,

 Re: Hilllsborough Disaster

 This letter is to confirm your instructions to act in regard to Jie Hillsborough matter generally
 and accordingly, I enclose herewith a Memorandum pursuant to the Law Society’s Practice
 Rule I d, and a copy of our terms o f engagement. I already have your letter o f 27th March
 on file which kindly confirms your wish for the firm to act on your behalf.

 The standard terms are amended as follows:

1-     Professional time (all fee earners) - flat rate of
2.     Bills to be rendered quarterly.                    --------------

You will understand that accordingly, you are our client, notwithstanding previous instructions
received from South Yorkshire Police, and notwithstanding the agreement you have with
South Yorkshire with regard to reimbursement of legal costs incurred. If you require any
clarification on this aspect please do not hesitate to telephone.

I am enclosing an Authority for you to sign for Eversheds, and will make contact with Paul
Isaacs' clerk shortly.

We have o f course chatted about the general outline of anticipated events, and will endeavour
to deal with any eventualities as quickly and as effectively as possible to protect your
interests. To confirm what I expressed when we met, please do feel free to contact either
myself or Nick Owston, Ailsa Lawrence or indeed Gerry Johnson, if he is in the office, to
chat about any matters arising in relation to Hillsborough at any time. Everyone here at
Winckworth & Pemberton is extremely keen to bring together all the best elements o f a team
effort to protect your interests, although we hope o f course that our involvement on major
scale will not be required.

Yours sincerely,




SIMON EASTWOOD
                                                              i      M O l i t               f S ’
                                                                           Solicitor;


                           Kings Court, 12 King Street, Leeds, L S I 2H L . Telephone
                      F atsim il;                        [D o cu m en t tx e h a n g e 12051 Leeds 24. Emaal F
                                                             Web: hctp://w\vw.walkcrmocris.co.ulc



         Messrs.Garretts                                                                  Our r e f             RBM/MT/MURRAY
         Solicitors
         D.X. 26444 LEEDS PARK SQUARE                                                     Your ref              DK/KH


         BY F A X                                                                         13 May 1999




     Dear Sirs

     R -V- SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY

     We acknowledge receipt of your letter of the 12th May.

     1.          Meeting o f Authority. We note the date and time and await details o f the
                 venue. It would be intended that our Mr. Richard Manning will attend to
                 make the oral submission and we note the request for a written submission.

    2.           Role o f H.F.S. G. Having regard to the comments made in the Divisional
                 Court to Mr. Alan Jones, Q.C. namely “what are you doing here” we are
                 surprised that you are even asking H.F.S.G. whether in the circumstances
                 they believe it appropriate to question the use of Public Funds for the funding
                 o f our Client. We reserve our position as to what action we will take if
                 H.F.S.G. indicate a wish to attend and to make representations,’and you
                 allow them to do so.

9   3'          S o u th     Sef t ° n -       Attached is a copy o f the letter o f the 11th February 1999.
                The Magistrates’ Clerk at South Sefton has not made a final decision because
                it will depend upon your decision. If, as we expect, the Police Authority
                confirms the continuation of funding to our Client from the 12th January, and
                ongoing, then we think it very likely that the Clerk at South Sefton will
                confirm the decision he has provisionally reached, and in which event both
                ourselves and Winckworth Sherwood (who are in an identical position) would
                want to jointly mount an application for Judicial Review o f that decision.

    4.          Costs.

                                 The Schedule that we have provided to you post the 12th January is
                                 for the most part work on the two Judicial Review Applications.
                                 You know the date that we made an application in relation to the
                                 funding, which was precipitated by the challenge from H.F.S.G. to
                                 the locus of the Chief Constable.




              A li*! oj .m r .irinrr-, nana i: open ta      a; the     idarm. Rsgt<!//tcil by The Lim Aeruny tn tkr rgrnluct i f   f>u>intu.
                                                                   Messrs.Garretts
                                                                    14 May 1999
                                                                          Page 2




             to ^ l Z Z i Z r T               beimpossib,e * » ta «* <*«*•£
             tw o ^ r ^        t ' ?      r     d0ne ta. reM on «> « * of those

            ftP-P-Appl,cation because we had (he c o n d «
            and because it was over a longer period o f 3 £
                                                                             v “f
                                                                         PP',Cant>




           March, 2 nd March ?6th Anrii 5 f                 hearings on the 1 st
           May and we are back on thl               ^    IaSt Monday ^ l0th
           the schedule           * * 24A ^         but ncither o f      are in

          If there had not been the intervention by H.F S G so that fhnH;
          had c o n n e d uninterrupted (hen in sofc as Z Z ^ f o ^
          obtained sszainst Ann ArUi^^          •                        costs
          p r o c ee d e d ! ta x lte blll S S . \ COn“ “ ed- we " ' « « have
          p o n io n c r fth e c o lta w L ^ o ^ l a ^ 0^ ? *
          charging rate agreed with the Authnritv f    aS agama •*“
          sensible way ^ e a ^ t ^ S t £ Z ? ° "              " "*
 4.5
          We have heard nothing from the D . P P       and t h e r e W   a




 4.6
         c ^ l" Z ^ T s o m T T ^                   5etwwn     biu <“ *
         enclosures to our lena of the 2<Mi        T*     amounts » * =
         -    . no, an                                  ‘       ^     ta


 relcvance^of thfc’'^ 0 ^ ™ “^ ^ , ^ ° ^ ° " - We 1)0 daHenge the
Members to feel that this is in Z I f          ^ ^         n0t * » * * » *
Authority and ourselves. Thus although we J C0ntr0VersiaI as between the
there is entitlement, the monev frnJwh* c      ^ pQsltl0n as to whether
only be pro v i d e d \ p T ^ S ™ \ f P ^          “        T iatif ™ “ld
refused to provide the funding requested, and              r°    Auth°nty
14. MAY.                                                                              NO. 3 4 3 4    P. 4



                                                                                  Messrs. Garretts
                                                                                   14 May 1999
                                                                                           Page 3


                   relation to the Order for costs against Adlington. In short therefore it is an
                   amount that only would become available by way of indemnity if all else
                   fails.

                   Legitimate Expectation. We have to fundamentally disagree with you on the
                   way in which you put this matter. In our view there is a contractual position
                   between the Authority, our Client and ourselves in relation to costs. Having
                   regard to that authority given and only stopped on the basis that you were not
                   certain that your Clients had power to grant that authority, and having now
                   been told that they did indeed have power, it would be in our view
                   Wednesbury unreasonable and Padfield perverse for the funding decision not
                   to be confirmed from the 12th January and not to be met to the 12th January.

           7.      Legal Aid. The Clerk to the Justices will not determine a Legal Aid
                   Application unless the Policy Authority refuse to grant funding. There is no
                   fresh Application, the original Application is held in abeyance on this basis.

                   The means determination done by the Legal Aid Board under the Leeds
                   Magistrates’ Court Pilot Scheme and the Legal Aid Board concluded “if the
                   Court is minded to grant Legal Aid we would suggest a contribution o f
                            >er week from income, and              xom capital.

           8   ,   Our Client's Financial Resources. \
                                                                                        .VO. 3434   ?.   5




                                                                                  Messrs.Garretts
                                                                                   14 May 1999
                                                                                          Page 4




        9.
                                                                                    -   * * ta



       10.
                    S sfto "                for” ^          f          ^       ft* Authority can
                    themselves, and indeed that g o efto the°daK       th !''5’ ' T ' c°mmitted
                    actually made the decision w J L „   T              e meetmg where they
                    to grant funding, they should c o lZ e tiS S           ^ T    s ^ T      ^

                                                                ^          —            r , s
                   Solicitorsand the t T S  C° I JL*? ™*T,sl chanSe ”             «*= view o f
                   funding up to the date o f th»    ,              would be therefore to grant
                    course ^hecase^s « ^ S ^ T ? 1 ? *                        P"       S1 ™
                    ;s likely to have to be made by the Authority I f S aT o”t h e S f t 0™0”
                   IS committed, then the Authority would k» •           j       . d the case
                   advices from Leading Counsel with an «.■              10 asking for further
                   to be incurred. I T om Z n m l 1 T S T ° f a ' MStS             were ^
                   review so long as                                               *«


 Yours faithfully



j c v . b .   M an n in g
Partner
                                                                                       NO. 3 4 9 4        P. 5




       SOUTH SEFTON MAGISTRATES' COURT
                The Court House. Merton Road . Bootle . Merseyside . U O 3BJ

    D. L llty, Solicitor
    Clerk to the Justices                                                             Tel:
                                                                                               Ext. 212

   M y Ref- D L/JM H                                                                  Fax: |
                               Your Ref; RBMZBQW/Murray
                                                                                      DX: 707620 Bootle 3



                                                                                      1mFebruaty, 1999



   Dear Sirs,



                            ADLINGTQN -V- DUCKENFIEII) AND MtfRRAV



  __   l*     ^ refer ^ 0ur earlier correspondence in this matter and apologise for the delay in
  a c c S tth a iS T         1 h3Ve °k?C1 m ° re         ^     decision in R- 'v‘ MilIer       although I
  not t h e m s e l v J S e ^ c o T       ***       PrOVfSi° naI C° nCiUSi° n        defendan* have


 l ha. c °'T5T?r’! have now becom e aware both through the national news and other media
 mat ^ e South Yorkshire Police Authority has d ecid ed to reverse its earlier dedston anT lS
 withdrawn funding for the defendants. I am also aware that this decision is to be challenged
 £ 2 P n ria              challenge is unsuccessful, then any argument which I might have that
 the Pohce Authonty are responsible for the defendants' costs would fail. A c c o r d S I o p p o se
 to await the outcom e of those judicial review proceedings before I m ake a final de’cisioiT




                                           Yours faithfully,




                                       Clerk to the Justices.




Private and Confidential
Messrs. W alk er & Morris,
Solicitors,
Kings Court, 12 King Street,
LEEDS. LSI 2HL
                                             W A L K E R
                                             M O R R I S
                                                    So licito rs


                Kings Court.   12   King Street. I.eerk TSi ''Hr T^l^nKone
             Facsim
               csimile
                   ilt                                                          i
                                        Web: hcep:/7\\-wv.\vaIkermorris.co.uk


  Messrs. Garretts
                                                                   Our ref      RBM/MT/MURRAY
  Solicitors
  D.X. 26444 LEEDS PARK SQUARE                                     Your ref     DH/KH

                                                                   14 May 1999




 Dear Sirs

 REQUEST FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE

 We refer to our conversation on the 13th May. We are making a very I o n a
 submission to you m response to your letter o f the 12th May. You have confirmed
 that you will ensure that this information that we are providing, which is o f a very
 sensitive nature, will remain entirely confidential and not pass into the public domain.
 In particular we would not want this information to copied to H.F.S.G. or to go into
 some Library or Record Office where the public can easily gain access.



 Yours faithfully




Patner




H:\WP\CRlM-MA-rARBM\RE\aE\V\MURRAY6.LET\14 May 1999
        iS.MPY'99 14:54



                                                                   w A I K E R
                                                                   M 0 R R I S
                                                                     50 /ci/ 0rs



                             R ings C o u r t, 12 Kin g Street, Leeds, LSI 2 H L . T elep h o n e
                         Facsimile                  document Exchingc 12051 Leeds 24. Email
                                                         W e b : n ttp ://w w w .w a lk e rm o rris .r(V iil<




        FAO David Harlock
                                                                                                         Our ref          RBM/BQW/MTJRRA
        Garretts                                                                                                          Y
        Solicitors
        DX 26444                                                                                         Your ref DH/KH
        LEEDS PARK SQUARE
        BY FAX
                                                                                                         18 Mav 1999


       Dear Sirs


^           S° UTH Y0RKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY EX PARTE CHIEF
       CONSTABLE OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE

       We have spoken to Counsel at length this morning with regard to the comments that you
       have made about his opinion. He cannot understand why there should be any criticism
       0 the joint opinion just because o f its length and particularly when you also have the
       detailed submissions made to the Director o f Public Prosecutions. Nonetheless if there
       arc matters where further clarification is sought, he is prepared to speak to Coimsel
       instructed by you on the telephone today to deal with any such matters. If no such
       conversation takes place then we will assume that the pcrccivcd problem no longer
       1 7 ' ru  U!l St£md ^                     y0U arc ^              §oinS to get an additional written opinion from
       Mr William Clegg QC.

       Yours faithfully




    '9 R y    Manning
    I PARTNER




             A /in . / * ,         Hma    ^   „ mvK!S„    „            M y fu               h 7 it U v          ,, *   m<hm J    hui^
