           DOCUMENT FORM                      Date and time raised                              Number


                                           ryvi it
(Include source and any document number if relevant)
                                                                           I 'r\   iPn i
Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                             Receiver

                                                                                                                /X
Document registered/indexed as indicated

Nofs) of actions raised
                                                                                                             x:
                                                                                                         Statement Reader
Statement reader's '


                                                                                                             indexer
indexed as indicated

ftofs ) of actions raised

Examined - ■ further action to be taken




                                                                                                             Indexer
Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                             Vincent Hale & Co.
                                   Solicitors
Telephone: (0742)                  Nash House         Vincent Hale Solicitor
Office 325842                    140 Upperthorpe      Consultant:
Home 345214                          Sheffield        Gerard Vincent Hale B.A.   (Hons.)
Fax    325644                        S6 3NF



        Our ref: VH/SEW                                     6th June, 1990
        Your ref: MJF/VSC

        Dear Sir,

        Hillsborough - Superintendent R. Marshall

        I am writing this separate, explanatory letter, to clarify
        Superintendent Marshall's intentions.   I have no objection to the
        complainants' solicitors having copies of both letters - if my
        proposals are not rejected out of hand.

        It is somewhat unusual for an officer who is the subject of
        disciplinary proceedings to suggest that the proceedings are
        unnecessary and a waste of time and money, and should therefore be
        withdrawn, but I hope you will accept that these are unusual
        circumstances.

        Despite the final report, which places the blame on almost
        everyone concerned, except the dead fans, Superintendent Marshall
        and a few colleagues are the only ones faced with possible
        manslaughter charges or severe disciplinary punishment.

        He has no option but to use every piece of evidence he can
        muster to show that he did his best in very difficult
        circumstances.  There is also his own self-respect.   Even one
        death is too much for him to accept responsibility for without the
        most determined fight.  There can be no question of him
        accepting the blame for 95 deaths by default.

       It will be clear from my main letter that I am not seeking to say
       that the complainants' children were responsible in any way nor
       that all the fans outside the ground were wicked or malicious, but
       it flies in the face of known facts and experience to ignore the
       'crowd' syndrome which makes two or more people acting together a
       very different proposition from the sum of the individuals.   Here
       we had some 5,000 latecomers, many of whom had filled in the hours
       before the match by drinking alcohol and were 'merry' at least.
       Anyone who thinks that they could have been controlled in the
       simple terms of the Enquiry (see Para 19 of my main letter) is not
       facing reality.  All the evidence before and since Hillsborough,
       shows that time after time, despite the most intense preparation
       and planning, crowds become uncontrollable and injuries and damage
       ensue.  We can show that this crowd was not the exception to
       the rule as some wish us to believe.

       We can't do it on the same evidence that was shown to the
       Enquiry, however, and will have to bring in all those who were
       upset because their evidence was not used and who will be only too
       willing to come forward and have their say.

       Nothing that I shall put forward will suggest that Liverpool fans
       are any worse or any better than any other fans - the 'crowd'
       syndrome knows no city, county or country boundaries.
I would genuinely prefer to let bygones be bygones.
Superintendent Marshall obviously has some searing experience
that he could put at the disposal of any Force making plans for
another major football match, but he will not be asked whilst this
investigation continues. Your own services, and those of your
men, could also, with respect, be better employed.

It would be very difficult for one police force to suggest that
charges against another police force should be dropped without a
full investigation. There could be allegations of mutual
back-scratching, but, again, the circumstances are unusual. There
has already been a full investigation - and 76 recommendations of
which, as I mention in my main letter, only 15 directly concern
the police. The civil proceedings and the inquest are to come.
Many people would think that enough is enough.

It is obviously necessary for the complainants to be advised
independently whether or not they should continue with their
complaints.  I expect they have solicitors in respect of their
civil claims, who are the obvious ones to advise them and take the
decision entirely out of police hands. With proper handling, an
agreed statement could be prepared which would not cause the
victims organisation to lose any ground in their civil claims.
There could indeed be a substantial gain to the relatives of the
dead fans from an act of generosity and they would avoid any
danger of losing public sympathy by being tarred with the same
brush as those fans who the evidence will show went far beyond
reasonable behaviour.

I may not be thanked by the police insurers for expressing an
opinion that civil proceedings by the relatives and injured cannot
fail but I stressed "against someone" not necessarily the police
alone. Between the civil actions and the compensation fund, I am
sure that many people will think that everything possible has been
done to compensate the victims and that a continued desire to
punish Superintendent Marshall (leave aside the other police
officers for the moment because I do not act for them and am not
authorised to make any proposals on their behalf) whilst so many
others with greater responsibility go free, may cause a backlash.

I hope that whoever has the responsibility will accept this
request as a serious one and not as a mere tactic to avoid the
consequences of wrong-doing. As in many instances where
substantial costs and effort are required and the outcome is not
clear-cut, there is a duty on all solicitors at least to enquire
whether the dispute may be settled amicably, 'out of court'.

Yours faithfully
VINCENT HALE

Detective Chief Superintendent M.J.   Foster,
West Midlands Police,
Hillsborough Enquiry Team,
Nechells Green Police Station,
Fowler Street,
BIRMINGHAM
B7 5DA



                               Page - 2
