                                                                                          MiR.15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                               D a te and tim e raised   3 / e l <$3     lo ^   Number


TitleK                                                                                             To T S>Ot_
(Include source and anybocum ent number i f relevant


Receiver's instructions — urgent action - Yes/No
                                                                                                                Receiver


                                                                                                             3133
                                                                                                                Indexer
Document registered/jrtelUMSil as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                            Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions                      /^ ( uaA .


                                              * U d ..
                                                                                                             7Sf7.
                                                                                                                Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken




Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                           Tel: Bedford




                    THE   HIiu.iJBCRCUGH         .



The following is a statement of what I saw before and during the F./.

Cup semi final at Hillsboroug-h on lptn April 1989. This information is

based on notes that I made on the evening- of the match.

I have given a comprehensive statement to ofj.icers of West Midlands

Police, these points were all mentioned in it,


I arrived at the ground at approx 1.40 prn. At   that time there were

no queues into the ground. At the Leppings Lane turnstiles there was

at least one policeman outside each turnstile. None of the outside gates

were open at this time. I entered through the turnstiles marked for '3'

tickets, inside the ground there were more police, I was searched at

this point. At this time I saw no mounted police at the entrance.


I took up a position between the penalty area and the touchline, on the

right hand side of the pitch-, about halfway up the terrace. There was

plenty of room atthis time.


From about 2 .3O pm onwards, it is apparrent that the centre section, to

my left, is overcrowded. Many people were climbing over the fence into

the pen that I wts in. I was about 10 — 15 yards from the fence. People

are also climbing up into the stands, (the seated area above the terrace).



By 2.50 there are more people standing around me, although it still

seems spacious for a semi final. Just in frontof me, to my right, I hea

—rd someone say that he has got into the ground without showing his tic

-ket. I saw his ticket, with the stub intact, and his mates said that

they did not snow their tickets either. They also comment that it was

chaotic outside the ground.
' *    %




       almost immediately after kick off, people begin climbing the i-'-e

       tne edge of the pitch. It is soon obvious to   me   that the :u.ten --~i   1 > t.V f-

       to be stopped, 'x'hen I noticed some panic on behalf of the oolice • stew­

      ards at the ecge ol the pitch, they were waving their arms, but seemed

      helpless to do anytning. At this time people in my section v.ere unaware

      of what had happened. The match was stopppd alter 6 minutes, (4 i:.inutes

      too late in my view.)


      For the next 10 - 20 minutes it all seemed rather chaotic. Then I began

      to realise that some of the people being laid on the pitch had not passed

      out, but were probably dead. AT about 3.30 I heard a message on the tannoy

      asking all Liverpool fans to evacuate the terrace. This message was so

      quiet that I had to strain to hear it. Noone seemed to take much notice,

      then I saw some people moving out of the terrace, around the back of the

      Leppings Lane stand. I followed them, In the ground I was aware tnat there

      was alot of anger, directed at Photographers maimly. At the back of the

      stand there was some chaos. Some people were overcome with the situation.

      There was a line of 3 — 4 ambulances at the gate. I left the ground, on

      the way down the road I saw a Liverpool fan kick the frontdoor of a parked

      Police Car, he was crying. The Police saw that no damage had been done and

      did not pursue him. This was the only violent incident I saw.
