                                                                                      M IR .15
                     Sheffield Archives Ref:                  /b \^

OTHER D OCUMENT FORM                                Date and time raised             U - S C h ,-   Number



Title
                                       CCQv^                          la^Wrvna^j
(Inclu d e source an d an y docum ent num ber i f relevant)                    '




Receiver's instructions — urgent action    -0M„-fig n                        Qfcr G ^ £ g r ^ T (S E
                                                                                                                     Receiver
  Of       Ni
                                                                                                                  2H 33
                                                                                                                     Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised      7t ] 35g
                                                                                                                 Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                     Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken




                                                                                                                      Indexer
Further action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                                                                             1
T a Cooke Bsq                                        GJD/AMS
Professor of Surgery
University of Glasgow
Departaent of Surgery
Royal Infirmary
10 Alexandra Parade
fllMglW
031 2ER                                              20 April 1989




Dear Professor Cooke


BE* HILLSB0R0C0H - 15 APRIL 1989


I an grateful to you for writing and the information that you Included
In your letter will be of great interest to ray investigative team.

It say be that we shall be In touch with you again to take up the points
that you have made.

Thank you very such for writing.
       UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW
       DEPARTMENT OF SURGERY                          Royal Infirmary,
                                                      10 Alexandra Parade,
       St. Mungo Professor of Surgery:                Glasgow G31 2ER.
      JDartfiKKXaaer T . G . C o o k e                Tel: 041-552 3535
                                                      Ext 5429




17th April 1989



Mr. G. Dear,
Chief Constable,
West Midlands Police,
Birmingham.




Dear Sir,

     I have heard from the television that your police force is
conducting the police enquiry into the Hillsborough disaster, and
I would be grateful if you could pass this letter on to the
officer in charge as I was present at the ground as a Liverpool
supporter and involved both at the Leppings Lane gate and in
giving medical aid to the victims.

     I feel a number of points need to be answered.  I arrived at
the ground just before 2.45 pm and the crowd was about 15 yards
deep from the turnstiles,    but only being controlled by one
mounted police officer who was asking the crowd to back off but
this had little impact considering the numbers involved.      The
crush was intense, so much so that one police officer from inside
the ground was helping supporters climb over the wall.

     One important question that has not received any publicity
is that the turnstiles that I was at did not let anybody through
between 2.45 pm and one minute to 3 o'clock when the main door
opened.  I feel the decision to open the main door was correct as
already there was severe risk to injury outside the ground.
However,  the question must be answered - why were fans not
allowed to filter slowly through the turnstiles?




                                                                             3
    * .* »
     -


*
         I




                                           -   2   -




                  I would also like to point out, as an experienced attender
             to football matches, that there appeared to me to be the normal
             amount, if not fewer, people looking for spare tickets and I feel
             that the "fan with no ticket" is a red herring. However, most of
             us did pass through the gates without our tickets being checked,
             and I, like many others, still have an intact ticket.

                  The next point I would like to make is that there appear to
             be no emergency plans for dealing with this sort of situation.
             As a doctor I find this most surprising. One would have thought,
             as in most other public situations, a plan should be developed
             and rehearsed by the police and emergency services for dealing
             with any tragic event.   In my view, this lack of co-ordination
             resulted in potentially salvagible victims being ignored
             increased the number of deaths.

                  I will be happy to give evidence at any enquiry that you may
             be making.




             Yours sincerely,



             T .g . cooke
             Professor of Surgery.




                                                                                 4
