                             I ncident at Hillsborough Football Club



Andrew James Shiel
Police Constable 2662
Main Street Police Station, Rotherham.



I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police stationed at Rotherham#

At 8sm Saturday 15 April 1989 I paraded at Main Street Police Station to commence duty
in connection with the Hillsborough Footbal match between Liverpool and Nottingham
Forest football clubs.Transport was provided to the groung and I was there assigned to
serial 39 which was deployed to Halifax Road to await the arrivail of the Liverpool
coaches and the supporters,The officers incharge of the serial were Inspector Keek
and Sergeant Doyle.

 At 10am we were briefed regarding the policing of the football event by various senior
 officers in the North Stand of the ground.After this briefing Insp Meek gave a shorter
 account of Serial 39 and 40’s duties for the day.We then made our way to Claywheels Lane
 to await the arrinail of the first Liverpool Coach.From Claywheels lane we were re-deployed
A s Halifax Eoad.There we were deployed in pairs myself working with PC 1927 Taylor, in
^ie area opposite the Mobile garage on Halifax Road.It was the intention to ensure that
 the football supports had no articles ihich could be usedas a weapon or cause danger
 be taken into the groundtand that any alcohol be left on the coaches.
The coaches were parked on Halifax Road facing away from the ground the first being parked
 the furthest away.As the coaches were being parked at my location random searched were
 made of the alighting supporters.As further coaches arrivied we made out way down Halifax
Road keeping witji the last coach to arrive.On the arrivail of one coach near to the
 Working Mens Club on Halifax Road it was noticed that fuel was leaking from the
 vehicle and therefore the firebridge were requested.Myself and PC Taylor remained with
 the Coach until the fire bridge had arrived and made the coach sfe.

We then walked down Halifax Road towards Claywheels Lane and as we did so I noticed
large numbers of alcohol cans, empty glasses on the pavement and the wall tops.
The supporters I had seen I did notice that a large number of them had been drinking
and were in   very high spirits
As we reached Claywheels Lane we again joined Serial 39 the intention to walk onto
the police garage, but due to a radio message f rom ground control I was instructed with
other officers by Sergeant Doyle that we were required to attend at the Leppings Lane
^^ind of the ground although I was not aware of tfre reason. We attended at that location
immediately where we joined a number of other officers outside the ground. I then entered
the ground via the West Stand entrance together with PC Taylor where I saw a large number
of fans leaving the West Stand Terrace by the central tunnel joining other fans who were
milling around in that area. A number of people were laid on the ground obviously injured
being tendered to by police officers and fans alike. Some of the fans were abusive towards
myself and other officers whilst others were distressed and upset. I followed PC Taylor
into the central tunnel where he picked up a young boy aged approximately     yrs who
appeared seriously injured. PC !Eaylor made his way back out of the tunnel but due to the
mass of people I had to assist him in clearing a way through onto Leppings Lane where
he was placed in the rear of a South Yorkshire ambulance where attempts were made to revive
the boy with the assistance of an ambulance woman. It was neccessary for the boy to have
oxygen and I fetched a oxygen revival kit from the Fire service personnel located nearby.
Hie oxygen supplied with the equipment in the ambulance was already in use inside the
stadium. Hie ambulance woman was then relieved by an ambulance man who was in fact a member
of the crew assigned to that vehicle. Due to the seriousness of the boys injuries it was
neccessary for me to convey the boy to the Northern General Hospital due to the fact that
the driver was engaged in reeusitation of other fans.PC Taylor and the ambulance crew
member remained in the rear attempting to revive the boy. With the aid of another officer
who was aware of the location of the hospital we transported the boy to the accident and
emergency department where the boy was admitted. I then returned to the ground with the
                                  » 2 *




 ambulance man whilst PC Taylor remained with the boy. I attended immediately at the
 Leppings Lane end of the ground where I saw the ambulance driver. On his instructions
 three more casualties were placed in the rear of the ambulance which I conveyed to the
 Northern General Hospital whilst the ambulance crew administered firfct aid in the rear.
 On this journey and subsequent ones I had a police motorcycle escort to and from the
 hospital. I made a total of three journies to and from the hospital conveying approximately
 seven people from the leppings Lane end of the ground. From the second journey onwards
 the route to and from the Hospital was manned by police officers at all the junctions
 in order to allow a free passage to the location ensuring the quickest travelling time.

 During the time I was driving the ambulance I was aware of a large number of fans
 standing in the roadway of Leppings ^ane and walking away from the ground. They were
 oblivious to any traffic and even though the emergency blue lights were illuminated and
 the sirens were on the fans didnot appear to show any concern for their own safety or
 the urgency at which the ambulance was being used for. They were reluctant to move off
 the road way until the last possible moment resulting in me having to slow down in order
 to avoid them.

 Once I was relieved of this duty I attended in the area of the West'. Stand where I was
 with other officers instructed to form a cordon near to the perimeter of the stadium
 in order to prevent the fans and public from seeing or interfering with the deceased.
 Whilst stood there the fans shouted abuse and threats towards ourselves and other officers
^kearby. Once the deceased fans had been moved I attended at the North Stand where I
 rejoined my serial and PC Taylor who had returned from the hospital.

 After a short breifing by Senior officers I returned to the Northern General Hospital
 where I attended at the mortuary where I labelled eleven of the deceased with the details
 available at the hospital. I returned to Killsbrough Football Stadium with the body of
 Arthur Horrocks^Zyrs, born 190148 of                      [Merseyside by ambualnce. He
 was placed in the Gymnasium area which had been utilised as a nprtuarv area prior to
 identification by the brother of the deceased Malcolm Horrocks
 Liverpool, erseyside. On completion of the identification the deceased was conveyed by
 ambulance to the Medico Legal Centre,Sheffield where he was handed to the reception staff
 at the centre.

 At 1.30am Sunday 16 April 1989 I paraded off duty at ^ain Street Police Station.
                                                                            Q
 I cannot describe the persons whom I conveyed by ambulance to the Northern eneral
 Hospital and I am unable to recollect to whom the person, Arthur Horrocks was handed at
 the medico legal centre.
