STATEMENT PAGES
 P71Q   -   3139
 Incident      102   260390 0P8064                          Elfr_
                                          DOCUMENT RECORD PRT                            .u.^pyoppy,
                                                                Is
                                                                 ' Sheffield Archives Ref:
                                                               sra M ja fctM w          si 8^.9
                                                                                       Station

       •ame     ,    WARING

 Forenames           ROY

 Age                                           Date of birth

 Address


 Occupation          POL dl

 Telephone

 IC                  Height                    Build

 Hair colour

/-” '<r type

♦ 3                                            Complexion

 Facial hair

 Glasses             Use                       Accent

 Number of Pages

 Dated               280489                                               R. WARING Signed


              I am ROY WARING, a Chief Inspector in the Headquarters Operations

              Division of South Yorkshire Police.      On Saturday, 15 April 1989

              (150489), I was detailed for duty at the Hillsborough Football Ground

-             in connection with the Semi-Final match between Liverpool and

% !           Nottingham Forest.   I was working Sector 2 under the command of

              Superintendent Roger Marshall.   This sector was divided into two

              halves and I was responsible for Section 2A.      This sub-sector covered

              serials 22 to 33 and serials 44,46, 47 and 48.      All these serials were

              deployed outside the ground, the lower numbered serials being

              responsible for patrolling Middlewood Road from the Hillsborough

              shopping precinct through to the top of Leppings Lane and as far as

              Crofton Avenue.   Other officers were deployed in Leppings Lane itself

              in the Catchbar Lane area and other serials manned the barriers which

              block off the small side streets off Leppings Lane and Penistone Road

                                                                                                   2719
                                                                    PAGE    2
                                                                    S1859

known locally as the triangle.     Other serials have responsibility for

policing the traffic island area at Leppings Lane/Penistone Road with

a view to preventing clashes of supporters from opposing sides.

Serial 33 is responsible for policing that part of Penistone Road

North from the Travellers Rest public house to Wardsend Road North.

The serials having responsibility for the barriers on the side roads

are static points, the other serials have a patrol responsibility in

the particular area laid out in the operation order.

On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I ccranenced duty at 9.00am (0900)

at the Niagara stables.     I intended meeting officers who were

attending on a mutual aid basis from other forces.     On arrival at

Niagara I saw that Superintendent Marsh was already in attendance

there and since I had to attend the briefing at Hillsborough at 9.45am

(0945) am I left Niagara at 9.30am (0930) and made m y way to the

ground.   On arrival at the ground I drew a radio and went to the North

Stand where the briefing carrmenced at 10.00am (1000).   Following the

briefing refreshments were available and serials were instructed to be

in position by 11.00am (1100).    Having had something to eat and

a drink, I went out into the street on the Penistone Road side of the

ground just before 11.00am (1100).    My initial patrol was around the

triangle area where I noticed that all officers and barriers were in

position. I had a short conversation with each pair of constables as

I walked round this area and was satisfied that it was properly

contained.   I continued and walked out into the Catchbar Lane and then

Middlewood Road area where I saw that officers were deployed on their

patrols and it was at this time that I noticed that the Park Hotel on

Wadsley Lane was obviously closed and the windows boarded up.      I took

particular notice of this because at the Semi-Final 1988 (000088) I

had to close these premises at 2.15pm (1415) following trouble with

persons drinking therein.    I then walked back along the length of
                                                                 PAGE     3
                                                                 S1859

Leppings Lane to the traffic roundabout end, again seeing that

officers were deployed on their patrols as required and I spent some

time at that end considering the segregation of supporters after the

match.   This proved to be somewhat problematic last year when large

numbers of people left the ground because opposing fans' coaches are

often parked in the Berries Road area and this is one of the closest

points that the two opposing sides come together.   Last year, I had

had to deploy a large cordon across the road here to ensure that

segregation, and I spent some time wondering how this could be

achieved this year.

During my initial walk round there were supporters already about but

there were not that many.   I am not aware what time the turnstiles at

Leppings Lane actually opened.    I recall from the briefing that some

gates were to be opened at 11.00am (1100) but that the majority were

to be opened at 12 noon (1200).

As the morning progressed I patrolled on foot in the area I have

previously described but I did not go right down to the Hillsborough

shopping precinct, having had a short conversation with Inspector

Humphries who stated that things were relatively quiet at that end.

Pedestrian traffic in the Middlewood Road/Leppings Lane/Penistone Road

area gradually increased as time went by particularly with the

commencement of the arrival of coaches which were initially parked in

Claywheels Lane and then later directed to Halifax Road for parking.

As the pedestrian traffic increased, and particularly with the

weather being good at the time, groups of people were making their way

to the ground while others were sitting on walls or standing in groups

on spare land and a significant number of these were drinking alcohol

from tins and large plastic bottles.   I myself advised numerous people

that they would not be allowed to take alcohol into the ground nor

would they be admitted if they were drunk and I heard other officers
                                                                  PAGE    4
                                                                  S1859

regulary advising people the same.    I am satisfied that officers on

patrol in the areas were paying active attention to the crowds as they

build up. With regard to the behaviour of the Liverpool fans as they

approached the ground, I would describe it as boisterous but there

were no outbreaks that I saw of public order problems although I do

recall hearing transmissions on the radio regarding trouble at the Fox

Public House on Foxhill Road.

At about 1.30pm (1330) I walked along Leppings Lane which was very

busy on both sides of the road with pedestrian traffic and as I passed

the lappings Lane end I saw that it was very busy.   I remember

stopping there a few moments and seeing mounted officers encouraging

people to enter the ground or to clear away from the rear pen if they

were not ticket holders.   I then walked out into Middlewood Road where

it was again fairly busy, Liverpool supporters being encouraged to

park their cars in that area, particularly in side roads.

I recalled that the one special train expected was due to arrive at

around 2.00pm (1400) and with that in mind I returned along Leppings

Lana intending to go to the traffic island end and observe the

movement of spectators with regard to segregation.   As I walked from

Catchbar Lane I saw that the area around the bridge over the river was

very busy indeed with people and that the Leppings Lane enclosure was

similarly extremely busy although apparently under control. I

continued along Leppings Lane which was also extremely busy toward the

traffic island end.   As I approached the traffic island I saw the

front end of the escorted fans who I assumed were the occupants of the

special train. They were being escorted by mounted officers, foot

officers, and I saw at least one dog van.   The majority of these

people appeared confined to the footpath and there was a considerable

number of them. I arrived at the traffic island end of Leppings Lane

and saw that there were no difficulties regarding segregation and I
                                                                   PAGE
                                                                   S1859

remained at that traffic island for seme tine.

 It is difficult to be precise but I think it would be approaching

2.30pm (1430) when I heard a message on my radio which was officers

at the leppings Lane entrance to the ground asking for vehicular

traffic to be stopped along Leppings Lane.   I recall this particular

because I was standing next to the PC working traffic duty on the

island who had an altercation with a driver who had driven at speed

through persons crossing the road while sounding his horn but making

no attempt to slow down.   The officer advised this driver quite

properly but in no uncertain terms and as he set off he was in fact

the first vehicle to be denied access to Leppings Lane.    Still being

busy with pedestrian traffic but with apparently no threat of

segregation problems, I left the traffic island end of Leppings Lane

and started to walk back towards the Leppings Lane entrance to the

ground.   As I was walking along it was fairly evident to me that the

persons approaching the ground were those who had either been to

licensed premises or had stayed away from the ground in other places

drinking because the proportion of people who I would describe as

boisterous through drink seemed to have significantly increased. As I

neared the leppings Lane end of the ground, I recall seeing Inspector

Sykes standing in that location and number of other officers who names

are not known to me who were manning the barriers.    I could also see

that the number of people waiting to enter the ground had increased

significantly and now stretched certainly to the roadway of Leppings

Lana but I do not recall it completely blocking it.   By the time I

reached this point it must have been between quarter to and ten

minutes to three (1445 to 1450). I stood at the back of the crowd in

the area of the sweet shop in Leppings Lane and I in fact was standing

in the roadway itself but not in the middle of the road.   I could see

mounted officers among the crowd and from where I was standing,
                                                                 PAGE      6
                                                                 S1859

although the crowd was very large there was no indication to me that

there was any serious problem by the turnstiles themselves. Fran my

position I could see the right hand side of Gate A and turnstiles 1-16.

I could not see Gate B or Gate C. While standing in this position

people were continually turning up and I was jostled among the crowd

and continually bombarded by people asking which was the North Stand,

West Stand, standing areas etc. Even though tickets and entrances

were colour coded, this did not seem to have been readily appreciated

by spectators. The time now must have been approaching three o'clock

(1500) as I recall hearing a concerted roar frcm the crowd inside the

ground as though the teams had come out.   As I recall it was not the

start of the game as I am sure it was just prior to three o'clock

(1500).   While standing in this position among the crowd and due to

the noise frcm the stadium I cannot recall hearing specific radio

transmissions although at about this time I became aware of the Police

landrover pulling up on my left and an Inspector using the public

address system asking the crowd to stop pushing forward and he

repeated this message several times. A moment or so after this I

recall seeing Gate A being tugged open although I could not see due to

the crowd in front of me who was opening it. I ranember thinking to

myself that if that gate was opened it would never be managed to be

closed again.    However, after seme few seconds the gate in fact was

pulled to.   During that time a significant number of people passed

though Gate A.    I am not in a position to estimate how many but I can

say that after that gate had been closed the numbers in the Leppings

Lane entrance pen had reduced significantly.    Whether other gates were

opened at about the same time I am unable to say.   After the closing

of Gate A, people continued to enter via the turnstiles and the

numbers in that entrance pen further reduced.    In the few nonents that

followed things seemed to have quietened down considerably and I then
                                                                    PAGE    7
                                                                    S1859

heard a transmission to the effect that all available personnel were

to snter the ground.     Also at this time I could see Superintendent

Roger Marshall who was standing seme 10-15 yards (yds) to my

right.     There were quite a number of PCs in the vicinity also.

Superintendent MARSHALL obviously having heard this message walked

towards me and shouted words to the effect that he would take the

majority of men with him into the ground and that I was to keep a grip

of this back end.     I recall in particular using the words 'Keep a

grip'. He went into the ground through either Gate B or Gate C taking

with him the majority of the PCs and leaving me with about one dozen.

I formed these officers into a loose cordon across the entrance pen

and remained there.     It was unknown to me or the officers with me at

that time what had happened within the ground and I assumed it was

some sort of public order problem.     I then heard a message on my radio

to the effect that no further persons were to be allowed into the

ground and almost immediately the narrow blue turnstile gates behind

me were all closed.     I instructed the officers who were with me to

clear the Leppings Lane entrance pen of people and not to allow any

further persons in.    We commenced to do this but had a great deal of

difficulty and altercation with people arriving late who were ticket

holders.    However, I was able, using these officers, to hold the rear

of Leppings Lane fairly sterile.     There were still quite a large

number of people out in Leppings Lane itself.     While holding the rear

of Leppings Lane outside the ground other officers began to turn up

presumably in response to the radio message.     After seme few minutes

Superintendent MARSHALL returned to my position and having had a short

conversation with him we estimated that we had seme 40 or so officers

with us and available.     Superintendent MARSHALL attsnpted to use his

radio to ask control where these officers could be best deployed but

he received no reply.     In view of this inability to communicate he
                                                                    PAGE      8
                                                                    S1859

instructed me to go personally to the control box and advise regarding

the situation in Leppins Lane.     I entered the ground by Gate C and

headed for the police control box.     I saw numerous people together

with police officers in that open area behind the West Stand and some

of the people appeared to be injured.       I continued towards the control

room and climbed the stairs.     On looking over the playing area my

initial impression was that there had been sane sort of pitch invasion

but I then saw that there were what appeared to be numerous casualties.

I entered the control box and spoke to, I think, Superintendent MURRAY.

I explained that we had some officers available for deployment in

leppings Lane and he said words to the effect that we were to hold the

back end.   I returned to Leppings Lane and conveyed the message to Mr.

Marshall. Realising that something fairly major had occurred and

hearing snatches of transmission referring to ambulances and

casualties I decided to clear as far as possible the rear of the

leppings Lane entrances and maintain an open roadway in Leppings

Lane.   I instructed the PCs with me to keep the rear of the service

road and the entrance pen as clear as at all possible and I asked

Sergeant THOMAS of the Mounted Branch to try and clear, again as feu:

possible, people away frcm that back end.      I walked out into Leppings

Lane itself the roadway of which was reasonably clear and stopped a

traffic mobile.     I asked officers in that mobile to close Leppings

Lane at the traffic light junction with Catchbar Lane.      I similarly

spoke to a traffic motorcylist and then to a traffic supervisor

although I cannot    recall who that was.    Shortly after this fire

appliances began to arrive and ambulances.      I tried to maintain a

through route so that ambulances could enter the service road at the

Leppings Lane end, collect casualties near to Gate C and then leave

the ground via the service road into Penistone Road.      People began

then to leave the ground in large numbers which made Leppings Lane
                                                                 PAGE     9
                                                                 S1859

again very congested.   However, emergency vehicles were able to get

through.

As more and more people began to leave the ground there was

an extremely belligerent mood taking over a great deal of abuse was

directed at police officers. There was in my view a grave risk of a

public order situation developing and while I had sufficient officers

for my needs, a very difficult situation appertained for seme

considerable time.   Due to this I remained in the Leppings Lane area.

I was still not aware, nor were the officers with me, of the scale of

what had occurred.   It was not until some time later when I was

approached by two doctors in Leppings Lane who said that they had

answered the public appeal and I was able to use my radio to ask where

these should be directed.   I was told the gymnasium.   Things had begun

to quieten down outside by this time and I personally took these two

doctors underneath the North Stand through to the gymansium.    I

entered the gymnasium and directed the doctors to the injured persons

area.   I there saw Superintendent MARSH and it was at this stage that

the scale of the disaster was made known to me.   In view of the

situation I suggested to Superintendent MARSH that faced with an

incident of these proportions that he and I could perhaps serve the

joint effort better by manning our posts at Headquarters.     He agreed

and left the ground almost immediately en route for HQ.     I went to

find Superintendent MARSHALL to see if I could be released.     The

situation in Leppings Lane was contained at this time and I found

Superintendent Marshall at the control room and received permission to

be released frcm duty at the ground.   I left the ground and picked up

my private motor vehicle and drove to HQ.   Due to traffic conditions I

did not arrive at HQ until seme time just before 6.00pm (1800).       I

went to the Force Operations Room and together with Superintendent

MARSH, Chief Inspector EDMONDSON and Superintendent ANDERSON we
                                                                           PAGE 10
                                                                           S1859

          discussed the requirements and together went through the Major

          Incident Manual to ensure all support services were being properly

          utilised.   As part of the operations effort I later attended at

          Hairmerton Road Police Station and following discussions with Chief

          Inspector MCROBBIE arranged for the Church Hall on Forbes Road to be

         opened as a reception centre for relatives.    I later returned to HQ

         and remained on duty until 11.30 pm (2330) that night.


                                                              R. WARING SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

^           TIME:             DATE:

^ n N E S S TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                     2728
Incident    102   260390 QP8064        DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                           STATEMENT NUMBER   S2281

                                                                              Station

Surname           HUMPHRIES

Forenames

Age                                        Date of birth

Address


Occupation        POL INS

Telephone

IC                Height                   Build

Hair colour

Hair type

f t                                        Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses           Use                      Accent

Number of Pages

Dated              040589                                   A HUMPHRIES INSP Signed


           INSPECTOR A HUMPHRIES - A3 SUB-DIVISION, MEXBOROUffl.

           On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I was on duty in company with other

           officers involved in duties at the FA Cup semi-final football match at

           Hillsborough, Sheffield between Liverpool Football Club and

           Nottingham Forest Football Club.

           At 9.45 a.m. (0945) that date I attended the main briefing at

           Hillsborough Stadium with my four serials which consisted of four

           Sergeants and thirty Police Constables.   Hie serials under my command

           numbered 22 to 25 inclusive.   Our duties to be performed on the day

           were public order patrols along Middlewood Road, Sheffield from

           Crofton Avenue to Bradfield Road, this area being designated Sub-

           Sector 10.   After a short break for a packed meal I briefed my men

           regarding their specific duties.   Special attention was to be paid to

           all shop premises along the route and to any public houses in the
                                                                     PAGE    2
                                                                     S2281

vicinity.    I also instructed the officers re car parking facilities in

the area.

At approximately 11.05 a.m. (1105) I walked with my serials

to their respective points.     The four serials in my command were

spraad over a distance of approximately one and half miles.     At

approximately 12.30 p.m. (1230) I returned to the junction of

Middlewood Road and Wads ley Lane, men from serials 22 and 23 were in

that location, this covered a shopping area with a number of fast

food shops which were attracting Liverpool supporters. It was obvious

that this was the busiest point in my sector so I remained there.       I

addad a further 2 officers from serial 24 to this area for that

reason.    From the outset, myself and the officers with me were being

approached by Liverpool supporters asking directions to public houses

and off licences.    The main public house in the area was closed so

many supporters wandered off towards the city and along Wadsley Lane

seeking licensed premises.     It was apparent at this early stage that

the majority of supporters had already been drinking quite heavily.

As time progressed more supporters arrived in the area, the majority

of which were walking round with cans and bottles of beer and bottles

of wine.    We were continually being asked for directions to licensed

premises.

At approximately 1.45 p.m. (1345) I was joined by Superintendent

MARSHALL, he was the senior officer in charge of the area.    Mr

MARSHALL wished to see all my officers on their respective points.

With this in mind, together we started to walk along Middlewood Road

in the direction of the Hillsborough precinct.    After we had walked a

short distance, a radio message was received to the effect that a

dwellinghouse holder on Wadsley Lane was experiencing difficulties

with drunken supporters.     It was alleged that the supporters were

urinating in the garden and being abusive.    A Police vehicle was sent
                                                                     PAGE    3
                                                                     S2281

to the location.     Mr MARSHALL said that he knew the area and that he

was only a short distance away to where the incident was occurring.

We, therefore, turned round, walked back along Middlewood Road and up

along Wads ley Lane.    We walked sane considerable distance, but found

no trace of the incident.     However, during this walk we did, in fact,

walk by an off licence, I am unable to say this off licence's exact

location, but it was off Wadsley Lane.     Outside these premises were a

number of Liverpool supporters, some of whom were stood and some of

whom were sat on the frontage of the off licence.       They were all

drinking from cans of beer and bottles of beer and wine.      The off

licence itself was full of customers, all of which appeared to be

Liverpool supporters. I walked into the off licence and was

inmadiately surprised at the amount of staff who appeared to be

serving.    They numbered approximately five or six persons, although

the off licence itself is of the com e r shop type,.    A lady who

appeared to be the owner or the person in charge, enquired about my

visit.     I merely enquired into her and her staffs' well being, but

also reminded them regarding the law relating to selling intoxicants

to persons under 18 years of age.     I must add tha|: at that time inside

and outside the premises I did not see any person who appeared to be

under 18 years of age drinking intoxicants.     However, sane of whan

appeared to be border line cases. After being assured that they were

monitoring all persons they were selling intoxicants to, I left the

premises and rejoined Superintendent MARSHALL.     We made our way back

to the junction of Wadsley Lane and Middlewood Road, at which point
                                                    *



Superintendent MARSHALL departed and walked off towards the

Hillsborough Football Ground itself.     I remained in that location.

The stream of supporters continued up and down these roads, there was

a small amount of trouble in the Kentucky Fried Chicken premises,

which was quickly resolved. The Police Officers in that area were
                                                                   PAGE        4
                                                                   S2281

 continually advising supporters not to get drunk, to leave their

 drinks with the threat that they would not be allowed into the ground.

The amount of cans and bottles left in the area was enormous.      At this

point I must say that the hundred and hundreds of supporters I saw who

were drinking intoxicants or obviously had been drinking intoxicants

were not disorderly or incapable, but I can say that they were all in

drink.

At approximately 2.40 p.m. (1440) to 2.45 p.m. (1445) the volume

of supporters started to increase.    At a time when one would have

expected a decrease as kick-off time approached, they were ccming

from the Wads ley Lane area, all or most still carrying cans and

bottles of intoxicants.    My opinion of this was that because the

majority of licensed premises in the area were closed, they had

travelled greater distances to obtain their drink and were returning

late.    A short time later, although I could just see the Leppings Lane

end of the ground in the distance, I could not see the turnstiles or

gates.    I started to hear radio messages from Superintendent MARSHALL

regarding the build up of supporters at that end of the ground.        These

radio messages started to increase and at one stage I can remember

someone saying they had a hundred men on stand-by in the gym and they

were asked to attend.   Also mounted branch officers said they were

attending.   The radio traffic increased with Mr. Marshall then

starting to say that there was a serious crush.   Someone requested

that the game be delayed for 15 minutes and that this should be put

out over the loud speaker system at the ground.   They originally asked

for this to be done and then demanded for it to be done, but the reply

came back negative.

As previously stated I could see the Leppings Lane end of the

ground, but not the gate or turnstiles.   The area looking from

a distance appeared to be extremely congested with supporters.     I
                                                                    PAGE    5
                                                                    S2281

then noticed an officer who I believed to be Mr. MARSHALL, certainly

with gold braid on his hat, standing on the top of a Police vehicle

positioned in the middle of this crowd looking towards the gate area.

I then heard Mr. MARSHALL over the radio ask that a gate be opened to

relieve the crush, this request was queried by the control.    Mr.

MARSHALL again asked for the gate to be opened, saying the situation

was becoming serious.     I cannot remember a reply to this request, but

then Mr. MARSHALL then demanded that the gate be opened, saying that

if it wasn't opened someone would be seriously injured or even

killed. I can remember the reply came back over the radio, similar to,

"In that case okay," or, "In that case yes."    I can remember it was

about this time that I heard the crowd in the stadium roar.     I

irnoadiately assumed that the teams had entered the pitch.    I realised

from the radio messages that a crush was taking place and slowly moved

down the Hill towards the ground.    I was expecting to be summoned with

my men, but wasn't called.    Around this time there was a small

disturbance between supporters further down the hill, towards the

ground itself, so I again moved nearer to the ground in response to

this incident. This tuned out to be a small skirmish, which broke up

before officers could arrive and the persons concerned ran off along a

road to the right.

Shortly after this a call came over the radio saying, 'Everybody to

the ground,' owing to the fact that only myself and the Sergeants in

charge of the serials had a radio I turned and waved to all the

officers in sight and shouted to them.    As a result of this we all ran

down the hill over a small bridge and turned right into the Leppings

Lane end of the ground.    Radio traffic appeared to be constant at this

time, so I had no means of communication with my serial situated in

the distance.   After turning right into the Leppings Lane end of the

ground, as I entered this area Superintendent MARSHALL asked me and
                                                                    PAGE    6
                                                                    S2281

seme of my men to close a barred gate to stop any further supporters

entering.   We quickly closed this gate and were immediately confronted

by a group of angry supporters showing their tickets and demanding

entry.   At this time I had no idea of what had occurred in the stand

behind me, so I started calming these fans down.    I can remember

saying, "There's been a bit of a crush, give us a few minutes whilst

it's sorted out then we will let you in.    We are only doing this for

your own good."    lb their credit these supporters, who numbered maybe

thirty or more, stood back and waited.

A short time later Mr. MARSHALL approached us and just said, "Go in

there and help them out with the injured," indicating the stand at the

lappings Lane end.   Along with other officers from the gate I then ran

across a large concrete area directly behind the Leppings Lane end

stand (West Stand). As I did so I noticed there were a few

supporters coming from a tunnel under the stand, they were shouting

and swearing saying, "You'd better get in there you bastards," and

"What are you fucking doing out here, you're needed in there," and

similar other continents.

I ran through the tunnel with a number of officers, there were seme

supporters walking through and seme standing.    I noticed Police

Officers were carrying someone through, I thought it was a youth, I

could see he was injured, but I was sure he was alive as he was being

brought out of the tunnel.    I then ran through the tunnel into the

terraced area.    In front of me I could see Policemen at the perimeter

fence passing an injured or dead person through a hole in that fence.

There was a large group of Police Officers on the pitch side of the

fence, so many that the only thing I saw of the pitch area was the top

of the goalposts and an ambulance.   I had no idea what was happening

on the pitch.

I immediately noticed a pile of bodies towards the right hand comer
                                                                  PAGE      7
                                                                  S2281

of the terrace.    The first thing that struck me was that all the faces

of these people were blue.     I made my way towards this area of the

terrace.    At this time I also noticed a metal barrier which appeared

to be bent over and twisted.    I noticed one policeman who I don't know

struggling to get someone off the ground.     I immediately went to help

him down on the concrete area at the back of the tunnel.     This youth

was blue and showing no signs of life.     We started giving him mouth to

mouth resuscitation, we did this for a few minutes, but got no

response.   I can remember the Police Officer with me saying, "I think

he's dead boss, I think he's dead."     Ws therefore covered his face and

ran back into the tunnel and back onto the terraces.    As I did so,

quite a number of people injured and seme who appeared to be lifeless

were being carried out by Police Officers.    Regarding the youth we

carried out, the only description I can give is that he was a white

youth wearing blue denim jeans and a light coloured T shirt or jumper,

this we pulled up to cover his face, before retreating back into the

tunnel.

When I arrived back onto the terraced area, I found two Policemen

giving mouth to mouth resuscitation to a youth on the terrace floor,

they were having difficulty getting his head back with the steps, so I

told them to carry him away.    I assisted them in carrying this youth

back through the tunnel and onto the concrete area.    All this time I

had noticed that seme supporters, still standing on the terrace, were

shouting and swearing at us accusing us of being responsible, calling

us killers and murderers. I left the two officers giving this youth

mouth to mouth resuscitation and once again returned to the terraced

area.   On this occasion I noticed that the supporters above us, in the

stand, many of them were shouting and swearing and waving their fists

at us, seme were even spitting at us.    I can't remember how many times

I went back onto the terraced area, but eventually it cleared.    I can
                                                                    PAGE    8
                                                                    S2281

remember entering the concrete area and looking around me.     It

appeared to be covered with people laid out.     I looked around and

everywhere I looked I could see Policemen and Policewomen bent down

with these people, giving mouth to mouth resuscitation or talking to

them.   At one point a middle aged lady approached me and said that she

was a nurse and asked if she could help.     This lady quickly became

involved, I saw her giving mouth to mouth resuscitation to a number of

people, examining injuries and also reassuring other supporters who

appeared to be distraught.     I have no idea who this lady was, but she

certainly did a marvellous job and her services were much appreciated

by all those present.

I noticed an ambulance pull up at the gate, so I went towards that, at

this time the radio traffic was constant.     I shouted my call sign,

'India 10,' but had no acknowledgement, everyone was talking at once,

so I waited for a lull and shouted up requesting a call for doctors to

attend at the rear of the Leppings Lane stand.     I don't know if this

was received or not because of the radio traffic, I couldn't tell, I

just hoped that they had heard my message and were acting on it.        I

also shouted up for air to be brought to the rear of the Leppings

Lane end stand.     I went to the ambulance, called a couple of Police

Officers nearby and we helped the ambulancemen wheel the stretchers

out and pick up seme of the injured youths who were quickly

despatched.    Unfortunately after this had gone, it seemed ages before

another arrived, I suppose it wasn't that long, but it appeared so at

the time.     I can remember a Policewoman who I do not know, ask

me for a stretcher urgently.    She and a St. Johns Ambulanceman had a

youth on the floor, she was giving him mouth to mouth and the

ambulanceman was thumping his chest.    I can remember they said that

he had gone once and that they had brought him round.    It would

appear that he had gone again, but they continued and although the
                                                                    PAGE    9
                                                                    S2281

youth was blue, he eventually appeared to be breathing.     I told

them to keep looking after him and that I would get an ambulance.

I want towards the gate and to my right, near the roadway, I could

see a fire engine.    I shouted to a Police Officer whom I recognised

from A2 Sub-Division, I instructed him to go to the fire engine and

try and obtain breathing apparatus, but when he arrived all the

firanen had left the engine.    An ambulance came almost immediately, so

I ccnmandeered a stretcher and brought that to the Policewoman.      We

lifted the youth onto the stretcher and placed him into the ambulance,

he was still breathing, but he looked very ill and was still quite

blue.

I continued organising stretchers as the ambulances arrived.       On one

occasion, after I had been to the concrete area, I returned to the

gate and a policeman brought a doctor to me, he was a tall man, quite

young.    By this time we had a number of injured persons propped up

along the outer wall, bodies were also being put a short distance

away.    An Inspector and a serial of policemen, mainly frcm A2 Sub-

Division, were standing in a line covering the bodies from view.      The

doctor walked along, pointed out supporters and was saying, "This man

must be next in the ambulance, this one is dead, this one is injured

but can wait."    I can remember instructing Sergeant Lomas and some of

the other officers present to follow the doctor's instructions

regarding priority for ambulances, this was complied with.    As the

frequency of ambulance arrivals increased we eventually moved all the

injured parties and bodies from the concrete area at the rear of the

stand.    I personally thought the doctor did a fine job, he appeared to

be quick and methodical in diagnosing injuries and death.    His

instructions were being passed on to the ambulance drivers, which in

turn were related to the hospital staff.

After all the injured had been removed, I can remember standing by the
                                                                    PAGE 10
                                                                    S2281

gats when the crowd started to leave the stand.     I was taking a

breather and also at the same time stopping any of the crowd caning

through the gate so they wouldn't see the bodies.     One Liverpool

supporter stood in front of me and started shouting at the crowd to

use the other entrance, he was trying to help and maybe letting off

steam.    Eventually we closed the gate, but not before a number of

supporters had deliberately tried to push by to have a look at the

bodies.    I then went and joined a cordon of officers situated at the

entrance to the leppings Lane end of the ground.    At this point I

joined up with sane of my other serials, we stood in a line whilst the

whole of the Liverpool supporters left the ground, many of them were

very angry, they were calling us, 'Murdering bastards' and 'Killers.'

I can remember one shouted, 'Thirty scousers dead, I suppose you lot

are happy now.' There was a continuous torrent of abuse and threats

made by the crowd as they passed by.    To their credit all the officers

stood up to this constant abuse and made no continents back.   I believe

had any one of these officers lost his nerve or lost their heads, or

reacted in any way, there would have been a riot.

The attached report refers to my recollection of the event surrounding

the incident at the Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield on

Saturday 15 April 1989.    (150489)   I have received a pro-forma

document from Chief Superintendent WAIN requesting specific details,

most of these are fully covered within the content of the report.

However, items six to ten I would like to cover separately:

Item 6 - What was the mood of the fans, as previously stated, prior to

the start of the match, the majority of fans I saw were in drink,

although I must say they were not abusive or disorderly.

Item 7 - Actions of stewards; I can say that at no time throughout the

entire incident, in which I was involved, did I notice any stewards

whatsoever.
                                                                           PAGE 11
                                                                           S2281

         Item 8 - Breakdown in radio transmissions; as previously stated, the

         problem with transmissions was that the radio traffic was constant and

         on many occasions there appeared to be more than one person talking at

         once.

         Item 9 - 1 have attempted to describe the body of the youth with which

         I was personally involved, although I did assist with and see quite a

         number of other bodies.     I am unable to assist any further with any

         form of identification of these people, but I can say that I cannot

        recollect seeing the bodies of any women or children.

         Item 10 - I can remember feeling extremely sad for the persons who had

        died and those injured in the incident.     I was also shocked and amazed

        at the conduct of some of the supporters during and after the

        incident.    I can understand some of their behaviour, through

        bereavement or maybe shock, but many of them I feel were just jumping

        on the bandwagon and maybe trying to lay blame on others for their own

        actions.    There was one particular point that I could not understand,

        after entering the Leppings Lane end of the ground, behind the West

        Stand, as previously mentioned a large concrete area, this area could

        have safely accomodated a very large number of supporters and yet on

        the face of it everyone seems to have entered or tried to have entered

        the tunnel leading to the small terraced area.




                                                        A HUMPHRIES INSP SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

          TIME:              DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE

END OF REPORT
Incident     102   260390 QP8064         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                             STATEMENT NUMBER   S2831

                                                                                Station
^um arne           LOMAS

Forenames          PHILIP   COLIN

Age                                          Date of birth

Address            SOUTH YORKSHIRE POL
                   DONCASTER

Occupation         POL PS2305

Telephone

IC                 Height                    Build

Hair colour

Hair type

4L                                           Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses            Use                       Accent

Number of Pages

Dated              030589                                                        Signed


           I am a Police Sergeant in the South Yorkshire Police currently

           stationed at Doncaster.     I have a total of 12 1/2 years service, the

           last 3 years being in the rank of Sergeant.

           At 8.15am (0815) on Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), I paraded for

           duty at the Doncaster Police Station.      My tour of duty was timed

           between 8.30am (0830) and 4.30pm (1630).       I attended on duty in order

           to travel to the Sheffield Wednesday football ground at Hillsborough

           for the FA Cup Semi Final between Liverpool and Notts Forest.         I

           anticipated to work overtime on this date and expected to retire from

           duty at around 8pn (2000). Whilst at the Doncaster Police Station I

           checked that all my manpower detail were present and reported to

           Inspector HUMPHRIES.     I later learned that one man PC                  iad

           requested permission to go hone for personal reasons.       This request

           was made to Insp HUMPHRIES. Together with my detail I travelled to
                                                                   PAGE
                                                                   S2831

Sheffield on a double decker bus.

At 9.45am (0945) a briefing was held in the Hillsborough Main

Grandstand chaired by Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD.      The main

duties of the day were outlined and they were;

1. To allow the game to be played with the minimum of disruption.

2. To be fair but firm with fans who overstepped the mark.

3. No person without a ticket was to be admitted into the ground.

Each serial had their own responsibilities in addition to the main

objectives of the day.

At 10.10am (1010) myself and my serial had our first meal.

At 11.10am (1110) I deployed my manpower in Middlewood Rd from Minto

Rd to Wads ley Lane.     Officers were deployed in pairs as follows.    PC

PC2158 CRAN and PC2862 TAYLOR were responsible for the shop frontage

which was positioned in the middle of Middlewood Rd for the area I

was responsible for.      PC703 THORNTON and PC1698 MARTIN were

positioned on the upper end of Middlewood Rd to its junction with

Minto Rd and PC2993 NUGENT and PC1758 WINFIELD had responsibility

for the lower end of Middlewood Rd upto its junction with Wads ley

Lane.   I doubled up with PC469 SHAW and patrolled the full length of

the road. I doubled up with the officer due to being one man down on

my detail. Numerous Liverpool fans had already started to arrive and

it soon became apparent that the busiest stretch ofroad would be

Middlewood Rd from Wads ley Lane to Catch Bar Lane. This stretch of

road is predcminently shops and take away fast food premises.      There

were a large amount of Liverpool fans in this area.

As I patrolled along Middlewood Rd large amounts of fans were

arriving.   I was asked two main questions.     In fact only two

questions, the second always followed the 1st.

1.   Where can I park?

2.   Where can I get a drink?
                                                                  PAGE     3
                                                                  S2831

If the fans were walking the question was restricted to 'Where can I

get a drink'. On each occasion I was asked where intoxicants could be

bought I declined to tell them stating that I was from Doncaster and

didn't know the area.

Word soon spread between fans as if by telepathy where both off

licences and public houses were situated.

About 1.30pm (1330) there were a large number of drunken Liverpool

fans sat in the pub car park of "The Park". They were rowdy.      Insp

Humphries told me that he expected a bit of trouble and asked me to

provide two men from my detail to stand on the comer of Wads ley

Lana and Middlewood Rd.   PC THORNTON and Martin took up this position

about 1.45pm (1345).    I also remained in the location with PC Shaw.

The pedestrian traffic had been heavy but no trouble had occurred.

When we arrived back at the location the drunken fans had left the

area.   I noticed that the majority of the fans were the worse for

drink and many were drunk and staggering.     I also noticed that very

few people were walking to the ground the majority were walking up

Wadsley Lane to an Off Licence I was informed had stocked up fully

with intoxicants and had six staff working and also to a pub some

distance away. The majority of people were just stand or sitting on

the pavement, service road at the junction of Wadsley Lane and

Middlewood Rd and the car park of The Park.    I watched them drinking a

range of intoxicating drinks including, Carlsberg Special Brew,

Guinness, numerous brands of lager and beer.    This beer/lager was

contained in either four pack cans or 2 litre or 2 1/2 litre bottles.

Myself PC SHAW and Insp HUMPHRIES made numerous comments to each other

about the sheer amount of drink that was being consumed.    We spoke

about our feelings of the off licence owner and publican selling so

much drink to drunken people.    I stated that I hoped if any damage was

caused it would be to their property in such large amounts that they
                                                                   PAGE    4
                                                                   S2831

would never open for a football match again.     I never returned up

Middlewood Rd again, it was obvious that ray services were of more use

at this junction.    About 2.15pm (1415) I heard a radio transmission

that there were a group of people at the public house all ready for

causing trouble.     Public order vehicles were deployed.   I again made

the comment that it would be nice if these fans caused any damage, it

would be to the pub. Many fans were standing about and it became

apparent that they did not have tickets.     I was approached by many

youths asking if I knew where they could get sane.     I saw and heard

many saying, 'Have you got any spares'.     I also heard quite a few

people say 'Cane on we'll get into the ground with the crowd they'll

let us in'. When I heard these and similar comments I remember

thinking, 'You've got another thing ccming mate, obviously you haven't

been to Sheffield before'. Up until 2.30pm (1430) pedestrian traffic

going towards the ground had been light.    At 2.30pm (1430) as if by

someone pressing a button the situation had reversed. Everybody now

was heading for the ground.    Looking up Wadsley Lane the pedestrian

traffic grew and grew.    At first the pavement was blocked but then

half the road was covered with liverpool fans.    The vast majority of

these people were the worse for drink. Many still carried four packs

of beer and lager.    I couldn't imagaine how they were going to consume

such quantities before entering the ground, particularly as many were

unsteady on their feet.    I remember thinking quite naively, 'This lot

has no hope of getting in, in their condition'.

I positioned myself on the com e r of Wadsley Lane and Middlewood Rd so

they would see a uniform presence as they came down the hill.     I

looked to my rear towards Leppings Lane and I saw the road completely

blocked up with pedestrians.    I deployed PC Thornton to stop all

vehicular traffic going down Leppings Lane and send it all down

Middlewood Rd.
                                                                   PAGE      5
                                                                   S2831

As the crowd continued to come down Wadsley Lane I had occasion to

speak to many people about their foul language and behaviour.      In

particular I spoke quite severely to one youth who was holding an

opened caraf of red Canadian wine about his language and behaviour

towards two girls walking in the opposite direction.      The suggestions

roada were obscene and totally disgusting.     As he made these remarks he

was holding his penis and shouting 'Suck this you fucking whore!' When

I approached him he immediately apologised to me blaming the drink and

saying he wouldn't do it again.    Remembering Mr DUCKENFIELDS comments

he was severely warned but allowed to continue.      I rsnember, thinking

how each person I spoke to about their behaviour suddenly became very

amenable obviously because they did not want to be arrested prior to

the game starting.    The drunken pedestrians continued and I even saw

two youths carrying a third with his arms over their shoulders.        He

was being half walked and half dragged.      I said to these youths,

'There's more chance of a snowball surviving in hell than you have of

getting into the ground'. One youth replied, 'I know mate, but you've

got to try it!'.

All this time many youths were asking the crowd 'got any spares'.

The reply was always no or there was no reply.     One reply I heard

from a group of five walking to the ground was 'Sorry mate, we need

another two ourselves'.

As I looked down Leppings Lane I could see a large amount of fans

congregating near to the c o me r where the turnstiles were.    It was

obvious that the crowd sat on the wall opposite to the turnstiles did

not have tickets.    I saw each person asking for tickets go down to the

ground and I heard one say words to the effect of 'cone on we'll get

in'.   I didn't understand this because to me it was obvious no ticket,

no entry.

At 2.55pm (1455) the pedestrian traffic was still heavy but it was
                                                                  PAGE      6
                                                                  S2831

mainly confined to the pavement.     I allowed PC THORNTON to stop point

duty. I could see large crowds of people down at the Leppings Lane

turnstiles but I allowed traffic to flow believing it could get

through safely. At some stage I heard a request frcm Supt MARSHALL to

delay the kick off by 15 mins to allow fans to get into the ground.        I

never heard the reply in general radio transmissions were of a very

poor standard even though I would only be about 150 yards (150 yds) or

so away from the Control Room which is situated at the Leppings Lane

End. It soon became apparent that there was some sort of trouble at

the turnstiles.   I thought of deploying sane of ray manpower to assist

but many fans were still making their way to the ground.     Due to

their condition I felt it ray duty to ranain in ray position to protect

property frcm damage.    The transmissions continued and I heard the

control room say to I believe Supt MARSHALL 'We have 100 officers on

standby in the gym if you require any further assistance'.     I remember

thinking again 'It's no good them being in there they should be out',

certainly the amount of pedestrians in Leppings Lane in my mind

justified further officers on the beat.

The problems continued at Leppings Lane and, I knew this because of

radio transmission.     I believe I heard either 3 or 4 requests for a

gate to be opened to relieve the pressure.     In the end Supt MARSHALL

said words to the effect of, 'If the gate is not opened we will have a

catastrophy on our hands'.    The order was given for the gate to be

opened.

A short time later we were at max a minute I'd say about 100-150 yards

(100-150 yds) away waved down to the turnstiles.    On our arrival we

were asked to form a cordon across the entrance and police horses

moved the crowd of about 150-200 away.    Many were complaining because

they had tickets we refused to allow anyone past.

One youth the worse for drink was standing with his arms in the air.
                                                                     PAGE     7
                                                                     S2831

He was eventually knocked over by a police horse.     I saw him hobble to

the end of a bridge wall assisted by another fan.     I saw him then

punch the bridge brick work with full force.     I thought you drunken

idiot. I saw his hand after he had done it.     All his knuckles were

bleeding and he was obviously in pain.     The complaints kept on coming

as to why we were not admitting anyone into the ground.

About 3.10 pm (1510) fans started to come out of the ground very

upset and very hostile in particular to the Police.     We were sworn

at and many were saying 'it's no good being out here you should be

in there.'   It was obvious that something had happened but we

didn't know what.   The hostilities continued and it included

middleaged men in respectable dress.

An ambulance arrived and was allowed through.     I saw the ambulance

stop close to the concertina doors furthest away frcm us, a body

was brought out the rear of the ambulances motionless.       Word

started to reach us about a death or deaths inside the ground.

At this stage I believe it was Superintendent MARSHALL approached us

and said, 'Go inside and just do whatever you can'.

Together with other officers I entered the tarmac area at the rear of

Leppings Lane West Stand.    This area leads to the tunnel which in turn

leads to Pens 3 + 4 on the terracing at the rear of the goals.       As I

entered this compound I could see a large amount of people walking

about apparently dazed.     Close to the tunnel entrance I saw approx 6

bodies laid on the floor.     Each body had someone with it.    I saw mouth

to mouth resuscitation along with 1st aid.    Many people were around

these bodies and I decided to give assistance to the root of the

problem which was obviously on the other side of the tunnel.        I went

through the tunnel and saw many people being carried through the

tunnel by fans to the terraced area.     On reaching the pens I went to

the left into pen number 4.    This area was almost clear.     I saw two
                                                                    PAGE     8
                                                                    S2831

officers one being PS Peter DOYLE from C2 Rawmarsh attempting to bend

a section of fence upwards to allow fans access to the pitch.       I

assisted them with this.     I could see that a lot activity was going on

in pen 3.    I could see a PC kicking at the wire mesh to force an

opening.    I saw that bodies were being carried out of this pen.       I

then went onto the pitch to assist in carrying the bodies.      This

section of the fence by the time I reached it was swamped with Police

Officers.    I was unable to get close other than by pilling at PC's and

forcing my way through.    I then went back into pen 4 ran to the tunnel

exit and round the dividing fence and into pen 3.

I could see a line of Police Officers at a diagonal running across the

pen.    This line of officers ran from the bottom c o me r with pen 4 at a

shallow angle across the pen.    I went towards the lower middle part of

the pen at the bottom c o m e r closest to pen 2, I saw a mass of bodies

strewn out on the floor many laid across other bodies.     I could see

that the colour of their faces were purple and there was no signs of

life.    I examined many bodies trying to find one who was not dead or

who had some form of life.    This was to no avail all appeared dead all

were purple.

I assisted in carrying out one male body.     He was laid face downwards

approx 6 ’2" 15-16 stone wearing jeans and red shirt no jack.    He had

dark hair but I never saw his face.     I had hold of his left leg and as

he was carried his jeans started to fall down

did my best to pull them back up.

                                       This body was handed over to

officers on the pitch.    I returned and assisted to carry one further

body but I am unable to remember any details about him other than he

was male short hair and about 25 years.     I again returned but all

the bodies had been taken onto the pitch or into the rear yard.

The mood of the fans not in the pens were very hostile.     The most
                                                                     PAGE     9
                                                                     S2831

hostile people I have ever come across.

Threats were being made all the time this being directed I believed at

the Police.     Whilst in the pen I was spat upon numerous times.     I

tried to ignore the fans but I remember thinking 'When this is over we

are going to have one hell of a riot'. All that was required was a

wrong word or action by the Police.     I saw many Police Officers in the

pens in deep shock.     After the bodies were removed I spoke to several

officers in particular young WPC's who looked close to cracking up and

had tears running down their cheeks.     All declined assistance or to

leave the area.     I was so inpressed by young officers obviously in

early days of service yet wanting to do so much to help.I became aware

of a fan very upset who was looking for his friend.        I saw him try to

get to the pitch and a Police Officer was telling him to go the other

way.    Pushing developed and I intervened immediately pulling the PC

away.   Another officer I believe a Sgt spoke to the fan who broke down

in tears.    He was taken away.   The PC was obviously suffering with

stress from the incident and friendly advice only was given but the

mood of the fans pointed out to him and the effect it could have on

all of us.     Whilst in the pen I spoke to Sgt Michael RODDIS from D2

Attercliffe for a matter of a few seconds or so.I then returned to the

rear yard at Leppings Lane and close to the gate I saw a PC giving

mouth to mouth to a male on the floor.     Another PC was assisting with

cardiac massage.     This fan was dying and reviving.    I was told he had

done this twice.     Insp HUMPHRIES was also there.     I was asked to find

soma oxygen.     I went outside and saw an ambulance stuck in the middle

of fans on the road.     I fought my way through the fans and the abuse

that followed with my presence.     I asked the ambulance supervisor a

man with a white shirt to come with me if he had oxygen as we needed

it urgently.     He came slowly but not without the ambulance, waiting

for it all the time.     I took hold of him by the hand/arm and said,
                                                                    PAGE 10
                                                                    S2831

 'Please cone, we have someone being revived and then he's dying we

need oxygen urgently'.     He then came complete with oxygen.   This was

given to the person who was placed on a stretcher eventually and taken

to hospital.   I left prior to him being taken away.I then went to the

service road at the rear of the compound which runs around the

perimeter of the ground.     A female nurse/doctor asked if I could get

her some bandages this we did from an ambulance.     She administered

first aid.   All the people had someone in attendance.    I then saw Insp

MIL LETT and Insp HUMPHRIES they told me they had a Dr who was

catagorising the injured.     Problems were occuring in that when an

ambulance arrived it was being filled by people of non too serious

injury and the real emergencies were being overlooked.     I ascertained

where seme of the real emergencies were and as soon as an ambulance

arrived I went to it and told the driver that no one gets on board

without my approval.     I then went to the rear and only issued

stretchers to officers who informed me it was an emergency as

diagnosed by one of the doctors and I recognised it from the

information passed from Insp MILLETT or HUMPHRIES.     I saw one Dr who

was dressed in denims.     I believe he is the same person to critisise

the police after the event.    Being there I strongly rebuke this

critisism at the highest level.

Eventually, all the injured were conveyed to hospital, I remained in

the service road taking charge of the ambulances as they arrived until

all the people had been taken away.

I have no doubt that there were stewards there.    I cannot recollect

seeing many or any or seeing what they were doing.    Having

said that I was not looking for this and my mind and actions were

concentrated elsewhere.

My fears of the incident were restricted to the hostility of the

fans.   I feared for the safety of the PC's and other officers there.
                                                                          PAGE 11
                                                                          S2831

         My feelings were that of great sorrow.    Having examined so many bodies

         being unable to offer any life to them.   What a waste.   I would have

         likad to have done more but so would many others.    I have to accept

         that I did all I could under the circumstances but I still feel guilty

         because I was there when 95 people died and I cannot say that I did

         not save a life personally.    I must recognise that by ensuring the

         catagorised injured, went to hospital as soon as possible I may have

         dona such a thing or been part of a team to save lives which is what

         it's all about.

         After the incident occurred virtually no radio transmission were made

         or heard.    The quality was poor.




                                                                        SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

           TIME:              DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                    2750
Incident    102   260390 QP8064          DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                             STATEMENT NUMBER    S2208

                                                                                Station

Surname            SELWOOD

Forenames          IAN

Age                                          Date of birth

Address            S YORKSHIRE POLICE,
                   WOODSEATS PSTN, SHEFFIELD.

Occupation         POL INS

Telephone

IC                 Height                    Build

Hair colour

Hair type

fL                                           Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses            Use                       Accent

Number of Pages 5

Dated              290489                                          IAN SELWOOD Signed


           At 8.45 am (0845 hrs) on Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), I commenced

           duty at Woodseats Police Station, Sheffield, frcm where myself and

           other Officers were taken by a hired P.S.V. to the Sheffield Wednesday

           Football Stadium for a 10.00 am (1000 hrs) briefing.

           I was in charge of 4 Serials, 26 to 29 inclusive, these comprising of

           4 Sergeants and 32 Constables, all from A1 Sub-Division, none of whom

           were known to me either by name or sight.

           We were responsible to Superintendent MARSHALL who was in charge of

           the Liverpool end of the Ground.    The duties of my Serials were as

           follows:-

           Patrolling Parkside Road and Catchbar Lane;

           Manning barriers placed across the mouths of -

           Penistone Road N/Vere Road;

           Penistone Road N/Fielding Road;
                                                                 PAGE     2
                                                                 S2208

Leppings Lane/Vere Road;

Leppings Lane/Fielding Road;

Penistone Road N/Bickerton Road;

Leppings Lane/Bickerton Road;

Leppings Lane/Leake Road;

Leppings Lane/Famdale Road;

Leppings Lane/Shenstone Road;

lappings Lane/Eskdale Road.

My Serials were in position shortly before 11.00 am (1100 hrs) that

day.   Although not many fans were building up in these areas at this

time, gathering mainly around the chip shops and sandwich shops which

were open in the area.    Even at this time I saw fans drinking from

bottles which appeared to be of beer or cider and many were seen to be

drinking from and carrying cans of beer and lager.   During the course

of the day I was asked by several fans directions to nearby public

houses which were open, and in particular, 'The Fox' Public House,

Foxhill Road, which received publicity last year in relation to the

amount of alcohol consumed by the fans.

One incident springs to mind regarding 'The Beehive' Public House,

Dykes Hall Road.   I recall one message being passed early in the day

relating to fans congregating outside these licensed premises,

demanding access, which was refused by the licensee as I believe he

was closed for the day.    However, a short time later I was approached

by 4 youths from Liverpool who asked directions to 'The Beehive'

Public House.   I told them not to bother as he was closed, but I was

told they were friends of the licensee and were expected there by him.

The build up of fans in the Leppings Lane area obviously increased as

the kick off time approached and numerous persons were seen in

possession of alcohol, mainly cans of beer and lager.    Requests for

directions to public houses continued during the afternoon.
                                                                  PAGE      3
                                                                  S2208

I recall that at the pre-match briefing, we were told that the train

from Liverpool was due to arrive at Wadsley Bridge Station at 2.02 pm

(1402 hrs) that day.     However, it did in fact arrive about 10 minutes

early.    Leppings Lane then became blocked by the masses of fans making

their way to the Ground and although many were drinking and carrying

cans of alcohol, the banter between myself and the fans was friendly

and good humoured, and I saw none of the obvious signs of drunkenness.

Although towards kick off time the masses thinned considerably, there

were still fans walking and running along Leppings Lane to the Ground.

I believe that at some time after 2.00 pm (1400 hrs) an instruction

was given, though I do not know by whom, to close Leppings Lane to

vehicular traffic.

During the afternoon I was asked by possibly 7 or 8 fans if I knew the

location of any ticket touts for them to buy tickets.     I was not aware

of any in the area.     This seemed strange in so much as the previous

year when the same two teams played at Hillsborough I saw numerous

ticket touts, who as the kick off approached, were almost giving

tickets away to the fans.     This year I also saw numerous fans asking

other fans if they had any spare tickets.    On each occasion the answer

was no.

As the kick off approached I was not near the Leppings Lane turnstiles

which we were told at the briefing would be opened at 12 noon

(1200 hrs).

Once the fans had cleared in Leppings Lane I began making my way to

Claywheels Lane for a meal, when I was deviated to go to the Leppings

Lane turnstiles.     This would be shortly after 3.00 pm (1500 hrs) that

day. On my arrival at that location a short time later, I saw

numerous Officers in that area but few fans.     I found radio

transmiss ions at that time from Ground Control almost unreadable due

to the noise being made by the spectators. In addition to this,
                                                                   PAGE     4
                                                                   S2208

Constables were not issued with radios and had to rely on supervisory

Officers to pass on messages to them.

A short time after this I was told to go to the rear of the West

Stand. I do not recall whether this instruction came frcm Ground

Control or another Officer in Leppings Lane.

On nty arrival in the area behind the West Stand I saw numerous persons

in the area generally milling about.     I saw seme were distressed,

gasping for breath, others either sitting or lying on the floor

injured, and until I heard of a fatality, the seriousness of the

situation did not become apparent to me.

I saw Officers assisting with casualties and giving mouth to mouth

rescuscitation to persons on the floor.     I assisted other Officers

with the removal of the injured to outside the Ground and into the

area behind the West Stand which joins Leppings Lane and Penistone

Road North. Myself and other Officers gave comfort and what other

assistance we could until a fleet of ambulances began arriving at the

scene.     I recall doctors, nurses and First Aiders arriving in the area

to assist.     I helped with the placing of the injured into the

ambulances. During the course of events I saw about 10 dead bodies

lying by the railings guarding the river and protected frcm public

view by a line of Police Officers.

Although ambulances were wanting to get into the area behind the West

Stand this was impossible as the crowds in that area would not

disperse.     Feeling amongst several fans were running high and I was

verbally abused on several occasions as were other Officers within my

hearing.     Because of the feeling of the crowd in that area, I was

fearful of a serious Public Order situation arising, though

thankfully this did not happen.     During the course of events I did not

handle any bodies.

Sometime after 4.00 pm (1600 hrs) the crowds began to leave the
                                                                              PAGE     5
                                                                              S2208

         Ground, many in a sanbre mood, many verbally abusing the Police.       Once

         they had cleared I went onto the terrace at the Leppings Lane end of

         the Ground and assisted in the removal of a small number of spectators

         who were still remaining.    This was to facilitate the talcing of

         photographs of the area.

         I have policed two other semi-finals in recent years.      In 1988

         (000088), when the same two teams took part.     On this occasion I spent

         much of my time before the kick-off in the area of the Leppings Lane

         turnstiles.    I do not recall any serious Public Order situation on

         this occasion at that location.      I recall several ticket touts being

         in the area who were almost giving tickets away as the kick-off

         approached. Myself and other Officers were also handed tickets by

         fans to pass on to others wishing access to the game.

         In 1987 (000087), I was on duty at the semi-final between Leeds and

        Coventry. I was policing the area behind the South Stand between

         Leppings Lane and Penistone Road North.     Again, on this occasion I do

        not recall any problems.


                                                              IAN SELWOOD SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:   290489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT
Incident    102   260390 OP8064          DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                             STATEMENT NUMBER    S585A

                                                                                 Station

 surname           CROPLEY

Forenames          PAUL    FREDERICK

Age                                          Date of birth

Address            SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


Occupation         POL SGT

Telephone

IC                Height                     Build

Hair colour

Hair type

t ,                                          Ccnplexion

Facial hair

Glasses           Use                        Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                                                                             Signed


           I am a Police Sergeant in the South Yorkshire Police stationed at

           Doncaster Sub-Division.     On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) my

           normal tour of duty would have been weekly leave but because of the FA

           Cup semi-final at Hillsborough Sheffield I was to report for duty in

           full uniform at 8.30am (0830) that day.

           Together with other officers I was taken to Sheffield via bus for a

           briefing at Hillsborough Stadium.

           The briefing took place at 10am (1000).       We were addressed by several

           officers and the briefing took the format of many others, prior to

           football matches I had worked at over the past 17 years.

           At this time I met Inspector Selwood who had charge of a group of

           Serials including Serial 26, my own.        In this Serial were the

           following officers.

           PC 2072 Harratt           PC 1789 Flatman
                                                                      PAGE    2
                                                                      S585A

 PC 1734 Foster         PC 714 Bell

 PC 1431 Jackson        PC 1442 Charters

PC 2354 Plummidge       PC 1882 Riirmer

PC 184 Geeson

I had been aware, prior to ray arrival at Hillsborough, what duties we

wera to carry out.

Briefly we were to operate as a general public order patrol in the

Parkside Road/Catchbar Lane area, outside the ground before the match.

During the match to remain on standby in a PSV at the Leppings Lane

end, during which time we were to be fed. Prior      to the game ending to

taka up patrol as perthe initial part of     ourduties.

Aftar the briefing, I collected one personal radio which at that time

was the only form of comnunication ray Serial had.    We were fed with

what was delightfully called 'a cold snack' and instructed to take up

duties at 11.15am (1115).   I briefed ray men personally.   Because of

the odd number I was partnered by PC Plummidge.      I knew all the

officers personally and ray instructions were met.    I gave no officers

specific areas to cover but spoke in general terms, that the length of

road was quite long and to 'keep moving up and down' which would give

me the opportunity to see and speak to them all.     I discovered that

PC Flatman a camrunity constable, had his own radio with him and would

be able to follow any instructions given to me.

ffe took up our duties at 11.15am (1115).

The length of road we were given to cover extended frcm Penistone Rd

to MiddlewDod Rd and covered the access to the ground from both sets

of supporters.

I walked the complete length of our area only to find thatapart        from

one supermarket there were no other shops (offlicence          -        food)that

would be of interest to the football fans.    On taking up foot patrol

little if anything happened during the first hour.
                                                                         PAGE    3
                                                                         S585A

By 12.30pm (1230) nearly all available on street parking had been

filled. Fans from both clubs were arriving.         There were no problems.

General enquiries were normal, 'Where to get a drink?         Which entrance

do I use' and so on from both sets of supporters.

One significant point did arise during this time, the numbers of

people who were asking other supporters if 'they had tickets for

sals.' These requests were made by young men and boys and I did not

think from any particular football team.

As time moved inexorably closer to kick off, the general numbers on

the streets, footpaths, etc. increased gradually.        There was never one

particular time the numbers swelled immediately.

At about 12.45pm (1245) passing a car sales pitch, on Catchbar Lane I

was spoke to by a man I presumed      to be the proprietor.    He askedme if

I was going to       do anything about this (indicating the youths saton

his boundary wall drinking cans of intoxicants) and pointed to an

e m p ty   piece of land to the rear of his premises he explained was being

used as a urinal.       It was at that point I noticed almost straight away

that the numbers were such that to prevent it happening would be

virtually impossible.      The youths sat on the wall were doing nothing

wrong. Near to this car sales pitch was a Supermarket.         I saw 2

officers from another Serial stood at the door.        They explained that

there had been       'problans' inside with some fans (Liverpool) and that

they were just       keeping their eye on things.

Nothing of any significance happened until about 2pm (1400).        During

that time the numbers swelled until all footpaths, walls etc were a

sea of pedestrians.      Traffic was still running normally but with

increasing difficulty.

By this time I was spending nearly all ray time in the area of Catchbar

Lana/Leppings Lane.

Whilst I would say that the majority of the Liverpool fans were well
                                                                   PAGE      4
                                                                   S585A

behaved, they were a high percentage that were drinking from all

manner of receptacles.     This seemed in stark contrast to Penistone

Road where the Nottingham fans were arriving.      I an not saying there

wera more of them drinking only that their numbers seemed more orderly

and calm.

Between 2pm (1400) and 2.15pm (1415) I spoke to Supt Marshall who

appeared in ccnmand in the area of Leppings Lane.      He enquired where

ray Serial was and instructed me to bring them all to the junction of

lappings Lane/Catchbar Lane.     By the time this was done the roads were

full of Liverpool supporters and traffic progress was difficult.       At

that point we closed off access to Leppings Lane except for serial

busas to alleviate some of the congestion.

Police horses were sweeping the area trying to encourage fans to enter

the ground.   They seemed too reluctant to do so or were there in great

numbers without tickets.    Looking towards the turnstiles from the

junction from a slightly elevated position I could see the action of

the horses.   Youths peeling off and returning to stand on footpaths

etc away from the turnstiles.

Numbers continued to swell.     The area became a sea of discarded beer

cans.   Piles appeared next to walls.

At 2.30pm (1430) ray attention was drawn to a crowd or at least a part

of it at the top of Leppings Lane.      A space appeared and a fight

developed. I saw other officers move towards the skirmish.     By the

time I arrived it appeared all over.      I walked back down Leppings Lane

towards the turnstiles when I saw

                                                Nottingham, run from the

footpath towards the small fight which was taking place in Leppings

Lana.   He was shouting, I could not hear what was said.    He had his

right arm raised and as he reached a youth who had his back to him he

thumped the youth on the head, the youth stumbled. _______ turned and
                                                                   PAGE    5
                                                                   S585A

ran off.   I followed quickly, took hold of him and told him he was

being arrested.   He said "I'VE DONE NOTHING HONEST."    I saw a police

van parked on lappings Lane, placed           inside and instructed the

driver to take him to the charge office inside the ground.     I

collected PC Plummidge frcm the Catchbar Lane junction and took him

with me. Surprisingly it only took a few minutes to reach the charge

office and on ray arrival there stood in an orderly queue to be dealt

with. By approximately 2.55pm (1455) the prisoner had been searched,

and booked in, placed on transport.   At that time I was told that

reports had to be completed immediately.     Not to delay PC Plummidge I

gava him ray radio and instructed him to return to our Serial in order

that they would have some communication and that I would join as soon

as possible. At just before 3pm (1500) I entered the gymnasium where I

saw other officers, some eating, some completing reports.    I sat down

with PC 1837 Brookshaw (A1 - Sub Div) who had also arrested a man and

together we began to complete our reports.

At 3.05pm (1505) I recall an officer shouting to us all in the

gymnasium that we are required in the ground.

Whilst I would not say that he said 'It was a pitch invasion' I

presumed it was something similar.    I ran from the gym with PC

Brookshaw and to get the area had to force our way through a crowd of

special Constables stood between the North Stand and the Spion Kop.

On reaching the front I looked towards the Leppings Lane end and could

see many police officers and fans stood on the field of play.      My

initial thought 'A pitch invasion.'   I ran with PC Brookshaw to the

far end of the ground.

As I got nearer to the Leppings Lane I could clearly see police

officers stood on the fencing and ray first thoughts of a pitch

invasion soon disappeared.   I began to move through some fans who were

on the pitch, they appeared to be in a daze, some holding their
                                                                  PAGE      6
                                                                  S585A

chests, other laid on the pitch.    Not fully aware of exactly what had

happened I quickly checked with one or two apparent injured

supporters, how they were.    Some were very agitated and screaming

 'Thay're dying in there.'   I did not know what had happened.

Gradually I got to the perimeter fence and could see that there were

many people apparently trapped inside the fence and sane were asking

for help.

The gate in the fence was open, some people were getting off the

terrace via the gate assisted by an officer, but the numbers appeared

small.   I still did not know what had happened.    Officers were leaning

over the top of the fence and trying to assist people getting over.

Other officers were trying to break off the wire grill inside the

angle iron framework.    This could only be done by quickly pushing it

backward and forward, weakening the struts.     I assisted where I could.

Over the next two or three minutes, time seemed a blur at this moment.

 I recollect seeing a mass of people physically trapped next

to the fence and wall.   Slowly the impact of what my worst fears were

crept over me, many were hurt.

Together with other officers after the fence grill had been broken we

reached through and dragged a body onto the pitch.    I was helped by

others and we placed him on the grass.   The man appeared lifeless.

Together with a St Johns Ambulanceman we tried mouth to mouth and a

Brooke airway was forced into his throat.   Another man joined us, told

me he was a doctor, did not identify himself.    He tried pounding the

heart.   Nothing seemed to work.

Not realising the enormity of what had happened all around me,

knowing that this man was dead, decided to get him away before the

same thought struck many Liverpool fans around me.    I was helped by

seme police officers and some Liverpool fans.    The body was placed on

an advertising hoarding and we ran the full length of the pitch,
                                                                           PAGE
                                                                           S585A

         leaving the playing area between the North Stand and the Spion Kop.

         An ambulance was parked in that area and we laid the body down.

         Everyone else left inmediately leaving me with the body.    At that time

         I honestly believed that this man was the only fatality.    A group

         of Liverpool supporters arrived carrying a second body.     They laid him

         next to the first and left.

         A Superintendent enquired of me, 'What had I got.' I told him two

         apparently dead men.    He arranged some help and both were taken into

         the gymnasium and laid against the far wall.    I remember seeing a

         police officer with a small boy, and a Liverpool supporter.    Hie small

         boy appeared dead.    A few chairs were spread around us.   I presumed to

         prevent others from seeing us.

         One of the bodies I was dealing with was identified as David Rirrmer of

         Skelmersdale, Lancashire.    The other body remained unidentified that

         night.

         I went off duty at 6am (0600) Sunday 16 April 1989 (160489).




                                                            P F CROPLEY SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN


          TIME:               DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT
Incident       102   260390 OP8064       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                               STATEMENT NUMBER   S2250

                                                                                  Station
      lamu           MOZLEY

Forenames            KEITH

Age                                            Date of birth

Address              SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE,
                     DONCASTER.

Occupation           POL PS1684

Telephone

IC                   Height                    Build

Hair colour

Hair type

<L                                          Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses              Use                    Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                300489                                            K. Mozley Signed


             I am presently stationed in Doncaster Town Sub Division, Doncaster

             Division, as a uniform patrol sergeant.

             At 8.30am (0830) on Saturday, 15th April 1989 (150489), I reported on

             duty at Doncaster Police Station for nty duties at Hillsborough, I knew

             from correspondence received some days earlier that I was in charge of

             a serial of eight officers and that our duties were to be at each end

             of Vere Road and Fielding Road at their junctions with Leppings Lane

             and Penistone Road North, preventing access to these two streets by

             anyone except residents.

             We were transported to Hillsborough by bus and were briefed in the

             North Stand at 10am (1000) that morning.

             Shortly after 11am (1100), the eight officers in my serial in four

             pairs, took up duty at their points.      Metal barriers were placed

             across the road junctions immediately the officers got to their
                                                                    PAGE     2
                                                                    S2250
points.

The Inspector in charge of ray serial was Inspector SELWOOD.    I saw him

at the briefing and several times throughout the day.

I was issued with a radio at the briefing, the officers on ray serial

were not.     I had therefore no way of contacting them other than by a

personal visit to their place of duty.    This could involve a walk of

perhaps three hundred yards (300 yds), from one point to the next.

The officers working at the Penistone Road North end of the two

streets we were supervising were involved with Nottingham Forest

supporters.

Officers working at the Leppings Lane end were involved with Liverpool

supporters.

I visited alternately all four pairs of officers in ray serial.     At the

junction of Vere Road and Penistone Road North, there is a fish and

chip shop on one side and an off-licence on the other side.    From

quite early in the day, large queues had formed at both shops. A

large percentage of supporters of both clubs were drinking as they

were walking along and carrying cans of beer.     I saw one youth

drinking from a seven pint party can of beer.

It was also apparent that both sets of supporters were intermingling

at both sides of the ground, mainly I think by accident having got

lost and looking for their way into the ground.

Throughout the day, I did not see any problems involving rival sets of

supporters.    Hie mood of the fans going to the match was good, and

I saw no animosity from them towards either the Police or fellow

supporters.

I was approached by several persons from about 2pm (1400) asking where

there were sane public toilets.    I did not know of any and told them

that as far as I knew the only toilets were inside the ground.      All

said that it as too early to go in, obviously because it would stop
                                                                   PAGE     3
                                                                   S2250

them frcm drinking.     I was also approached by several obvious

Liverpudlians asking where the ticket touts were as they had not got

tickets.     Only one admitted to travelling without a ticket, the others

said their tickets had been stolen.

At about 2.20pm (1420) I joined two officers PC 2526 AYRES and PC 2042

DRURY in leppings Lane at the junction with Vere Road.    At this time

it was busy with supporters making their way to the Leppings Lane

turnstiles.

There was still the odd Nottingham Forest supporter mixed in with the

Liverpool fans.    Many were asking for directions to their particular

part of the ground, having no idea where they were going.    These

people took up most of our time.

At about 2.45pm (1445) it was brought to my notice that people could

not get to the turnstiles at Leppings Lane end for the North or West

Stands because of a crush of people which had built up.     I was told

by several supporters all brandishing tickets who were asking if they

could gain entry anywhere else.    I did not notice the crush of people

build up and did not realise anything was wrong until I was told.     A

few people, mainly women or persons with children asked if they could

get out of the way nearby until the crowd had cleared.    I mentioned

the problems to an Inspector who was walking past us - not our

Inspector and I do not know who he was.    He went off in the direction

of the turnstiles.    I could see that there were Police Officers there

with the crowd.    I could see the mounted officers above the heads of

the crowd.    I did not appreciate the seriousness of this crowding

until about four Liverpool supporters at separate times said that if

something was not done about it, there would be another Heysel

disaster.

There were still at this time a steady stream of supporters walking

along the road towards the turnstiles.    There were still in evidence a
                                                                    PAGE     4
                                                                    S2250

lot of cans of beer.

A short time after I first noticed the congestion, I saw that it was

beginning to clear.     I was not aware of the reasons why it was

clearing.     I did not hear any radio messages but with the noise of the

crowd and being constantly in conversation with someone, it was easy

to miss what was being said.

It seemed to me that the congestion cleared some minutes before the

kick off although it is difficult to tell as I can only judge from the

noise of the crowd inside the ground.     I could tell by the noise of

the crowd that the match had started.     There was no crush outside at

this time.     There were over a hundred people in Leppings Lane who were

making no effort to get into the ground and who obviously did not have

tickets.     They were fairly well behaved but shouting and I considered

that all had been drinking.     They were on the other side of Leppings

Lane frcm the football ground on the footpath.

I heard a readio messge shortly after the game had started asking for

all available officers to go into the ground,      tty job was to prevent

any harrassment of the residents nearby and as there were a lot of

people outside the ground, I did not consider, myself or any of my

serial to be available.     In any case, I was only in contact with two

of them.     I could have contacted another two within a short time.   Had

I known what was actually happening inside the ground, my decision

might have been different.     Fran listening to the messages on the

radio, I was none the wiser as to what was going on.      I heard a call

for an ambulance because someone was seriously injured but was still

unaware of the situation inside the ground.

Shortly after the incident developed, a few people started leaving the

ground.    I was asking them what was happening.    At this time they had

no idea of the disaster which had occurred but were aware that people

were hurt.



                                                                                 2766
                                                                            PAGE
                                                                            S2250

     Fira engines and ambulances started arriving in Leppings Lane and

     shortly afterwards I heard on the radio of the need for a mortuary.

     It was only then, perhaps 20 minutes after, that I realised the

     seriousness of what had occurred.   It was too late by then to be of

     any help inside the ground and in any case, a lot of people were

     leaving the ground requiring supervision.      Seine of them, mainly

     teenagers who had been drinking were shouting and swearing at the

     Police Officers present that it was all our fault.        Many were crying

     and all were upset.   The situation outside became even more volatile

     when the crowd began to leave enmass.      Even more people were shouting

     accusations at the Police although I would say that they were only a

     small percentage of the people there.      The fire engines parked in

     Leppings Lane were getting in the way of the crowd who were leaving

     and I took steps to have them parked out of the way.

     None of the Police Officers in my view responded to the abuse they

     were getting from the small percentage of the supporters leaving the

     ground.   All these people were ignored.    To have re-acted to them

     would I am sure have sparked wholesale violance against the few

     Police left in the streets.   The mood of the crowd at this time was

     one of anger against Police who they were blaming for the incident,

     the crowds dispersed and I saw no incidents involving the crowd,

     other than the few people abusing the Police.



    We were all called back to the North Stand when the crowd dispersed

     and I took no further part in the incident and went off duty from

    Claywheels Lane.




                                                        K. Mozley PS1684 SIGNED

TEMENT TAKEN                                        ‘
Incident      102   260390 QP8064        DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                             STATEMENT NUMBER    S2240

                                                                                Station
m    mame           WILSON

Forenames           PAUL

Age                                          Date of birth
Address


Occupation          POL PS2408

Telephone

IC                  Height                   Build

Hair colour

Hair type

^^s                                          Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses             Use                      Accent

Number of Pages

Dated               020589                                                       Signed


            On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I corrmenced duty at Doncaster DHQ

            at 0830 hours.

            I was in charge of Serial number 28 of the Semi Final detail at

            Hillsborough, the responsibility of which was close off a number of

            streets off leppings Lane with barriers to prevent persons attending

            the ground frcm deviating along side streets and thus causing damage

            nuisance to residents etc.

            The following officers were on my serial and performed duties at the

            points shown -

            PC 2127 SMART/PC 761 RICHARDSON - Bickerton Road/Penistone Road

            PC 1620 PATERSON/PC 2644 ROBERTS - leppings Lane/Famdale Road

            PC 2846 SMITH/PS 2408 WILSON - leppings Lane/Silkstone Road

            DC 40 TOMLINSON/DC 2399 WREN - leppings Lane/Leake Road

            (PC              failed to report for duty due to injury and I therefore
                                                                    PAGE    2
                                                                    S2240

took his place with PC SMITH.)

I hald the only radio for our serial and liaised with other matters of

my serial verbally by walking from point to point.

In charge of my sector was Inspector SELWOOD of E Division.

After initial briefing at the ground we were deployed to our

positions.     Taking up points about 11.45am (1145).

By this time the first supporters were beginning to arrive in small

numbers.     By 12.30pm (1230) large numbers of persons were making their

way along leppings Lane towards the ground.     Many of them were

drinking from cans and bottles and carafes of wine, and I saw one

youth drinking directly from a 7 pint 'party can'. Many supporters

wera asking for the nearest pub and off-licence and whether they were

open to supporters.

By about 2pm (1400) there were hundreds of supporters in Leppings Lane

standing and sitting on walls etc., drinking, many were walking up and

down asking for spare tickets from others but there were apparently

very few spare tickets for sale.

I spoke to many Liverpool supporters and some Notts. Forest supporters

who had tickets for the Liverpool end.    Most were friendly and in good

humour although some were drunk.     I advised some groups initially that

they would not be permitted to enter the ground either with alcohol or

drunk but as larger numbers appeared it became a wasted exercise.

To the best of my knowledge there were no incidents of disorder in the

vicinity of my serials points.     The main problem was one of litter

with literally hundreds of beer and pop cans and bottles and chip

papers etc. strewn about.

This was corrmented upon to me by an elderly lady resident of Bickerton

Road who said she was 84 years and had lived there most of her life

and had never seen such a mess of cans etc. at any previous game or

event at Hillsborough.
                                                                  PAGE     3
                                                                  S2240

By about 2.30pm (1430) the bulk of the supporters who had been milling

about in Leppings Lane drifted toward and into the ground.     There was

then a lull of about ten minutes when it appeared that there were very

few supporters left outside the ground.

At about 2.40pm (1440) there was a sudden surge of supporters coining

along leppings Lane toward the ground, many of whom were running.

Sane were still carrying cans and bottles of beer and I saw some

pouring it onto the road as they were moving.    At this time I was

still on the barrier at Bickerton Road.    A short time later I became

aware, via radio messages, of problems at the Leppings Lane entrance.

I stepped out into Leppings Lane and could see the entrance and that

it was a mass of bodies from the turnstiles right back to the road and

that more and more were adding to it.     There were still large groups

making their way to the ground and I attonpted to slow down several

groups who were running by pointing out that there was nowhere for

them to go.   The crowd and crush at the turnstiles was clearly visible

but they continued regardless to rush and add to it.     The majority of

these persons were male in late teens, early twenties age groups.

There was very little shouting or chanting and all seemed intent on

getting to the ground.

I then heard, via radio, of mounting problems inside the ground.      I

heard a call for officers to the perimter track but thought that it

was fighting/pitch invasion.   There were no transmissions to the

contrary.   After a short time there was a radio message for further

assistance at the ground.   I then made my way to the Leppings Lane

entrance where I joined a number of other officers.    There were still

soma supporters milling about outside the gates and a few were still

arriving.   As I arrived some people were starting to leave the ground.

Sane were obviously shocked and upset and were crying.    Others were

abusive and began shouting at the officers outside.    Conments such as
                                                                   PAGE     4
                                                                   S2240

 'Black bastards,' 'You've done it this time,' 'You're to blame for

this,' 'You should all be ashamed,' 'You should all be locked up,'

 'Why aren't you in there doing something, you only want the money,'

'You're only good for kicking miners,' interspersed with the usual

expletives and profanities.   The officers outside the gate including

myself were held outside to monitor the crowd leaving.      I believe the

instruction was given verbally by Chief Inspector PURDY, who was the

only senior officer I saw at that time.   After the call for assistance

there was very little of an intelligible nature passed by radio.

Persons were transmitting over each other interspersed by silences

when no instructions or direction were given.     The officers outside

the ground, including myself, had no idea whatsoever what was

happening inside.   Initially persons who were shouting and swearing at

us were spoken to firmly and threatened with arrest, however, as more

reasonable persons began to emerge and explain to us some of what had

happened inside we began to appreciate the reason for the anger

directed at us.

When the rescue operation was complete all officers were then called

into the North Stand about 5.00 pn (1700).   Only then did I begin to

realise the scale of the problem inside the ground and I saw the

profound effect which it had on some of my colleagues.     We were left

to ponder for some time before we were given a short de-brief and

adjourned to Claywheels Lane to re-muster our serials and await

transport to return to Doncaster.

The mood of officers was very quiet, some were obviously moved by the

events and were close to tears.

We returned to Doncaster and retired from duty at 7.45 pn (1945).




                                                P WILSON   PS2408 SIGNED
 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

           TIME:         DATE:   020589

^^N E3
     £SS TO SIGNATURE:




                                          2772
Incident      102     260390 QP8064         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                                STATEMENT NUMBER   S2195

                                                                                   Station

^fem am e             REYNOLDS

 Forenames            RONALD   HERBERT

 Age                                            Date of birth

 Address              S YORKSHIRE POLICE
                      THORNE

 Occupation           POL PS1561

 Telephone

 IC                   Height                    Build

 Hair colour

Hair type

% s                                             Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses               Use                       Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                 290489                                                         Signed


            Twenty nine years service and a Police Clog Handler for seventeen years

            until 1982(000082).       As a result, I have attended a great number of

            football matches and most of the recent semi-finals at Hillsborough.

            Last year, 1988(000088), I was on duty at the Liverpool - Notts Forest

            semi-final at the same venue and on that occasion I was in charge of

            a detail in the vicinity of Leppings Lane/Penistone Road/Claywheels

            Lana junction where the Liverpool supporters were approaching the

            ground.

            At 8.15 a.m. (0815) on Saturday, 15th April(150489), I commenced duty at

            my home station and paraded for duty at Doncaster at 8.45 a.m. (0845)

            I was in charge of serial 29 which consisted of Police Constables

            2668 FLETCHER, 1280 HEBDIGE, 214 COULSON, 2840 PEARSON, 1169 KERR

            2915 SEVERN, 3145 FUNTON and 114 BRADLEY, all of whom are from

            Th om e Sub- Division and whom I work with regularly.        My serial

                                                                                              2773
                                                                  PAGE      2
                                                                  S2195

travelled together in a double decker bus to Hillsborough, arriving

there just before 10 a.m.(1000) and paraded for duty in the North

Stand in row 20, seats 183-194. After the briefing my serial went

to Leppings Lane at approximately 11 a.m. (1100)   There we took up

duty moving barriers at the end of Shenstone Road and Eskdale Road

and general public order patrol.   We had ONE radio between the nine of

us and I kept that. For the first hour or so it was generally quiet

with the Liverpool fans in a boisterous but well behaved mood.     One or

two spoken to re: bad language and fans without tickets walking

against the flow causing minor problems over blocking the pavements.

As the crowds built up it was obvious that numerous fans had no

tickets and the most asked question heard was 'ANY SPARES' and I and

my colleagues were even asked if we had any.

2 P.M.(1400) ONWARDS

Large build up of crowd still basically in a noisy but boisterous mood

but no serious public order problem.   One youth spoken to severely for

dancing in the middle of the road in front of an oncoming double

decker.   There were an extremely large amount of fans passing either

drinking from or carrying beer cans and several appeared well under

the influence but no immediate problem.

2.30 P.M. (1430) ONWARDS

Very large amount of supporters still walking up Leppings Lane towards

the ground and also literally hundreds of other fans asking for spare

tickets although I did not see many changing hands.   Still a large

number of fans passing carrying cans and drinking from same.

2.55 P.M. (1455) APPROX.

Heard a loud cheer from the ground which I took to be the teams caning

out onto the field and at this time there were still literally

hundreds making their way towards the ground.

Shortly afterwards I heard over the radio that there were problems at
                                                                   PAGE    3
                                                                   S2195

leppings Lane entrance but by the time my serial arrived there, the

trouble appeared to have been resolved.

APPROX 3.20 P.M. (1520)

Saw one or two people being carried out of the ground and as a result

of a request for assistance inside I went down the side of the North

Stand past the gymnasium and onto the pitch.

Saw in the first few yards onto the pitch three people being carried

out apparently dead or near dead.

Assisted in treating one person near the centre circle who was laid on

floor but he was not seriously hurt and arranged for a civilian to

taka him for treatment.     Then formed in a line across the centre of

the pitch to prevent two to three hundred Liverpool supporters

charging down the ground to the Notts Forest supporters end.

Aftar this had been sorted, assisted one more person on the field who

wasn't seriously injured and then one who was at side of wall near

gymnasium.     He was complaining of rib pains but after getting him a

cup of water from an ambulance he appeared okay, so left him and

returned to outside of ground at Leppings Lane entrance and rejoined

serial.    Engaged in assisting ambulances access and funnelling

spectators out of ground.

Tremendous amount of hatred and abuse hurled at us the most common

being, "fucking murderers" and "all you're fucking good for is kicking

miners."

Approximately 5 p.m. (1700) to North Stand for de-briefing.

7.15 p.m.(1915) to Doncaster

8.15 p.m. (2015) off duty

OBSERVATIONS

Having worked the same match last year (1988)(000088) and on the

Liverpool supporters approach to the ground on both occasions, the

following three points were evident this year before the game:-
                                                                             PAGE    4
                                                                             S2195

         (1)    Very large amount of people arriving late.

         (2)    Literally hundreds without tickets.

         (3)    Large amount of fans, especially in the last hour, en route to

                the ground either drinking from cans or carrying cans of beer,

                and many of these already under the influence.

         (3)    Large amount of fans, especially in the last hour, en route to

                the ground either drinking from cans or carrying cans of beer,

                and many of these already under the influence.




                                                      R H REYNOLDS   PS1561 SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

           TIME:              DATE:   290489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                         2 7 76
Incident     102   260390 QP8064         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                             STATEMENT NUMBER   S2150

                                                                                Station

^ m £iame           ASHTON

 Forenames          IAN   BARRIE

 Age                                         Date of birth

 Address            S YORKSHIRE POLICE
                    DONCASTER

 Occupation         POL PS2627

 Telephone

 IC                 Height                   Build

 Hair colour

 Hair type

^|es                                         Complexion

 Facial hair

 Glasses            Use                     Accent

 Number of Pages

 Dated              040589                                                       Signed


            I ccmmenced duty at Doncaster Divisional Headquarters at 8.45 am

            (0845) on Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489).    I was i/c serial 30 under

            the command of Insp. Millett.

            The following officers were duputed to my serial, PC's 1417 McDonald,

            2967 Frost, 900 Dawson, 243 Landers, 631 Kitson, 174 Welch, 2804

            McFarlane, 2905 Greatorex.   All the officers work in A2.     We travelled

            through Sheffield in convoy, in our own personal carrier.

            We arrived at Hillsborough at approximately 9.45am (0945) and were

            briefed in the North stand by our senior officers.

            About 11.45am (1115) we took up our position on the roundabout at the

            junction of Leppings Lane, junction Penistone Road and Herries Road.

            Our task was to prevent opposing supporters caning into contact with

            each other.   Notts.   Forest supporters were not allowed in to enter

            Penistone Road North and Leppings Lane.   Liverpool supporters were not

                                                                                          2777
                                                                  PAGE      2
                                                                  S2150

allowed to enter Penistone Road and Herries Road.     We carried out this

task with no real problems, most supporters were good humoured.

However, I did notice that by about 2.15pn (1415) it appeared that

most of the Notts.   Forest supporters were in the ground, there were

certainly very few on the streets at our location.     I have worked at

similar locations outside the ground in previous years when the semi

final has been played at Hillsborough and it has been the case that

most supporters are in the ground by this time.    Thousands of

Liverpool supporters were walking down Penistone Road North towards

the ground and hundreds of cars and even coaches were just arriving.

I do not know if this was caused by traffic hold ups or 'stop offs' en

route. The large volume of persons travelling at Leppings Lane

continued until 2.45-2.50pm (1445-1450).   Just prior to 3.00pm (1500),

I gathered my serial together and reported to Insp.    Millet who was

at the entrance to Leppings Lane.   At this time we received a call

for assistance at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.    We proceeded

to that location with the Inspector and other serials.     Outside the

ground there were approximately three hundred people 'milling' around.

With the assistance of other officers and horses we formed a line

outside the gates which were open and kept the crowd under control.

We then started to see injured persons and others obviously in a state

of shock leaving the ground.

I beleive a Superintendent or it could have been an Inspector waved us

into the ground.   Although I had a radio I cannot recall any message

relating to what had happened or what was happening.     We believed the

Liverpool supporters had broken down the gates to gain entry.

Although I had heard the request for the gates to be opened because of

the crush and the subsequent order to open them.

I entered the Stadium through the tunnel and went into the Centre

South Enclosure, which was only about half full at this time.     I saw
                                                                  PAGE     3
                                                                  S2150

injured and obviously dead persons being passed through the gate and a

hole in the fence onto the pitch.    I assisted the supporters and

other police officers with this for a few minutes.     As the terraces

cleared it was possible to administer first aid on the terraces.     I

gava heart massage to two persons, whilst another officer whom I did

not know gave mouth to mouth.   They were both males about twenty years

of age, but I could not describe them further.     They appeared to have

been dead for sometime and the efforts were unsuccessful.    They were

eventually passed through the gate and taken away by supporters on

advertising boards.

There has been talk of people urinating and spitting etc from the

stand above, but I did not witness anything like that.

By this time most of the dead and casualties had been taken away and I

grouped my serial together and stood in the centre of the pitch.     On

abandonment of the game we made our way to our orginal point to

prevent outbreaks of public order.   Most fans were very subdued and I

did not witness any trouble.

I cannot recall seeing any stewards, but I was not really in a

position to notice them.

I would not say there was any breakdown in radio communication,

although more informational could have been transmitted.

Could the situation that arose have been averted with the aid of an

helicopter to monitor the build up of the crowd?

The late arrival of the Liverpool fans for whatever reason was

obviously a major factor in the disaster, combined with the many who

did not have tickets.   Alcohol also played a part but this is

prevalent at all big sporting events.




                                            I.B. ASHTON PS2627 SIGNED
 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

           TIME:         DATE:   040589

^^TNE£
     3SS TO SIGNATURE:




                                          2780
Incident       102   260390 QP8064          DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                               STATEMENT NUMBER   S2211

                                                                                  Station

^Jrname               PEARSON

 Forenames            G

 Age                                           Date of birth

 Address              SOUTH YORKSHIRE POL
                      THORNE

 Occupation           POL PS2881

Telephone

 IC                   Height                   Build

Hair colour

Hair type

^B ^s                                          Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses               Use                      Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                 280489                                                       Signed


           I    raport that I am currently engaged in the role of C u s to d y Officer at

           Thome.

           At 8.15am (0815) on Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), I commenced duty

           and was later transported to the Hillsborough football Stadium,

           Sheffield, for a briefing in the main stand at 9.30am (0930) that

           data.

           I   was in charge of Serial 31, these duties prior to the kick off being

           to supervise the pedestrians and coaches at the roundabout at

           the junction of Leppings Lane and Penistone Road.

           My    Serial consisted of the following Officers:

           PC919 EVANS

           PC1934 S M ITH

           PC139 LANGLEY

           PC1900 KENT


                                                                                            2781
                                                                  PAGE     2
                                                                  S2211

PC 2359 WOODCOCK

PC2735 WADE

PC1239 RAYBOULD

PC235 BLACKHAM

After briefing my Serial took up their respective duties at the

location outlined above, at approximately 11.00am (1100).    Throughout

the morning, supporters began to arrive in the area.    All appeared

good humoured and there were no particular problems.

By 1.00pm (1300), the pedestrian traffic had built up and it was

noticeable that some of the supporters were in possession of cans of

alcohol.   Two of my Serial were placed in Leppings Lane and these

Officers were preventing supporters continuing any further down

leppings Lane, whilst in possession of cans of alcohol. The fact that

the supporters in possession of alcohol were stopped by the Police,

created no problems and the supporters were quite content to remain in

the area to consume their alcohol prior to continuing towards the

football stadium,   At this time the weather was fine and dry, it was

sunny and at any one time there may have been up to 150 supporters at

the mouth of Leppings Lane, sitting on walls and standing in groups

drinking their alcohol.

The pedestrian traffic increased and at just after 2.pm (1400) there

was a surge of supporters who were accompanied by both Officers on

foot and members of the mounted section who had just arrived by train

at the Wads ley Bridge Railway Sation.   Again there was no problem with

the supporters and they, in the main, went down Leppings Lane towards

the Stadium.

By about 2.55pm (1455), it was noticeable that the pedestrian traffic

was easing down considerably and at two or three minutes past three,

acting on the instruction of Inspector MILLETT, myself and my Serial

went down Leppings Lane towards the football stadium where our next
                                                                    PAGE
                                                                    S2211

 scheduled duty was for standby duties in one of the Force coaches.

leppings Lane by this time was virtually clear of all pedestrians and

upon arrival at leppings Lane there were approximately two hundred

Police Officers on duty outside the gate.     There were very few

supporters in the area at this time and after a few minutes at this

location we were instructed to form a cordon across the mouth of the

leppings Lane entrance.

Information was then received that the football match had been stopped

and I mmediately formed the opinion that there was mass fighting

within the ground amongst the supporters.     Supporters then began

leaving the stadium via the leppings Lane entrance and it was obvious

from many of their faces that they had been in seme form of distress.

Many of the supporters began heckling the Police line, shouting that

we should be in the ground to assist the disorder and not be stood in

the position we occupied.     The exit by the supporters began to

increase and after a few minutes I saw a male being carried out of the

leppings Lane gate by Police Officers.     This person was being carried

face downwards, his body limp and I could see a liquid constantly

running from his mouth.     To my horror I realised that the man was

dead.   The body was placed on the concrete driveway on the right hand

side as one enters the stadium from Leppings Lane.

By this time there was a mass exodus from the stadium and supporters

were chanting at the Police, "Murderers, you Bastards.     It's all your

fault", and similar obscenities.     Further bodies were then carried

from the stadium and were placed on the right hand side of the

driveway.    Injured persons were placed on the left hand side of the

driveway and these were being attended to by Police Officers and

civilians.

Further bodies were brought from the stadium and placed together along

with injured persons.     The scene at this time could only be described
                                                                  PAGE     4
                                                                  S2211

as horrific.

Acting under the instructions of Inspector SYKES, my Serial, along

with other Officers, then formed a cordon in front of the bodies to

screen the bodies from the view of the supporters who were leaving the

stadium.    In total I believe there were twelve bodies in this location

and at one stage I saw a lady aged approximately thirty years, she was

walking among the bodies and was obviously looking for a particular

person.    She was quite composed in view of the horrific circumstances

that surrounded her and after a few minutes she left the area.    The

supporters continued to shout obscenities at the Police lines and

after about half an hour barricades were placed in front of the bodies

and these were draped in tarpaulin sheeting therefore screening the

bodies from members of the public.

The Fire Service and Ambulance Service were both in attendance and

they were experiencing great difficulty, particularly the Ambulance

Service in getting into the Stadium via the leppings Lane entrance due

to the supporters leaving.

Part of my Serial were then directed elsewhere and I remained in this

area until most of the bodies and the injured had been removed.     At

one stage at the height of the incident, whilst forming the barricade

in front of the bodies, near Leppings Lane gate, I was approached by

an off duty fireman who offered his assistance.    It was obvious from

his appearance that he was under the influence of alcohol and I was

under the opinion that he was not in any fit state to assist anyone

and I requested him to leave the area.   This man I later noticed

talking to other Police Officers, presumably offering his assistance

and after about quarter of an hour he came back to me and I escorted

him from the ground.

The crowd were extremely hostile towards the Police and on two

occasions I found myself isolated and it became apparent to me the
                                                                         PAGE       5
                                                                         S2211

         clangers in such a situation of being isolated.   I ranained in the area

         until approximately 5.pm (1700), at which time all the supporters,

         the injured persons and the bodies had been removed from the area.

         I later returned to the Hillsborough Ground and joined other members

         of the detail.

         I found the whole incident horrific and left me with a stunned feeling.




                                                      G PEARSON PS2881 SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

           TIME:            DATE:   280489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                        27 85
Incident      102   260390 OP8064          DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                               STATEMENT NUMBER   S1155

                                                                                  Station

iftn a m e              WARDLE

Forenames               PHILIP LESLIE

Age                                            Date of birth

Address              S YORKS POL, WOODSEATS PSTN


Occupation           POL INS

Telephone

IC                   Height                    Build

Hair colour

Hair type

• s                                            Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses              Use                       Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                020589                                           P L WARDLE Signed


             On Saturday, 15 April, 1989 (150489) I came on duty at 9.45am (0945)

             arriving at Hillsborough by private motor vehicle in time for the

             briefing at 10.00am (1000).

             My serial number was 44 and as my duty was initially checking

             Liverpool coaches and mini-buses on the A616 at Oughtibridge I was

             responsible to Superintendent MARSHALL who was in charge of the

             policing of the Liverpool Fans.

             After the briefing together with my serial we travelled to the

             checking point at Oughtibridge taking up duties at 11.15am (1115).

             (I rake no mention of the pre-match briefings as they were of a

             general nature and related mainly to officers in and around the

             ground.)

             Between 11.15am (1115) and 2.45pm (1445) my serial checked

             approximately 40 mini-buses (vans) and approximately 10 coaches which
                                                                 PAGE
                                                                 S1155

contained Liverpool supporters.   Several of these vehicles were found

to have small amounts of drink on board but on only 2 occasions (1

coach driver and 1 min-bus driver) were the drivers reported for

summons as it was apparent from the quantities of alcohol found on

these 2 vehicles that the drivers were obviously aware of its presence

No passenger was reported on my instructions and a disclaimer was

obtained from one person on board for the total amount taken from each

vehicle.   I would conclude that the amount taken from these vehicles

when one considers the number involved was minimal.   It is also fair

to say that gome fans had learned their lesson from the previous

year and had either drank alcohol prior to reaching the checkpoint or

as happened with 2 vehicles parked in the village and obtained a drink

at the local public house.   Apart from the odd supporter who was

'happy' with drink the remainder appeared sober at the checkpoint.

All were in good spirit and we sensed no animosity.   It was also

evident after about 2.30pm (1430) very few coaches or mini-buses

passed our checkpoint.

At 2.45pm (1445) we travelled to Claywheels Lane for refreshments

arriving at approximately 3.00pm (1500).   I cannot recollect the

exact route we took to Claywheels but no one in the vehicle made any

comment about fans etc. outside the ground.

Some of my serial had just obtained their meal from the mobile

canteen and I was in the queue when I heard a radio message to the

effect that there was trouble with fans at the Leppings Lane end.

Although unable to recollect the exact words spoken I was under the

distinct impression there was some fighting.   My serial immediately

got back into the vehicle and travelled to the Leppings Lane end,

and parked up the vehicle and were instructed by some Inspector to

form a cordon with other officers to prevent further fans entering

the ground.   This cordon stretched the full distance from pavement to
                                                                  PAGE       3
                                                                  S1155

pavanent in front of the turnstiles.    There were still a number of

fans milling about outside in the roadway, some of whom approached the

cordon with tickets.   These fans were told by someone that the match

had been stopped and they would get in before it restarted. On arrival

at the lappings Lane end, initially, there were no supporters at the

turnstiles, therefore, I assumed they were all within the ground.        I

was still not aware what had actually happened inside the ground.

My serial stayed within this cordon for some 10 minutes.   During this

time there was a verbal request for more officers to go inside the

ground, I believe onto the pitch, and this request was fulfilled by

other serials that were just arriving at the Leppings Lane end.     It

became apparent after a further short period of time that our presence

at this location was doing little to assist whatever situation had

developed inside, therefore, my serial moved in through an open gate

to the rear of the West Stand.

I would add whilst we were in this cordon position an ambulance

arrived at the Leppings Lane end and was allowed access to one of the

open gates.

Once inside the ground and to the rear of the West stand I was

confronted by hundreds of Liverpool supporters milling about in the

area some quite obviously distressed.   The tunnel which leads

underneath the stand to the terracing was cordoned off by officers.

There were fans lying on the ground to the rear of the West stand and

in the vicinity of the tunnel.   Most of these fans had someone

attending to them, police officers or otherwise and it was at this

point that Supt. MARSHALL emerged from the tunnel and instructed that

a cordon be formed to allow access to ambulances inside the ground

and towards the tunnel persumably to pick up the fans lying injured on

the ground.   I attempted to comply with this order by speaking and

shouting to officers to form this cordon but due to the confusion
                                                                  PAGE    4
                                                                  S1155

that seemed to be about and the following factors this effort failed.

1.   There were insufficient officers to form a cordon.

2.   The animosity of the fans (some of them) was so intense

towards the Police that they would not comply with any requests.

I was subject on many occasions to verbal abuse as follows:- "My

fucking mates are dying down there, what are you doing about it?" "You

fucking murdering bastard."

On many occasions I was asked "Who opened that fucking gate?"

After a short period of time the injured fans were moved outside the

ground to the ambulances that were arriving.   It became apparent to

me from the look of some of the supporters being carried out that

they were dead.

Once the injured and dead had been cleared, I cannot say how many

of each there were.   I could see that a cordon had been formed around

soma bodies outside the gate at the rear of the West stand.

During this latter period of time I was fully occupied with the

Liverpool supporters therefore did not assist in the removal or any

treatment to the injured.

After the injured/dead had been removed outside the ground I was

continually being abused and in some cases almost physically

attacked.   It was only the intervention of other Liverpool

supporters dragging people away from me that prevented this happening.

There were now few officers at the rear of the West stand and as the

area had been cleared of injured/dead fans I moved through the cordon

and down the tunnel onto the terracing.

By now and the time must have been approximately 3.30pm (1530) all

the terracing had been cleared of any injured persons.    There were a

line of officers across the centre of the pitch and fans were milling

about on the field.

I would add at this point that I was still unaware of the scale of
                                                                   PAGE
                                                                   S1155

the disaster.   I saw the crowd barrier that was broken and when asked

by someone if anyone had died I said I beleived one or two may have.

Supporters were asking me if the match was abandoned and I radioed

twice to control for a decision on this.     I was informed on both

occasions that no decision had yet been made.

Eventually a loudspeaker announcement was made regarding the match

being abandoned and I moved to the rear of the West stand whilst fans

left the ground.     I then rounded up my serial, some of whom had ended

up on the field of play and we ccmnenced mobile public order patrol

around the ground.

At approximately 5.30pm (1730) we made our way to the North stand and

Sgt. HUGHES handed in our de-brief sheet.    We went off duty at

Claywheels Lane.

I would conclude by giving the following information:-

1.   I did not handle any bodies

2.   It was not until I was able to speak to other officers some hours

after the incident that I became aware of the scale of the problem.

There was a distinct lack of information/direction over the

radio and at one stage there was little radio traffic at all.      I do

not mean this to be a criticism as those inside the ground were

probably aware of what was happening and little radio traffic was

necessary but I did feel out on a limb somewhat.

3.   I have not worked many matches at Hillsborough as I still play

football myself on Saturdays and regard the matches as 'hassle'. I

say 'hassle' because invariably the ones I have worked have been

bigger games, semi finals etc, and I get constantly moaned at by fans

who state they have p>aid X number of pounds for a ticket and cannot

get a place on the terracing (what are you going to do about it

officer?)

4.   Communications - I have commented about this already but
                                                                           PAGE
                                                                           S1155

         would add that it is very difficult to discern much at all firm the

         radio when one is in the immediate vicinty of the ground.

         5.     I had no contact with any of the stewards.

         6 . The conduct of the Liverpool fans at oughtibridge prior to the

         game was friendly and jovial.     Some had been drinking but very few

         that I saw were approaching being classed as drunk.

         I trust this will assist.




                                                               P L.WARDLE SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

           TIME:              DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT
Incident    102   260390 OP8Q64          DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                             STATEMENT NUMBER   S1840

                                                                                Station

^^nam e            CREASER

Forenames          ROBERT    WALLACE

Age                                          Date of birth

Address            COMMUNICATIONS & COMPUTER DEPARTMENT, HEADQUARTERS


Occupation         POL Cl

Telephone

IC                 Height                    Build

Hair colour

Hair type

U s                                          Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses            Use                       Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                                                              R W CREASER Signed


           I atn a Chief Inspector in the South Yorkshire Police at present

           attached to the Caimunications and Computer Development Department,

           Police Headquarters, Snig Hill, Sheffield.

           I have been a Police Officer for twenty years and have considerable

           experience of Policing football matches.       I have performed the duty at

           the following five Football League grounds in South Yorkshire:

           Sheffield Wednesday (Hillsborough)

           Sheffield United (Bramall Lane)

           Rotherham United (Millmoor)

           Barnsley (Oakwell)

           Doncaster Rovers (Belle Vue)

           The bulk of this experience has been at Hillsborough, where I have

           worked at numerous football matches.       These have included Football

           League and F.A. Cup Semi-Finals.
                                                                  PAGE    2
                                                                  S1840

Hillsborough is situated within the 'F' (Sheffield North) Division of

the South Yorkshire Police.

The first time I performed duty at Hillsborough for an F.A. Cup Semi-

Final was as a uniform patrol Sergeant in 1977 (000077).

In 1981 (000081) I was posted to 'F' Division (Sheffield North) as a

uniform patrol Inspector and I remained within the Division until the

end of 1987 (000087), during that time I frequently performed football

duties at Hillsborough.

I have been on duty at the Leppings Lane end of Hillsborough Stadium

for the F.A. Cup Semi-Final matches held in the last three years.

I have performed duty at most places within the ground, although the

majority of my experience has been at the Leppings Lane end of the

ground.

Shortly after Hillsborough was selected as the venue for the Semi-

Final between Liverpool F.C. and Nottingham Forest F.C. I was

contacted by telephone by Chief Superintendent MOLE, the then

Divisional Cormander of 'F' Division, who confirmed my availability

and requested that I work at the match.   He stated that it would be

his intention for me to work at the Leppings Lane end of the Ground.

Eight days prior to the Semi-Final taking place I received an

Operation Order.   A comprehensive, yellow bound document which

contained details of how the event would be organised.   Over the next

few days I made a detailed study of this document and, in particular,

the areas of the ground where I would be supervising officers.

On Saturday, 15 April 1989 (150489), I reported for duty at the ground

at approximately 9.30 a.m. (0930).   I was in possession of my

Operation Order at this time.

My areas of responsibility were for that part of the ground which was

to be occupied, in the main, by Liverpool supporters and for the

outside of the ground at the Leppings Lane end.
                                                                    PAGE    3
                                                                    S1840

The following Inspectors were allocated to ray command with areas of

responsibility as indicated below:-

Inspector WOODWARD                 North Stand (upper and lower level)

Inspector BULLAS                   West Stand

Inspector WHITE                    Leppings Lane Terrace and rear

                                    enclosure

Inspectors SYKES and PURDY         Leppings Lane turnstiles

Inspectors DELANEY andBERESFORD    Reserves

I have previously personally performed duty at all the above locations

at the rank of Inspector.    I have previously worked at football

matches with all the above officers with the exception of Inspector

Purdy.

The pre-match police briefing was given in the North Stand (Kop end)

and commenced at approximately 10.00 a.m. (1000).    It was a

comprehensive briefing and there was input from Chief Superintendent

DUCKENFIELD, Inspector SEWELL and Detective Sergeant CHARLESWORTH.

Immediately following the briefing, I sought out all the above

named Inspectors and I personally handed to them written (photocopy)

details of criminal intelligence which had been collated concerning

people likely to attend the match from both Liverpool and Nottingham.

I spoke to each of the Inspectors and mentioned points which I

considered to be of particular importance as far as their own area of

responsibility was concerned.    I knew that Inspectors SYKES and WHITE

both had vast experience of policing at Hillsborough and intimate

knowledge of the duties they had been allocated.

Following the briefing until approximately 2.00 p.m. (1400) no matters

of particular note took place.    I spent this time 'walking the ground'

speaking to Inspectors, Serial Sergeants and Constables.

Additionallly, I spoke to many of the Sheffield Wednesday F.C.

Stewards who I know (by sight but not name). I noticed that these men
                                                                     PAGE    4
                                                                     S1840

appeared to be working at locations where I had previously seen them

operate.     During the course of the morning I saw, and heard part of a

briefing given by Inspector WHITE to these stewards.     This hriefing

took place in the West Stand.

It was my information that the first turnstiles would be opened at 12

noon (1200).     In fact a small number were opened prior to this and a

few spectators entered at the Leppings Lane end of the ground and went

into the lappings Lane terraces in the centre pens.

As people started to enter the stadium I could see the usual mixture

of supporters.     They were in good spirits and obviously looking

forward to what had been forecast as an interesting game between the

two teams.

Shortly after 2.15 p.m. (1415) I visited Leppings Lane where I spoke

to Inspector SYKES.     There was a contingent of Liverpool supporters

standing in Leppings Lane on the opposite side of the road to the

stadium.     We discussed the merit of encouraging these people across

the road to queue for entry to the stadium.     Many of these were

openly drinking from cans of beer and lager; they were not at this

time causing any trouble. After discussion we agreed that such a

course of action was not necessary as there was a reasonable quantity

of supporters already forming queues outside the turnstiles.

Furthermore, it was considered that to move these people at this stage

may inflame the crowd.

As time progressed towards the scheduled kick off time it became

apparent that a large number of Liverpool supporters were still

outside the ground in Leppings Lane and in the queues to the

turnstiles.     I noticed at this time that the proportion of supporters

who had obviously been drinking increased.    They were, however, at

this time only a minority and were not causing any disruption.       Many

of the fans who arrived were unsure of the geographical layout of the
                                                                   PAGE    5
                                                                   S1840

turnstiles which gave admittance to the North Stand, the Leppings Lane

terraces and elevated section and the West Stand.   The signs above the

turnstiles were not clear and many fans were confused, a specific

example of this was the alphabetic character displayed above the

turnstile and the alphabetic character shown on the ticket as the

gangway to be used for access to the West Stand were in apparent

conflict.   It was necessary for Police Officers to give constant

assistance in this respect.

At approximately 2.30 p.m. (1430) I could see that difficulties were

being experienced in the build up to the turnstiles which were

allocated to the North Stand, the West Stand and the Leppings Lane

turnstiles - all these three locations are fed from Leppings Lane.

From this point until after 3.00 p.m. (1500) I continued to monitor

and supervise the Leppings Lane end of the ground on the outside.

I was with Inspector SYKES when he caused the flow of traffic to stop

in Leppings Lane in order to facilitate more opportunity for the

ever increasing pedestrian traffic to make progress.

I have considerable experience of policing this particular area and I

could see that the build up of supporters was later than usually the

case and there appeared to be larger numbers.   The operation was

frustrated more so by the presence of a considerable number of fans

who had arrived in the vicinity of the ground, but were not in

possession of tickets entitling them entry to what was an 'all

ticket' match.   Furthermore, many Liverpool fans arrived at the

Leppings Lane end of the ground in possession of tickets which

entitled them admission to the Spion kop and attempted to seek

approval to enter at the Leppings Lane end with friends who had

legitimate tickets for that area.

The situation outside the turnstiles, particularly those leading to

the Leppings Lane terraces, was such that by approximately 2.40 p.m.
                                                                   PAGE    6
                                                                   S1840

(1440) a situation had arisen whereby there was a large crowd of

supporters who were all pushing towards the turnstiles, but the

turnstiles could not accept than quickly enough to permit entry to the

ground.   The mood of this crowd was changing from a good natured crowd

to a frustrated crowd who could perhaps see that they had little

chance of gaining access prior to the start of the match.    The

proportion of spectators who had been drinking increased as time

progressed but they were outnumbered by people who did not exhibit any

signs of drink.   Within this crowd there were at least two or three

Police horses who were attempting to stop the pushing.   It has always

been my experience that horses are able to control such a situation,

but it was obvious in this instance that this was not the case.

A Police Constable was allocated to the outside of each of the

turnstiles for the Leppings Lane terraces.   These officers were given

the task of preventing supporters entering the ground in possession of

weapons, banners, alcohol etc. This searching action did not impede

the rate of flow of spectators through the turnstiles.   Because of the

intense pressure from the surging crowd, it was necessary to withdraw

those officers from that position: a decision taken by Inspector

PURDY, Which I fully suppported.

With a view to reducing the area covered by the Police horses,     I

instructed officers to close the gates Which are situated away

from the turnstiles next to the river - I did this because fans were

using this gate to get around the horses.

The crush within the crowd was such that people were suffering and

there was the possibility of severe injuries taking place.   I saw two

or three bodies of young persons passed over the heads of matters of

the crowd, these people either had, or were close to fainting.

At approximately 2.45 p.m. (1445) I rejoined Inspector SYKES in

Leppings Lane and we adopted a strategy of forming a line of Police
                                                                  PAGE       7
                                                                  S1840

horses at the rear of the crowd with a view to preventing the queues

at the turnstiles becoming larger.   This took seme time to arrange.

There were gaps between one Police horse and the next one and I

attempted to arrange for a Police Officer to 'plug' each gap.    Many

supporters approached this line and forced their way through, despite

firm advice not to do so.   I even saw a supporter crawl under the

belly of a horse in order to breach the line.

I could see that some people were climbing over the top of the

turnstiles in order to gain admittance to the Stadium and at one point

I recall seeing Inspector BENNETT ('F' Division) on top of

the wall above the turnstiles serving the Leppings Lane terraces.

Some minutes later I attempted to contact Police Control by radio but

could not do so; there appeared to be a fault with rny particular

radio (a Pye PFX personal hand held radio) in that it was receiving

but I could not transmit.   I approached Police Constable BUXTON who

was at this time in a Police Landrover.   This vehicle was parked in

Leppings Lane and the officer was giving instructions to the

supporters by means of a public address system.   He was urging the

spectators not to push forward.   I requested Police Constable BUXTON

to suggest to the Control Room that consideration be given to delaying

the kick-off time of the match (his radio, a Motorola HT600E hand held

radio, appearedto be functioning well).

At approximately this time I was able to see that the large

'concertina' gates, known as 'A', 'B' and 'C', had been opened and

that a large proportion of the crowd surged forward through these

gates.   These gates were only opened for a short period of time and I

could see officers/stewards at the rear of the gates apparently

struggling to close them, which they were subsequently able to do.      It

is my impression that gate 'C' remained open for a longer period than

the others.   As a result of this action the pressure on the turnstiles
                                                                     PAGE     8
                                                                     S1840

reduced although supporters were still arriving at the ground.       This

action clearly had the result of easing the tension outside the

turnstiles although the crowd there were still pushing forward.

A short time later, I would estimate just after 3.00 p.m. (1500),

there was a request for all officers to attend inside the ground to

deal with an apparent invasion of the surface playing area.     I did not

hear the specific radio transmission but I did hear officers around

me saying words to the effect of 'all officers inside - pitch

invasion'. I immediately attended inside the ground and went to the

rear of the goal at the Leppings Lane end of the stadium.     I could see

that people were trapped and that the gates from the centre pens were

open and people were coming through than.    There was considerable

confusion. Some supporters were climbing over the fences, they were

assisted to do so by the Police Officers and by other supporters.        I

assisted in the general activity of lifting injured and apparently

dead people from the Leppings Lane terraces onto the playing area.        I

was present at this location prior to a 'private' ambulance arriving.

I gave instructions to sane officers in an attempt to co-ordinate what

was happening.     I can recall, in particular, instructing Police

Constable Goodwill ('F' Division) to act as the Canmunications Officer

for Superintendent GREENWOOD.

A short time later I attended at the gymnasium situated inside the

stadium.    I was there concerned in the organisation of a temporary

mortuary.    My primary tasks were ensuring that each victim brought

inside was examined by a doctor to confirm death, and to allocate an

individual Police Officer to each victim to deal with the formalities

Which would follow.

I later acted as a logistical officer and was engaged in the liaison

between the Police, Social Workers, relatives and identification

teams.     I continued with this work until retiring from duty at 5.00
                                                          PAGE     9
                                                          S1840

         a.m. (0500) the following morning.




                                              R W CREASER SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACES

           TIME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPOPr



•




                                                                       2800
Incident      102   260390 QP8064         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                              STATEMENT NUMBER    S639A

                                                                                 Station

      lame           SINGH

Forenames            GURUCHARAN

Age                                           Date of birth

Address              S.YORKS POLICE
                     ECCLESFIELD PSTN

Occupation           POL PC2963

Telephone

IC                  Height                    Build

Hair colour

Hair type

a                                             Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses             Use                      Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                300489                                                       Signed


             F.A. CUP SEMI FINAL, HILLSBOROUGH, SATURDAY, 15TH APRIL 1989 (150489)

             On Saturday, 15th April 1989 (150489), I commenced duties at 9 am

             (0900) at Ecclesfield Police Station, frcun where I was transported

             with other officers to the Hillsborough Football Ground where a full

             briefing subsequently took place.

             I was detailed to Serial 19 together with PS 323 PROCTOR and ten

             other Constables.    Our duties were initially outside the ground at

             the Leppings Lane entrances, supervising arriving Liverpool

             supporters, receiving and searching arriving coaches and general

             public order duties.

             I arrived with rny Serial at the Leppings Lane end of the ground at

             about 11 am (1100) where we were met by Inspector SYKES who briefed us

             on our particular duties.   We then went into Leppings Lane and took

             up positions in the 'mouth' of the entry to ground and the Leppings
                                                                   PAGE      2
                                                                   S639A

Lana turnstiles and alongside Leppings Lane road itself.

On reaching leppings Lane I immediately noticed that there was a

large number of Liverpool supporters in the area.     They were just

walking around and appeared in good manner and spirits.

At 12.20pm (1220) together with Police Constable 2902 ROBERTS we spoke

to a loud noisy crowd of fans who were stood on the footpath.      It was

ascertained that two of the youths were selling tickets for the semi­

final.   They were both arrested and one of the youths had twenty

original semi-final tickets and #760.00 in cash on his possession.

The youths were arrested and escorted to the Police room where they

were processed and detained.   One of the youths was later released

after a Verbal Caution and escorted from the ground.

At 1.15 pm (1315) the same date I returned back to the Leppings Lane

end and joined my Serial.   I immediately noticed that the turnstiles

were now open and although a small number of fans were entering the

ground, a large number of fans were unconcerned and content to crowd

around all over the footpaths and roads.   A number of fans were

drinking from beer cans and singing football songs.

I joined the other Police Officers to stop the fans from drinking

alcohol and tried to move them off the road towards the turnstiles.

Although seme were co-operative,   there was a large number who        werenow

getting quite drunk and abusive.    I know for a fact that on a        normal

match day these youths would have been arrested but the sheer number

of drunken fans in the crowds would not have made this feasible.       The

crowd was getting large and noisier by the minute and they were still

content to stand around everywhere instead of going into the ground.

The turnstiles were comparatively quiet considering the large crowd.

At approximately 2 pm (1400) theLeppings Lane road was closed for

safety reasons and as a result a   few minutes later the entire        roadwas

now filled with fans.   Along with other officers I was totally
                                                                  PAGE    3
                                                                  S639A

involved in attempting to control the crowd by encouraging them to

enter the ground.   The mounted officers were also having a trying

tine.

At 2.35 pm (1435) I was alerted by a loud noise coming from Leppings

Lane approximately fifty yards (yds) from the turnstiles.   I could see

that seme Police Officers were running around amongst the crowd.      I

immediately went to the scene and there saw two Police officers from

my Serial attempting to arrest two youths.    I assisted the Police

Officers to convey the prisoners to the Police Room but access through

GATE 'A' was completely blocked by the sheer volume of the crowd which

was now rapidly increasing everywhere in the area.   As a result we

were obliged to use the adjacent roads to escort the prisoners.      At

this time we were approached by several youths attempting to purchase

the tickets from the arrested youths.

On reaching the Police Room I took no further part in this matter and

proceeded to rejoin m y Serial.   On reaching the Gate 'A' via the

North Stand I was unable to get outside to m y Serial.   I saw

Inspector WOOEWARD at this location and as per his instructions I

commenced duties at this location.

It was obvious to me that the large crowd outside the turnstiles was

becoming increasingly uncontrollable as fans were spilling into the

ground from the top of the turnstiles and those coming through the

turnstiles were highly emotional and gasping for air.

Soma were aggressive in their mood and threatening Police Officers

with physical harm and seme were crying and shocked but they were all

united in their pleas to the Police Officers to do something as

people were getting crushed and seriously injured outside the

turnstiles.   I can vaguely recall a woman saying to me that she had

seen an old man fall to the floor in the crowd and for almost ten

minutes whilst she was waiting to get in, she didn't see this man
                                                                     pact:
                                                                     S639A

again and she felt that he was still on the floor whilst everyone was

standing all over him.

I then heard that the gate 'A' was being ironentarily opened to

prevent a disaster outside.    Along with other Officers we positioned

ourselves so as to filter the surge of the crowd towards the North

Stand.   This was done successfully.

I then went through the gates 'A' and joined seme of the Police

Officers in ray Serial on Leppings Lane.   There was still a large

number of people outside and it was obvious that a large number of

them had no tickets.     I was involved in moving the fans without

tickets away frcm the ground when I heard a radio message requesting

urgent assistance in the ground.    I went with other officers into the

ground onto the pitch near the Leppings Lane terracing.

I first of all thought that a pitch invasion had taken place as a

large number of fans were present on the pitch.    A few minutes later

I noticed that Police Officers were pulling the perimeter fence down

and seme fans who were injured were being brought onto the pitch.        I

hurried to the assistance of these fans and although initially the

injured fans were more shocked and out of breath, I realised that

this was far more serious as lifeless bodies of fans were being

removed onto the pitch.    I attempted to resuscitate seme four young

men but they were already dead.

I then assisted other officers and fans to carry these dead men from

the pitch at the Leppings Lane end to the area near to the gymnasium.

I must have done this several times when I was instructed by a senior

officer to remain with one of them.

At 4.10 pm (1610) the same date Dr CORPEN attended and certified the

death of Graham Shaun WRIGHT, 17 years, I then remained with the

deceased until 6.20 am (0620) on Sunday 16th April 1989 (160489).

I then accompanied the deceased via ambulance to the Medico Legal
                                                                        PAGE    5
                                                                        S639A

         Centre where he was documented and left in the care of the mortuary

         staff.

         I want off duty at 6.45 am (0645) the same date.


                                                        G SINGH PC2963 SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

           TIME:           DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                    28 05
Incident     102   260390 QP8064        DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                          STATEMENT NUMBER    S1273

                                                                             Station

^rname             ROBINSON

 Forenames         M   B

 Age                                       Date of birth

 Address           S YORKSHIRE POLICE
                   ECCLESFIELD PSTN

 Occupation        POL PC276

 Telephone

 IC                Height                  Build

 Hair colour

 Hair type

^^es                                       Complexion

 Facial hair

 Glasses           Use                     Accent

 Number of Pages

 Dated             270489                                                      Signed


           On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I commenced duty at 9.00 am (0900)

           at Ecclesfield Police Station, from where I was transported with

           other officers to the Hillsborough Football ground, where a full

           briefing subsequently took place.

           I was detailed to Serial 19 together with PS323 PROCTOR and ten

           other constables.   Our duties were initially outside the ground, at

           the Leppings Lane entrance, supervising arriving Liverpool

           supporters, receiving and searching arriving coaches, and general

           public order duties.    This duty was in fact the same as I and many of

           my colleagues perform at most football matches at Hillsborough, has

           been well tried and tested, and myself and I am sure, the other

           officers present, were well aware of what was required.

           I arrived with my serial at the Leppings Lane end of the ground at

           some time shortly after 1100 am (1100).      We were met by Inspector
                                                                   PAGE    2
                                                                   S1273

SYKES who briefed us on our particular duties.    We then went out into

Leppings    Lane and took up positions in the 'mouth' of the entry to

the ground and the Leppings Lane turnstiles, alongside leppings Lane

road itself.    On reaching Leppings Lane I immediatley noticed that

there were already a large number of Liverpool supporters in the

area, seme walking around, seme stood around in small groups.      The

turnstiles were not open at this point.    Frcm the outset, I had cause

to converse with many supporters, all of whom at this time were very

amicable.     I was continually approached by supporters who had

arrived early and who were asking one of a limited number of

questions, namely - Where was the nearest pub or beer-off?     Where

could they get something to eat?    Where a particular entrance to the

ground was?    Did I know where any tickets could be bought?

All the supporters were in good humour, and were dealt with

accordingly.    They continued to walk around or gather in groups, the

numbers building steadily all the time.    More and more fans arrived

and it soon became noticeable that many had been drinking, many were

in fact walking around near to my location carrying several cans or

bottles of beer, and openly drinking frcm them.    On 'normal' match

days I am certain this in itself would not have been tolerated by my

serial, but the point was reached where there were simply too many of

them acting in this manner.    There was the occasional loud mouth who

appeared worse for drink, but again as time went on, these became

more and more noticable.

I cannot recall the exact time that the turnstiles were opened, but

I   can recall that when they were, there was no apparent rush by the

supporters in the area to get into the ground. They were stood about

in groups of increasing size, and then they began taking up positions

on nearby walls, sitting and drinking beer etc.,    There were many

people who had obviously arrived without tickets, they were openly
                                                                    PAGE    3
                                                                    S1273

approaching other people and asking to buy ticket^.    These people

were in fact a continual nuisance, and were being repeatedly asked to

nova away from the entrance to the turnstiles.

As time went on it became increasingly difficult for all officers,

even the mounted officers, to maintain good order in the leppings Lane

area.    The crowds were too plentiful and as the day went on they

seemed less willing to respond to any Police advice.    Very large

groups continued to stand around outside and refused to enter the

ground as advised.    Because of the numbers involved and the

relatively small number of officers present to deal with them, this

task soon became impossible.    It was not possible to control the

crowds on the road or at the entrances to the ground.    Even the horses

were unable to control the majority of the crowd.

I think that the time would be about 2.00 pm (1400) when leppings Lane

was closed to vehicles in the interests of safety.     By this time, the

crowds many who were now clearly worse for drink, were filling the

whole width of the road.     It remained an impossible task to control

them.    As the kick-off time got closer more and more fans attempted

to gain entry through the Leppings Lane turnstiles.     It soon became

obvious that they were getting frustrated by the slow movement into

the ground.    As the crowd around the turnstiles increased they

started to push and shove, tempers were fraying, myself and other

officers were being verbally abused.     There seemed little we could

do.     At one stage, as requested by PS PROCTOR, I followed him into

the crowd and tried to approach the turnstiles, hoping to advise the

crowd to stop pushing before injuries occurred.     I was in fact

separated frcm PS PROCTOR by a Police horse, and I lost sight of

him.     At this point I repeatedly shouted out at the crowd around me

to stop pushing.     This was useless, nobody took any notice, and most

seemed to laugh off the advice or continue to verbally abuse me and
                                                                  PAGE      4
                                                                  S1273

other officers there.     The pushing continued and intensified. I made

my way nearer to the edge of the crowd, somewhere next to the road.

I     could see that the crowd near the turnstiles was very tightly

packed, many were climbing up onto the perimeter wall of the ground

seemingly to escape the crush rather than gain easier access.     The

pushing nevertheless continued and was at its worst not long before

3.00pm (1500).      I can recall a Police Officer shouting out over a

vehicle loudspeaker to the     crowd, advising to stop pushing, but the

advice was ignored.      I recall thinking that there was soon going to

be injuries if the pushing didn't stop, although frcm my position I

couldn't see if there were any persons being injured nearer to the

turnstiles. I can recall that there was a point when there was a

sudden surge forward by the crowd, obviously by movement near the

turnstiles.     I   could not see what had caused this but I assumed that

a gate had been opened to relieve the pressure. Had this not been

dons I do believe that serious injuries or damage would have occurred

outside the entrances.     Also at this point I can recall large numbers

of supporters rushing to the entrances frcm Leppings Lane.      I saw them

run across the road frcm a wall where many were sitting or stood near

by.    My own belief is that these people did not have tickets, and

that on seeing the sudden rush into the ground, realising that a gate

had been opened, they too joined the rush.      This obviously added

considerably to the numbers entering the entrance at the same time.

Supporters continued to enter the ground, but shortly after 3.00 pm

(1500) on hearing radio messages requesting urgent assistance in the

ground, I went with other officers into the ground, onto the pitch,

near the Leppings Lane terracing.

I first of all thought that a pitch invasion had taken place, but it

was soon apparent that the incident was much more serious.      As soon

as it was apparent that people were getting seriously injured in the
                                                                  PAGE        5
                                                                  S1273

crush on the terracing, with other officers and supporters, I first

of all recall trying to break down a strip of the perimeter fencing

to the right of the goalmouth in order to get to a person who, if not

already dead, was very seriously injured.    This was eventually done,

the man lifted through the broken fence.    He was carried onto the

pitch and attended to by other officers.     I believe he was dead at

this time.

From this point I assisted in helping all present in lifting

obviously dead people from the terracing, and also assisting injured

people onto the pitch.     I cannot say how many dead bodies I helped

remove from the terracing, but I believe it must have been in double

figures.     On three occasions I assisted other officers who I could

not name, in attempting to resuscitate three people, two young boys

and a man of about 25 - 30 years.     I can recall thinking that they

were already dead but efforts, nevertheless continued unsuccessfully

to revive them.     I eventually assisted other officers, and also

supporters, in carrying three apparently dead young men frcm the

pitch at the Leppings Lane end, to the area near to the gymnasium.        I

did not stay with any of these bodies, other officers remained, and I

could not identify any of them.

I remained inside the ground, on the pitch, until most of the

supporters had left the ground.     I was completely stunned by all that

had happened and could not initially undersand how it could have

happened.     I was not in the ground when the incident began, but it is

my opinion that, being present outside the Leppings Lane entrances, it

was extremely lucky that no serious injuries had occurred outside.




                                             M B ROBINSON   PC276 SIGNED

  TAKEN


                                                                                  2810
Incident      102   260390 QP8064         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                               STATEMENT NUMBER    S923

                                                                                  Station
     tname           BURNLEES

Forenames            JANE     BORTHWICK

Age                                            Date of birth

Address              S. YORKS. POLICE. ECCLESFIELD


Occupation           POL PC3135

Telephone

IC                  Height                     Build

Hair colour

Hair type

                                               Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses             Use                        Accent

Number of Pages 3

Dated                270489                                 J. BURNLEES PC3135 Signed


             FA CUP SEMI-FINAL 15TH APRIL 1989 (150489)



             At 9 am (0900) on the above date I reported to Ecclesfield Police

             Station where transport was waiting to take officers from F2 to

             Hillsborough Football Ground. At Hillsborough I was briefed along with

             all the other officers on duty. I was in Serial 19, directly

             responsible to PS323 PROCTOR. Our duties were outside the ground in

             leppings Lane Near to the turnstiles which were to be used as access

             points into the ground for Liverpool supporters with the correct

             tickets. Our brief was to receive fans at that location and to

             maintain order and also to assist where possible and if needed, other

             serials working on the turnstiles at Leppings Lane. I was not in

             possession of a personal radio.

             At 11 am (1100) on that date we received a further briefing at the

                                                                                            281 1
                                                                  PAGE   ;
                                                                  S923

rear of the West Stand which is at the Leppings Lane end of the

ground. This briefing was carried out by Inspector SYKES who ensured

that all officers were aware of specific duties under his ccmnand

outside the Leppings Lane end of the ground. We were instructed to

carry out selective searches of fans outside the ground and to search

any vehicles that were carrying Liverpool supporters and depositing

them at the ground. Serial 19 then went outside the ground to thearea

of Leppings Lane adjacent to the turnstiles and the mouth of the

official car park at the rear of the South Stand. It was evident at

this point that large numbers of Liverpool supporters were already

in the area, many of them asking if spare tickets were available and

also asking for directions to nearby public houses which might be

open. At 12 noon (1200) the turnstiles into theground were opened and

seme fans began to enter the ground in an orderly fashion. Others were

not interested in entering the ground and were milling around,

congregating in large groups, some consuming alcohol from cans. Until

about 1.30pm (1330) these supporters did not give any cause for

concern, despite the fact that there were hundreds of them, many

ticket-less and most drinking. After 1.30pm (1330) it became very

difficult to maintain any sort of order either at the turnstiles or in

Leppings Lane. Large groups of fans were noticed standing around a

central figure - it appeared as though tickets were being sold and

officers frcm Serial 19 were constantly causing these groups to

disperse. This situation was worsened by droves of Liverpool

Supporters without tickets blocking both the road and the pavement.

Further to this congestion, a special train of Liverpool fans arrived

causing more overcrowding. At about 2.30pm (1430) the crowd moving

down frcm Catchbar Lane to Leppings Lane appeared to split in the road

and fighting broke out. Bottles were smashed and the atmosphere was

very hostile, with fans beckoning the Police to intervene, goading us


                                                                             2812
and being verbally abusive. This situation eased with Police

intervention and I was then approached by three males Who had

purchased photocopied tickets for   20 each ( instead of   6 each). They

were irate and demanded that I help them get into the ground, I

explained that I was powerless to help but still they were very

angry. At about 2.45pm (1445) the double gates to the far left of the

turnstiles were opened to ease the crush at the turnstiles. I

accompanied PC611 BOOTH and Inspector SYKES and others to close the

gate as a bottleneck effect was developing and people were pushing

violently. I was aware that hordes of Liverpool fans continued to

arrive. The mood was heated and volatile and they seemed intent on

gaining entry by whatever means.

At about 3pm (1500) I was looking frcm Leppings Lane towards the

turnstiles and I could see supporters climbing erratically over fences

near the river (which runs alongside the ground). Sane had fallen but

most were running towards the gates to try to enter the ground

without tickets.

I then saw the double gates open and the crowd surge forward. I was

aware of seme younger fans being lifted above the heads of other

supporters to remove them to safety. As the crowd rushed through the

gate, I followed, unaware what had happened in the ground.




END OF REPORT




J BURNLEES PC3135


                                      JANE BORTHWICK BURNLEES SIGNED

  TAKEN
            PLACE:

            TIME:         DATE:   270489
wrp
  TNESS   TO SIGNATURE:

ore:ICERS SI^IATURE:
Incident    102   260390 OP8Q64        DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                          STATEMENT NUMBER   S926

                                                                             Station

  mame             PROCTOR

Forenames          LIONEL

Age                                       Date of birth

Address            S YORKS POLICE
                   ECCLESFIELD

Occupation        POL PS323

Telephone

IC                Height                  Build

Hair colour

Hair type

                                          Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses           Use                     Accent

Number of Pages

Dated             040589                                                       Signed


           INCIDENT AT HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND, SHEFFIELD ON SATURDAY, 15

           APRIL 1989 (150489).



           On Saturday, 15 April 1989 (150489) I was engaged on duties at

           Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield, for the FA Cup Sani Final

           between Liverpool FC and Nottingham Forrest FC.

           I commenced duty at Ecclesfield Police Station at 9.00 am (0900) and

           attended at the Hillsborough Ground at 10.00 am (1000) for the main

           briefing which took place in the North Stand.

           I was the Sergeant in charge of Serial 19, which comprised 10

           constables and myself.   Our duties were at the Leppings Lane end of

           the ground where the Liverpool fans were to be accommodated.

           At 11.00 am (1100), together with rny serial, I attended at the rear

           of the West Stand, with other serials who were engaged on the
                                                                  PAGE        :
                                                                  S926

Leppings Lane turnstiles, where we were briefed by Inspector SYKES,

the officer in charge of our serials.     He ensured that everyone was

aware of their duties and reminded us that it was likely that the

Liverpool fans would be affected by alcohol and that we would have to

be selective as we would not be able to cope with the numbers without

depleting our strength.     Our brief was to maintain order outside the

turnstiles, to assist other serials as required, and to search and

supervise the unloading of vehicles and coaches arriving at the

ground.     These instructions were duties which most of the serial and

myself had carried out all season.

After the briefing we inmediately went outside the turnstiles and

took up a position where Leppings Lane abuts an open area leading to

the iron-barred perimeter fence and gates which are directly in front

of the turnstiles.    When we got outside there were a number of fans

already gathering in this area and on the footpaths on both sides of

the road.    Some of these fans were obviously without tickets because

they were asking fans for spare tickets as they were arriving.

At this stage the fans were in good spirits and comparatively well

behaved, although there were a number of them arriving carrying cans

of beer and lager.

On several occasions Inspector SYKES and myself asked the fans to

deposit the alcohol in bins which were at the side of the

turnstiles. One of our main problems were fans without tickets

gathering around us - we were constantly moving them away.

The turnstiles were opened sometime around 12 noon (1200) but the fans

were reluctant to go into the ground and the numbers grew outside.       At

one stage, around this time, two of my serial arrested a 'ticket

tout' who was causing people to obstruct the footpath further.    Fans

without tickets were constantly returning to the area and the mounted

police officers kept moving them from the area.


                                                                                  2816
                                                                  PAGE
                                                                  S926

All through this period my serial assisted with the unloading of

South Yorkshire Transpot buses, which were arriving at intervals on

the opposite side of the road from where we were standing.    As the

fans alighted we stopped traffic to allow them to cross the road to

enter the ground.     As they were getting off the buses fans without

tickets kept asking them if they had spare tickets.    When the fans

crossed the road it was obvious that numbers of them were reluctant

to enter the ground, many of them asking where the nearest pubs and

eating places were.

Approximately five coaches arrived at the ground which we supervised

in unloading, after that all other coaches were advised to let their

passengers alight at the coach park.

Between 12.30 pm (1230) and 2.00 pm (1400), the numbers of fans

without tickets grew into many hundreds, blocking the footpaths

leading to the ground to such an extent that people were having to

walk in the road to pass them.

On a number of occasions I asked members of the mounted section, who

were maintaining order in the queues and keeping non-ticket holders

away, to clear the footpaths.

Throughout, I maintained more or less the same position in order that

members of my serial could find me if they required my assistance.

It is difficult to recall times because we were kept extremely busy,

but, around 2.00 pm (1400), I heard a message on my radio to the

effect that fans were on their way from the Wads ley Bridge Railway

Station.   Sometime later they arrived escorted by police officers.

After these had arrived, fans started arriving in large numbers from

all directions and pressure built up at the turnstiles and started

backing-up.   I could see that mounted officers in front of turnstiles

A-G were being trapped.

Inspector SYKES instructed me to go towards the A-G turnstiles to try



                                                                         2817
                                                                   PAGE
                                                                   S926

and assist in relieving the pressure.     I asked same of the officers

around me to follow me.     I eventually got to the perimeter gates

which are in front of the turnstiles and the pressure was great.       I

would guess the time to be 2.30 pm (1430).

When I got to the double gates Police Constable 1834 SCHOLEY from

another serial was with me.    A short time after this, with the

assistance of the mounted section, we struggled to close the gates to

alleviate pressure on the turnstiles where fans were crying out.       We

eventually got the gates closed and Police Constable SCHOLEY dropped

the bolt on the base on his side of the gate.    Wte remained on the

turnstile side of the gate and the mounted section were on the road

side of the gate preventing fans from going through the gates.     The

rsnarkable thing was that we had created space by closing the gates

but the fans were still pressing towards the turnstiles and would not

coma back towards the gates.

After what appeared to be a few minutes, the crowd forced their way

past the horses and pushed the gates with such force that I had to

move with the gates to prevent injury to my ankles.    Police Constable

SCHOLEY later pointed out that the bolt in the base of the gate had

buckled with the pressure.

I maintained my position at the gates but had been forced towards the

river fence.   At one stage there was a surge and during the surge I

was kicked by a police horse on the rear of my left knee which left

me in considerable pain (my leg bruised badly in the following 24

hours).

In the last hour the mood of the fans had changed considerably, some

became very abusive and it was obvious that many had been drinking

heavily.   Some were that abusive that under normal circumstances they

would have been arrested.

During the period I was at the perimeter gates I saw people clijnbing



                                                                            2818
                                                                  PAGE      5
                                                                  S926

over the high wall into the ground at the side of Gate 'B'.

Shortly before 3.00 pm (1500) I saw that Gate 'C' was opened and fans

started to enter by the gate and a short time later gate 'B' opened

for a brief period and then closed.

Pressure around the turnstiles started to be relieved to such an

extant that I started to make my way back towards the road, because in

the second phase my serial was to remain outside the ground until

half time.     I still had considerable pain in my leg from the horse

kick which restricted movement.

Although I had a personal radio, which had worked alright when I

first started duty, it appeared to deteriorate, together with the

fact that I had difficulty in hearing it due to being surrounded by

noisy fans for most of the time.

I walked back towards gate 'A' and met up with a few officers of my

serial and almost irnnediately I heard a radio message requesting

officers to go onto the pitch because the Liverpool fans were climbing

onto it.     I followed the other officers through Gate 'A' to the North

Stand and entered the ground through the first gangway.    When I got

onto the pitch I saw a large number of officers in front of the

Leppings Lane fence pulling at the fence.     I also saw the gate open to

the centre north enclousre.     It was apparent that a number of people

wera injured and that it was not a 'pitch invasion'.

Fans started coining onto the pitch, obviously injured although some

of them not seriously.    They sat on the grass at the side of the

track.     I requested officers to move them further onto the pitch in

order that officers could work on the more seriously injured.

It became clear that there were many casualties and when I saw a South

Yorkshire ambulance in front of the Kop I went to it and asked the

crew to ask them to contact their Control for more ambulances, if it

had not been done already.    The reason I did this was because our



                                                                                2819
                                                                          PAGE      6
                                                                          S926

         radio appeared blocked.

         I then returned to the area to the right hand side of the goalmouth

         when facing lappings Lane.    At one stage a young doctor came up to roe

         and asked where he could help.    I took hold of his arm and led him

         through the fans who had come onto the pitch to the rear of the goal

         net where police and fans were working on a number of casualties.      I

         shouted to them that I had a doctor, went to him and assisted.    As I

         turned round I assisted in placing a fan onto a make-shift stretcher

         who was obviously dead and he was taken towards the gymnasium.    I

         rsnained on the pitch until it was cleared.



•
                                                         L PROCTOR PS323 SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

           TIME:            DATE:     040589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                        2820
Incident    102   260390 QP8064       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                          STATEMENT NUMBER   S866

                                                                             Station
^(^name            WRIGHT

Forenames          GRAHAM

Age                                       Date of birth

Address            S. YORKS POLICE HACKENTHQRPE POLICE STATION


Occupation         POL PC2980

Telephone

IC                Height                  Build

Hair colour

Hair type

ft.                                       Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses           Use                     Accent

Number of Pages 9

Dated              070589                                    G WRIGHT PC2980 Signed


           I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police,

           presently stationed at Hackenthorpe Police Station, Occupation

           Lana, Sheffield. At 8.30am(0830) on Saturday 15th April 1989,(150489)

           I commenced duty at Hackenthorpe Police Station in order to perform

           public order duties at the Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield,

          where the F.A. Cup semi final was to take place later that day between

           the teams from Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.

          My specific role was to be a member of Serial Number 16 under the

          direct supervision of Police Sergeant 1288 PAYNE. Also in the serial

          wera the following Constables 115 HUCKSTEPP, 3066 HUCKSTEPP, 259

          CONEY, 607 TAYLOR, 1715 BEST, 963 EVANS, 620 YATES, CERRONE and

          DUFFY. Our task that day was that prior to the start of play we would

           supervise turnstile gates A to G inclusive at the Leppings Lane end

          of the ground. During the actual play we would supervise the crowd

                                                                                       2821
                                                                  PAGE
                                                                  S866

within the elevated section of the West Stand. And prior to the end

of the game we were to take up a position outside the gates, in

Leppings Lane to supervise the exit of the crowd from the stadium.

Onca at the ground a briefing for all officers took place shortly

before lO.OOam(lOOO) in the North stand. After the general briefing,

my serial was briefed by PS PAYNE on our specific duties, only he and

one other officer in the serial PC YATES were in possession of a

personal radio.

Our instructions were to be in position on the turnstiles by

11.15am(1115) as the gates would be open frcm 12 noon(1200) onwards.

As a preventative measure we were to perform searches of incoming

spectators for weapons or alcoholic drinks. Prevent persons under the

influence of alcohol frcm entering the ground and control the

behavior of those entering the ground.

To achieve this we would station ourselves immediately outside the

turnstiles taking advantage of the restriction they caused to the

flow of persons into the ground.

Our briefing was supplemented by Inspector PURDY who was the officer

in charge of our serial, and later by Inspector SYKES.

As   instructed we were in position for when the turnstiles opened

shortly after 12 noon. (1200) Virtually straight away supporters were

at the ground and started entering.

At   that time the flow of persons into the ground was light and steady,

as   did the other officers of my serial I was able to search the

majority of persons entering the ground.

Any in possession of metal cans were asked to leave them in the

waste bins outside the turnstiles. Everyone who was asked did so and

practically everyone entering the ground offered themselves to be

searched and were good humoured about it. The weather was fine and

quite warm, most people were without coats making the searching


                                                                           2822
                                                                  PAGE    ;
                                                                  S866

easier. Very little property was taken frcm those entering. I am sure

of a small penknife being seized and a young couple attempting to

entar the ground with two large cans of lager.

The unfortunate consequences however were that whenever an officer

either seized an item of property or arrested someone, then they

would have to leave their posts on the turnstiles and the remaining

officers would have to cover all seven turnstiles as best possible.

That was not a cause for concern though as I could see another

serial of officers inside the turnstiles also checking person into

the ground. In fact for the first couple of hours, although we were

busy, everything went smoothly and there were no real problems,

although I was aware of several people coming to the one turnstile I

was covering, with tickets for the Nottingham Forest end of the

ground. However the situation changed shortly before 2.30pn( 1430) when

there was a sudden build up of spectators completely filling the area

in front of our seven turnstiles. Three or four times the crowd

surged and pushed forward Which resulted in me being trapped with my

back to the wall to the side of the turnstiles opening.

During the lulls in these pushes my priority had changed from checking

the spectators into the ground, to trying to 'funnel' them into the

'turnstiles' as quickly as possible.

The density of the crowd around me at this time was such that I had

difficulty in seeing what other officers were near to me, despite

being only a few feet away to my right, I could only just see PC 115

HUCKSTEPP who was stood at turnstile gates A and B. I could see no

other officers of my serial although to my left I could see Inspector

PURDY. He was stood on top of a railing at the end of the turnstiles

near to the large gate 'C'. He was shouting at the crowds trying to

encourage them to stop pushing, although he also called over to us to

see to see that we were alright.



                                                                              2823
                                                                  PAGE   4
                                                                  S866

A mounted officer also came close in, in front of me and attempted

to stop the crowd from pushing but he was frustratingly ineffective

as the crowd were tightly packed around the horse and seemed to

hava no fear of the animal.

At no time did the crush on the turnstiles relax despite the efforts

of the officers I could see, it became worse and a couple of times I

was pressed tightly back against the wall with people so close around

me that I was virtually unable to move and put in a position where I

was concerned for my own safety.

At this time we were serving no purpose at all, any efforts should

hava been directed at the rear of the crowd where the pushing started.

Eventually I was again able to see Inspector PURDY who called for us

to 'escape' fron the crowd by going through the turnstiles ourselves.

That message I passed onto PC 115 HUCKSTEPP after which I went

through turnstile A or B and we met again inside the ground.

Immadiatley I went back out via the large gate 'C' to where

Inspector PURDY was up on the railing still trying to control the

crowd. There was also large numbers of spectators climbing on top of

the turnstiles and onto the wall above gate 'B'

At that moment a young boy of about 11 years and practically

unconscious was passed over the heads of the tightly packed crowd

in front of the turnstiles. He was passed towards gate 'C' where I

took hold of him and carried him into the ground via gate 'C' and to

the 'Portacabin' which had been set up as a property store in that

area. The boy who was holding an 'inhaler' was very pale and short of

breath. Inside the Portacabin were other officers including I

believe Inspector WHITE and I left the boy in their care.

Again I went back out of the ground via gate 'C'. The mood of the

crowd had obviously changed and was becoming quite hostile as they

struggled to get into the ground. One fan who was not in the crush


                                                                             2824
                                                                  PAGE   5
                                                                  S866

but the other side of the railing, dropped his ticket which went under

the feet of the crowd. When he reached under the railing to try and

retrieve the ticket, other fans thought he was trying to 'jump the

queue' and actually kicked him.

It was impossible to stop the crowd pushing frcm the front near the

turnstiles as the pushing obviously started frcm well back. Therefore

in an attempt to relieve that rush on the turnstiles I went further

back in the crowd to where there are a set of wrought iron gates

which separate the stadium from Leppings Lane.

These were open but, as did a couple of other officers we closed the

thrse pairs of gates to prevent any further pushing on the turnstiles.

The difficulty with those gates though was that although the right

hand of the pair had a bolt which went down to the ground, the left

sida could only be closed and held closed using physical strength,

which I did.

By now it was between 2.50pm(1450) and 2.55pm(1455) and elements of

the crowd were becoming quite hostile and desperate to get into the

ground. I was subjected to quite a lot of verbal abuse frcm people

demanding to be let into the ground and others accusing me of causing

people to be crushed up against the gates I was holding closed.

It was impossible to reason with the majority of the crowd who

could not see what was happening in front. A couple of times I was

told of women and children being crushed up against the gates and so

wherever possible I allowed them to filter through.

About three times the weight of the crowd on the gates was more than

I could hold and large numbers would surge through before we could

fight the gates closed again. The mood of the crowd was one of

desperation to get into the ground before the game started. I tried

to assure people that the start would be delayed, something I

genuinely believed, but achieved little success.



                                                                             2825
                                                                  PAGE   6
                                                                  S866

Eventually the crowd at the turnstiles dwindled and I saw that the

other pairs of wrought iron gates had been opened. Obviously the

crowd pushing against the gates I was holding could see this and so

I had to let people start flowing through ray gate, although I only

opened one half and tried to slow down their entry.

It was a minute or so after the crowd had passed through or around

the turnstiles into the ground and where I was standing was clear,

that I heard the first 'tannoy' announcement asking the Liverpool

fans not to push against the gates, at that time I did not know what

gates were being referred to.

All the officers outside the ground including myself then went into

the sterile area to the rear of the West Stand. I was not in

possession of a radio but shortly after that I understand there was

a radio message as there was seme mention of the pitch and officers

began running around the West Stand towards the police control box.

I ran with them around the police control end into the South Stand

from which I was able to gain access to the pitch. As I went around I

could see large numbers of spectators on the pitch in What appeared

to be a straightforward pitch 'invasion'. The main crowds of people

appeared to be coming from behind the goal out of the West Stand

terraces and so I headed that way.

As I neared the perimeter fence I could see the faces and upper

bodies of people crushed against the fence on the South side of the

goalmouth. I could see police officers at gate '3' frantically trying

to pull people through the gate onto the perimeter track of the

pitch. I went to assist and saw that the people just inside the

gates were trapped up to just above the waist. Officers had hold of

them and were trying to release them but couldn't because of the

weight of people pressing on them from further up the terraces.

I therefore climbed up the left side of the open gates in an effort


                                                                             2826
                                                                  PAGE   7
                                                                  S866

to pull people up as the gates were only wide enough for a couple of

officers to reach through side by side. However even though I was able

to grab the hands of a number of people it was impossible to release

them.

In order that I could use both hands to grab people I 'bridged'

mysalf across the open gateway half way up. In that position I was

abla to help a number of people out of the terraces and across onto

the perimeter track.

In that position I was above the crowd pressed up against the fences

and it was then I saw about five feet back from the fence and just

off to the right of the gate. The head and upper body of a man of

about 20 years, clean shaven, wearing I believe a dark coloured top,

my attention was drawn to him because he was badly discoloured and

lifeless, obviously dead or dying and only being supported by the

people crushed around him.

That was my first realisation that this mas a major disaster. I

shouted at the people around the man to pass him too me but they

obviously couldn't release him as they were still being pushed forward

by the mass of people further back up the terraces. I shouted

at the people to move back and pointed at the tunnel yelling at them

to leave that 'centre south' enclosure but no-one seemed to move and I

was just shouted down.

It eventually became apparent that there were large numbers of people

trapped and crushed against the fencing and this body of people

stretched back several feet. The few we were able to help out

of the terraces onto the perimeter track were having little effect

on the overall numbers who needed help and so myself and other

officers decided we had to enter the terraces and pull people back

from the fences.

It) do this it was necessary to climb over the top of the depth of



                                                                             2827
                                                                  PAGE   8
                                                                  S866

fans, this we did and started pulling bodies back from the crush,

many of then lifeless.

Initially we would just pull bodies backwards to relieve the

pressure on the fence, but as more and more officers entered the

Centre South enclosure we were able to start concentrating on

individuals.

Together with one officer I attempted mouth to mouth resuscitation on

one man in late 30's, clean shaven, brown hair whilst the other

officer attempted cardiac massage. We then changed over but neither

of us appeared to have any success.

By this time more and more bodies were beingpulled   back from the

fences onto the terraces and there was little room for resuscitation

and so together with other officers I carried the first man out of

the terraces, via the tunnel under the stand to the sterile area

where his body was left with a couple of officers.

I returned to the terraces where resuscitation was attempted on

another man who I have little memory of, he was then carried to gate

'3' end passed onto the perimeter track.

Several others were picked up by groups of police and spectators and

we carried them either to gate '3' or to where thefence   hadbeen

broken down near to the centre of the goals.

I have little recollection of the vast majority of most of these

people as the necessity was to get them out of that enclosure as

quickly as possible to where they could properly be seen too.During

this time I was aware that there was still large numbers of supporters

stood around in that enclosure, doing nothing but their

very presence hindering the people trying to help the injured. I

tried to move seme of these away and told them to leave the

terraces but was shocked by the hostile reaction I received from

some, and amazed that seme actually still believed the game would



                                                                             2828
                                                                          PAGE   9
                                                                          S866

         continue and were adamant that they wouldn't move.

         Eventually all the injured were moved out of that enclosure and away,

         I rsmained in the area. A couple of times I heard the roar of the

         crowd from the Spion Kop and thought there was going to be trouble

         but I did not become involved in that.

         When the match was finally abandoned I supervised the departure of

         fans from the West Stand out of the ground after which we were

         debriefed.

         Finally it would appear to me that the cause of the problems was

         the vast numbers of people trying to enter the ground in the last

         half hour, many of these people had an overpowering desire to get

         into the ground before the kick off and could not be reasoned with.

         I would have liked to have seen the start of the match delayed and

        this announced over the public address system. The only announcements

         I heard was the request for the "Liverpool fans to move back from the

         fences."




        END OF REPORT




                                                       G WRIGHT PC2980 SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:    070589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                     2829
Incident      102     260390 QP8064        DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                               STATEMENT NUMBER    S2152

                                                                                  Station
      lame            BUXTON

Forenames             MICHAEL

Age                                            Date of birth

Address


Occupation            POL PC1863

Telephone

IC                    Height                   Build

Hair colour

Hair type

^^s                                            Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses               Use                     Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                 120589                                     M BUXTON PC1863 Signed


             I am Michael BUXTON, a Police Constable of 25 years service and I am

             stationed at Bradfield in FI Division.

             In the course of my work I drive the Divisional Land Rover each

             working day.     The Land Rover is fitted with a multi channel radio and

             a public address system.

             On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I was on duty in connection with

             the FA Cup Semi Final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest at

             Hillsborough.     My duties were as driver with the Land Rover and

             Superintendent CHAPMAN.    We were on duty in connection with Notts

             Forest supporters reception at Herries Road and Herries Road South

             areas.

             Between 2.30pm (1430) and 3pm (1500), I received a radio message from

             ground control to take the Land Rover to Leppings Lane to assist with

             crowd control.     I informed Mr CHAPMAN of this and drove to Leppings
                                                                    PAGE    2
                                                                    S2152
Lana.

When I arrived at leppings Lane turnstiles I was amazed at what I

found.   From the turnstiles to beyond the traffic lights in Leppings

Lana there was a mass of supporters.     They were simply pouring down

leppings Lane towards the ground.     At the turnstiles there seemed to

be making little if any progress through the turnstiles.     The pressure

at the front of the queue was tremendous and I became very very

concerned.    I appealed to the crowd to ease the situation over the PA,

this had no effect.

I told the supporters that people at the front were being crushed and

that these were women and children, their own people that they were

crushing.    It made no difference.   I repeated my messages several

tines to no effect.

I then called match control on my personal radio and asked for the

kick off to be delayed in order to offer the crowd something to stop

the crushing but I was informed it was too late.

I then became worried and I realised people were going to get harmed

and injured if something was not done.    So I called the Mounted

Inspector on the PA but he could not hear me because of the noise from

the crowd but after a minute or two I managed to attract his attention

and I gesticulated to him to form the Mounted Police Officers into a

lina across the area parallel with the turnstiles and this he managed

to do - however this had little effect, the crowd was hardly affected

with seme simply going under the horses' bellies.

The attitude of the supporters struck me as different because whilst

there were several adults with youngsters not taking any p>art in the

matter but standing to one side of the main stream of supporters

pouring down Leppings Lane, the bulk of supporters appeared to be

gripped by an urgency to get into the ground and get in now and if

someone was hurt, so what, it seemed as though something more
                                                                  PAGE      3
                                                                  S2152

important than a football match was talcing place behind the

turnstiles.   They appeared fanatical to gain entrance.

It was obvious that the greater part had, as so often is the case,

been drinking and had left it too late and on arrival seeing the large

crowd still waiting to get in the ground had realised they would miss

part of the game, although I didn't think so at the time I now think

the fans were storming the turnstiles.

Just when my concern was at its peak, just as I was at itty wits end

wondering what I could do next, the crowd seemed to disappear so fast

that initially I could not believe it and I realised that a large

concertina type gate had been opened; I was immensely relieved and

very grateful.

Seeing that I was no longer required I began to drive down towards the

rear of the South Stand when I reached a gate at the rear of the

Police Match Control point I heard a radio message, "Everybody

on the track, everybody on the track."   I stopped the Land Rover and

gained entry to the ground and ran onto the football pitch.

Initially what I thought I was seeing was just a pitch invasion.

There were no players on the pitch and fans were climbing over the

fencing at the lappings Lane end.   I was not overly concerned because

I knew that we're quite easily cap»able of dealing with a pitch

invasion.

I walked towards the goalmouth area at the Leppings Lane.     As I did so

I saw that a Liverpool supporter had got to the Notts end of the

ground and was agitating the Notts fans by his actions in the

goalmouth at that end.

As I walked across to the Leppings Lane end goalmouth I turned and saw

that he had been arrested around the middle of the pitch. As I neared

to the goalmouth I saw Police Officers helping fans over the fencing

and I began to realise it was more than a pitch invasion.     I then saw
                                                                  PAGE        4
                                                                  S2152

a gate in the fence and fans lying trapped on top of one another in

the gateway.   I looked behind the fencing and saw that the fans were

all crushed together.   I saw a young fan amongst them and realised he

was dead.

I want to the open gate and tried to pull a youth out of the entrance

but he said that his foot was trapped.   With other Officers I then

tried to pull a young female out but she was trapped by fans behind

her and she began screaming and the other Officers stopped pulling.

I said, "She's got to come out, come on pull."

We eventually pulled her free and then pulled out a youth who had been

trapped under her but to one side, after which I was able to pull the

youth who was at the bottom back towards the fence and I was able to

free his foot which had been trapped between a metal post which

supports the fencing and a concrete step.

I was obliged to recover by resting against the St Johns ambulance.       I

saw Chief Superintendent NESBIT standing on the advertisement

hoardings and holding onto the fencing trying to get seme organisation

but the noise was too much.   I ran to the Land Rover and a hand held

loud hailer and gave it to Chief Superintendent NESBIT who was still

in the same position still trying to get things organised.   He then

instructed Police Officers to form a tunnel down which we passed

bodies of the fans, whilst seme alive a lot of them were obviously

dead.   We passed back body after body until eventually we cleared the

area.

I then assisted in taking dead bodies on advertising hoardings to the

opposite end of the pitch, clearing the area and from there into the

gymnasium.

My next recollection is that I drove the Land Rover onto Penistone

Road and parking on the central reservation and performing traffic

duty directing ambulances down Herries Road and turning right into
                                                                  PAGE     5
                                                                  S2152

Penistone Road and then into the ground.

Eventually I went to the gymnasium looking for Superintendent CHAPMAN.

When I arrived at the gym and I saw all the bodies laid on the floor I

couldn't believe there was so many, row upon row of them.    Eventually

Detective Chief Superintendent ADDIS began issuing instructions

regarding procedures and finding I was not required, I went into the

North Stand looking for Superintendent CHAPMAN.    He was there with

other Supervisor Officers so I sat in the stand.

I remember seeing Chief Superintendent MDLE approaching the North

Stand from the Police Control.

After being stood down by Mr CHAPMAN I returned to the gymnasium to

see if I could assist but it seemed all organised.     I did a driving

job allocated to me by Chief Inspector BEAL then resumed to my beat.

When I arrived at Leppings Lane ini tally, I was able to travel freely

up to the crowd because there were very few fans walking up Leppings

Lane they were all coming down.    The crowd was of three to four

thousand strong.

The mood of the fans was a grim determination to get in the ground,

no one was laughing or joking, just the determination to get in.       I

have no recollection of any actions by any Stewards.

Radio communications were not good so much so that on previous

occasions the radio set up in the Land Rover is such that it can be

utilised as a radio room and has been on previous occasions by

pressing the correct buttons.     It receives and transmits messages via

match control.     At one stage I thought that I would be required for

this.

My normal function on match days is that of driver with the Land Rover

of the Chief Superintendent and always in position in Leppings Lane.

This is a duty I have been performing for years. •

I remember that when I was at Leppings Lane and after using the PA and
                                                                        PAGE
                                                                        S2152

         having had no success, I was joined by an Inspector who climbed onto

         the roof of the Land Rover and used the PA with the same result.




                                                       M BUXTON PC1863 SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

           TIME:            DATE:   120589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                2835
Incident    102   260390 QP8064          DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                             STATEMENT NUMBER   S420

                                                                                Station

Surname            HANDDAVIS

Forenames          PAUL

Age                                          Date of birth

Address            MOUNTED SECTION COMMANDER
                   OPERTIONS DIVISION, RING FM

Occupation         POL INS

Telephone

IC                 Height                   Build

Hair colour

Hair type

t *                                         Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses            Use                      Accent

Number of Pages

Dated              270489                                      P.F. HANDSDAVIS Signed


           I am the Mounted Inspector in charge of the Force Mounted Section.          I

           am answerable to the Superintendent, Operations Division, but the day

           to day running of the Branch is my direct responsibility.

           I regularly attend all football matches in this County and I have

           policed at "Hillsboro" on many occasions.     I was on duty for the

           previous two semi-finals at Hillsborough.

           Mounted Section, whilst playing an important part of the overall

           operation are only one cog in the wheel. The deployment of horses at

           the ground for this years' semi-final was more or less a carbon copy

           of previous years.

           Our Section of    18 horses is considered too small to cope with the

           size of the operation.    As in previous years Mutual Aid was sought

           from foreign forces.     I chose to bring in extra horses frcm both

           Merseyside and Nottinghamshire to supplement our strength.       The
                                                                   PAGE
                                                                   S420

overall number of horses deployed was 35.     That is six at the

Midland Railway Station and 29 at the ground itself.     I was not party

to the decision as to the total numbers of horses to be deployed.         I

was responsible, once the total number was decided upon, for their

deployment around the ground.

Prior to the day of the match I received my own copy of Operational

Order F 1/89.   I noted the recomtended deployments around the ground

but I modified this according to my own experience and knowledge of

likely trouble spots.   My Sgt SORSBY was consulted for his views and

together we agreed upon our deployment.     He attended the planning

meeting on 22nd March, 1989 (220389) at Hanmerton Rd.     I was unable

to attend.

Broadly speaking my deployment was based upon the safe escort of fans

both to and from the ground and assisting their safe entry/exit.       We

also keep an eye on any Public order situation which might develop

and deal with it, if it does.

I used our Merseyside horses at the Leppings Lane end of the ground

with Nottingham Officers on Penistone Road.    None of the Mutual Aid

Officers worked on their own.   They were all accompanied by S

Yorkshire mounted Officers.

Initially 10 horses were deployed on Penistone Road under the command

of Sgt SORSBY (S Yorkshire). 5 horses were at the Leppings Lane end

under the command of Sgt THOMAS (S Yorkshire) Ipwas responsible for

escorting fans from Wads ley Bridge Station and the Liverpool coach

parking area.   I had a total of 6 horses for that duty. I, with my

team then supplemented the Leppings Lane turnstile detail making a

total of 13 horses, working at that end of the ground from about

1415.   In addition and as a variation to the Operational Order Sgt

SORSBY and myself considered the South Stand Car Park to be a problem

area and 4 horses were sent to that spot.     2 horses were in Halifax



                                                                              2 8 37
                                                                      PAGE   :
                                                                      S420

Road and 2 in Herries Road with a watching brief over arriving fans.

All Officers were fully briefed     prior to deployment at 1130 hrs

(1130). The following account is a copy of entries made in my Duty

Book on Sunday 16th April, 1989 (160489)

Mounted Patrol around the ground with Inspector WILKINSON

(Merseyside) from 1130.     Patrolled in Halifax Road, Penistone Road and

around the ground.     Checked on deployment of all horses.   Whilst in

Halifax Road observed groups of Liverpool fans drinking outside the

White Horse Pub.     They were queuing at the off licence opposite the

pub also.

Further down Halifax Road, gangs of youths were sat on the grass verge

outside the Gateway Supermarket, drinking bottles of beer and lager.

At 1330     I and my team of 5 Merseyside Officers were at Wads ley

Bridge Station awaiting the arrival of the special train.     At around

1345 an announcement came over the radio to the effect that

Claywheels Lane was now full of coaches, and that coach parking would

now continue up Halifax Road.     At approximately 1355 the Liverpool

special train arrived.     (Definitely early - due in at 1402).

Approximately 400     fans on the train - allof who were quiet and sober.

Marshalled them in the usual way and set off down Halifax Road towards

the ground.     I used the planned Escort Officers - myself, Inspector

Wilkinson, PC 's 5043 5855 6278 7081 and additionally PW 156 and

PC2316.

We turned the crowd right at Leppings Lane roundabout and took the

supporters to the ground.

On arrival at the     ground at approximately1420 the usual thing

happened with thecrowd melting into the sides of the     pavement, going

into shops and mingling with other Hangers about.     I detailed

Officers on horseback to clear the pavements and encourage fans to go

inside the ground.    At this time, around 1420, there was no queuing



                                                                                 2838
                                                                    PAGE    4
                                                                    S420

at the turnstiles and no real problems.     Most of those escorted from

the station went into the ground without any problem.     PS1764 and

PS1952 together with PC 's 3186 1300 and 1696 were supervising queues

at the turnstiles.

After 1430 and right up to kick off time large crowds of supporters

arrived at the Leppings Lane end.     Many were intoxicated and confused

as to the correct entry point, into the ground.     They were unable to

discern where the queues for seats or standing were or which was the

correct turnstile.     All mounted and foot Police directed and assisted

them towards the correct turnstiles, but quickly the crowd increased

to vast proportions.     I found myself working to the right of the

lappings Lane turnstiles as you look from the road. Suddenly the Pen

that leads to those turnstiles became 'jam        - packed'   with     supporters,

all of whcm were quite good humoured but seemingly oblivious to the

over crowding that was occurring.    At this time I was working with

PC 's 1696 and 1300 frcm Merseyside.    All 3 of us worked for a long

time to stop fans pushing and jamming up against the person in front

of them.   It was already causing problems at the front of the

turnstiles and we knew a serious situation was developing.     I shouted

continously at fans to 'Stop pushing' as did the other Officers.       We

waved our arms in an effort to convey our meaning.    The crowd simply

ignored us and kept on increasing in volume.    Things eventually

became so overcrowded that my horse 'Hussar' who is 17 1/2 hands high

(seventeen and a half) and weighs well over 1/2 (half) a ton was

surrounded by fans who were wrapped around his whole body like

cellophane or cling film.     The horse could     not move a leg       or a muscle.

He began to lose his footing as he was lifted by the crowd.

I was somehow pushed to the left and my left leg was trappied against

a large steel upright or stanchion 'Hussar' who is one of our best

horses was clearly in a situation which he had never faced before and



                                                                                2839
                                                                 PAGE
                                                                 S420

I knew the horse was far frcm happy.    If he had kicked, reared or

even moved a leg I was extremely worried that the safety of the crowd

would be further risked.

Nobody in the crowd was taking the slightest notice of our pleas -

even those with small children.    I decided to come out of the pen and

try to work frcm the rear of the crowd to at least stop anyone else

from joining the rear of the melee.    I tried this tactic with minimal

success.

I could see that PC1696 and 1300 had followed my example and we were

joined by PC2316 SCOTT.    We then shut the blue wrought iron gates at

the lappings Lane end with the assistance of a foot Officer.    These

gates lead into the turnstile pens.    This was attempted to alleviate

crushing on the turnstiles which by now was getting quite nasty.       We

managed to hold the gates for a couple of minutes but the crowd in

determined mood - forced them open.

Realising the hopelessness of the situation I formed a line of horses

across the Leppings Lane access area outside the blue wrought iron

gates, in a second attempt to stop further fans joining the melee I

would think that around 1 1 - 1 2 horses lined up and formed a quite

effective barrier sideways on to the crowd who were still pouring

along Leppings Lane towards, the ground.

Inspector WILKINSON and PS1952 together with PC 's 3186 and 156 were

near to me and we held the line.    I could see the tactic working to

seme reasonable effect.    On my right towards the turnstiles the crowd

began to thin slightly at the turnstiles.   On my left looking into

lappings Lane I saw that we had contained around 500 or so latecomers.

They were obviously distressed and frustrated at not being able to

get to the turnstiles but we had them contained.

Suddenly, they started throwing themselves under the horses legs and

bellies.   They were forcing themselves between each horse with a



                                                                            2840
                                                                    PAGE
                                                                    S420

complete disregard for their own safety.    At this time a PC in a

landrover was using the loudspeakers on the vehicle and telling them

to stop pushing.     He repeated his message continuously but he was

ignored by the crowd.     They pressed heavily on our line of horses and

broke through and ran to join the rear of the pushing/shoving crowd

at the turnstiles.

At this time a supporter reported to me that a woman was injured at

the turnstile near the gate by the sweet shop (Gate A) I could not

see the woman and there was no way of getting to her, with a horse.

It was at this time that the order was given to open the gates.        It

was no doubt given to save loss of life at the turnstiles and was in

my opinion - quite correct.

Fans rushed through the gate on my left (Gate A) in large numbers.

This passageway leads I think to the North Stand.    The opening of

the gates had eased and released the problem almost immediately.

Shortly afterwards I dismounted and ran inside the ground to Police

Control on climbing the steps I noticed the West Stand terraces were

crowded and people were spilling onto the pitch behind the goal.

Imagining what I saw to be a pitch invasion I went back to my horse,

re-mounted and took a team of 8 horses to Gate 0.

Shortly after our arrival, casualties and bodies were brought off of

the pitch and set down all around us.    Almost all were apparently

dead and those still alive were receiving attention.

Eventually when the decision to abandon the game was announced I went

out of the ground and patrolled at the Lappings Lane end, assisting

with the disbursal of supporters.    A de-briefing of all mounted

offices was held later in the evening at Niagras Police club.     Duty

book entry ends at this point.

On the day in question my days duty began at 0700.     I completed duty

at 2000 that evening.    Before, during and after the match both I and



                                                                            2841
                                                                            PAGE
                                                                            S420

        all my Officers were under the command of Chief Supt DUCKENFIELD

        through Police control.

        Officers working at either end of the ground were the responsibility

        of the two Superintendents in charge - Superintendent MARSHALL at

        lappings Lane end and Superintendent CHAPMAN at the Penistone Road

        end.

        Superintendent MURRAY at the control point had a full breakdown of

        all Officers deployed.       Their exact location, collar number and force.

        My general perceptions of the day were that large numbers of

        Liverpool fans came late to the ground.      Many were intoxicated but

        not necessarily drunk.       Too many were in that state - prohibiting

        action by individual Officers.

        The crowd at the turnstile were initially good - humoured but quickly

        became aggressive as the turnstiles were unable to cope with the

        influx.    The crowd would not listen to advice given and had no

        concern as they pushed forwards, for the safety/confort of the people

        at the front of the 'push'.

        I could not understand at the time of the crushing at the turnstiles

        why people were not passing through.      The crowd hardly seemed to

        diminish at all.    In my 11 years on the mounted branch - what

        happened was quite outside all my previous experience.       I have never

        seen a crowd assemble so late and in such large numbers.




                                                          P. F. HANDDAVIS SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:      270489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:



                                                                                      2842
Incident    102   260390 CJP8064        DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                           STATEMENT NUMBER    S1374

                                                                              Station

^J^name            THOMAS

Forenames          STEVEN

Age                                        Date of birth

Address            RING FM,
                   CUDWORTH, BARNSLEY

Occupation         POL PS1764

Telephone

IC                Height                   Build

Hair colour

Hair type

• s                                        Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses           Use                      Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                                                                          Signed


           STEVEN THOMAS

           POLICE SERGEANT 1764

           RING FARM, CUEWORTH, BARBSLEY

           At 7.45 am (0745) on Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), I reported for

           duty at the Niagara Stables, Sheffield, performing clerical and

           stable duties, grooming Police horse 'Sandhurst' for football duties

           later the same day.

           At 10.15 am (1015) along with other South Yorkshire Mounted Officers

           and officers from Merseyside and Nottingham.     I attended a briefing in

           the Niagara Club, held by Inspector HANDDAVIS. Officers were given

           specific duties to perform for phase I and phase III.     I was

           instructed to work at the lappings Lane turnstiles along with Police

           Sergeant 1951 SMITH, Police Constable 1300 GRUNHILL, Police Constable

           1696 STANBRIDGE (Merseyside) and Police Constable 3186 WILSON from

                                                                                        2843
                                                                    PAGE         2
                                                                    S1374

South Yorkshire.

At 11.30 am (1130) all the Mounted personnel were mounted and

assatibled in the car park of the Niagara Club.      After a welcome by

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, we then left for the football ground.

On arrival at the ground, Inspector HANDDAVIS split the Mounted

contingent up to work with their respective groups or partners.         I

then took the officers mentioned above to the lappings Lane

turnstiles.       There I briefed them, showing them the lay-out of the

turnstiles, where the supporters with North Stand tickets would go,

w h e re   the West Stand ticket holders, and also where the Leppings Lane

terrace ticket holders go.      At this stage I noticed that there were

turnstiles already open and that supporters had started to enter the

ground. I also told the officers that there would be a build up of

supporters without tickets hanging around on the pavements and near to

the perimeter gates in hope that they would get tickets. Also to

expect ticket touts which would obviously attract supporters, thus

blocking entry to the ground.      Once briefed, I took all the officers

up to Catchbar Lane, Middlewood Road, Parkside Road, Penistone Road

and finally Lappings Lane, showing and briefing the officers, car

parking arrangements, flash points and their points for Phase III.          On

return to Leppings Lane, I instructed that Police Constable 1696

STANBRIDGE and 1300 GRUNHILL should work together in a pair, that I

should work with Police Sergeant 1952 SMITH and Police Constable

WILSON by herself.       I also suggested that because there was very

little all five horses could do at this time, that officers took the

opportunity to walk around the area yet again to allow the horses a

leg stretch and also to have another look round the area.

At 12.30 pm (1230) that day, in company with Police Sergeant SMITH, we

went on a general patrol.      We went up to Middlewood Road and turned

right up Wadsley Lane, pass The Park public house.       I saw a steady



                                                                                     2844
                                                                    PAGE     3
                                                                    S1374

stream of Liverpool supporters walking up Wads ley Lane away from the

ground. Most stated that they were looking for somewhere to get

something to eat.   When passing the shops in Wads ley Lane, I noticed

that Liverpool supporters were leaving off-licence premises with packs

of beer and what appeared to be the two litre plastic bottles of beer.

Some supporters were sitting on garden walls drinking the beer, whilst

others just sat on the pavement.     I actually moved six or seven that

were sat on the kerb edge.    I also advised that they should go to the

ground early and that if they arrived at the ground drunk they would

not get in.   We continued to walk up Wads ley Lane until we reached The

Horse and Jockey public house.     There I saw approximately 100

Liverpool supporters drinking beer in the car park.    Some were sitting

on the nearby grass verge.   We continued to walk round the estate

passing other off-licence shops, where again Liverpool supporters were

buying cans of beer.

Approximately 1.00 pm (1300), we returned to the ground to join

officers mentioned above.    At this time I asked the Mounted Officers

to keep the area in front of the perimeter gates clear.    Asking them

without tickets to leave the area.     I was also asked by a foot

Inspector to try to keep the footpath over the bridge clear, because

supporters were congregating, blocking the pavement causing other

pedestrians to step out into the road.    This was passed on to other

Mounted officers. At this time I noticed that all the turnstiles were

open and that supporters were going through without any problems.      For

the next hour up to approximately 2.00 pm (1400), all my contingent

were employed as described above.

At approximately 2.00 pm (1400), I heard over the radio that the

special train had arrived at Wadsley Bridge.     I looked at the

turnstiles and noticed that small queues had formed leading to

nearly all the turnstiles and the foot officers were searching all the
                                                                    PAGE     4
                                                                    S1374

supporters going into the ground.     Mounted officers were still asking

people not to block the entrance to the ground, again getting people

without tickets away from the ground.     I was asked by an Inspector to

clear the footpath in front of the shop and terrace house, so that

the supporters arriving from the special train could be directed

towards their respective turnstiles.    Queues were already being formed

by foot officers at the turnstiles and at this stage there was no

problems.   I was then joined by Inspector HANDDAVIS and eight other

Mounted officers.   I noticed that as people arrived they seemed

confused, because for the next 10-15 minutes, I was continually being

asked where certain entrances were.

Approximately 2.15pm (1415), I looked at the Leppings Lane terrace

turnstile (B) and noticed that there was a build up of people.      No

queues at turnstiles. At this stage all the perimeter gates were open

and supporters were continually arriving at the ground.     I noticed

that Police Constable 1300 and 1696 had actually gone into the pen

area and started to relieve pressure and re-establish queues.       I went

in to help because I noticed that seme supporters were trying to crawl

under the barrier and push their way to the front.     It seemed at this

stage that the supporters arriving at the ground just did not want to

wait their turn, but just push their way to the front.    The mood of

the crowd gradually changed from being happy to aggressive, because

myself and the other two Merseyside Officers were trying to get than

into queues thus preventing a crush. I noticed that people with small

children were holding them above their shoulders.     People were

totally disregarding what was being said to them.     I noticed beer cans

being thrown at one of the Merseyside officers.     A man with his young

son was shouting at me to do something because he was getting

crushed, because as I have said above, the people arriving just wanted

to push their way to the front.     I then left the pen area because
                                                                     PAGE    5
                                                                     S1374

I wasn't being effective.     I tried three times to get my horse into the

pen area just where the blue barrier finished, but could rot because

the supporters were so densely packed.

The supporters actually pushed me out.     My intention was to try and

join up with the two other Merseyside officers so that we could

put a cordon of horses across thus stopping sane of the pressure on the

turnstiles and also to try and regulate the flow of supporters. People

at this stage were complaining of being trod on by the horse. I moved

out of that area and organised a cordon of horses across the blue

perimeter fence.     I noticed that Police Constables GRUNHILL and

STANBRIDGE had also left the pen area because they were rot being

effective.   After organising this cordon I noticed that people at the

front near to the turnstiles were being crushed.     I also noticed an

Inspector standing on the blue barrier near to the turnstiles pulling

and lifting people out. Whilst I was in the cordon of horses on the

perimeter gates, I was asking supporters not to push, but yet again

they just ignored what was being said.     I saw youths climbing the

perimeter fence just to get into the pen area.     At about this time

myself and the horse were pushed through the gates.     The supporters

pushing past.     I saw several people fall to the floor and myself

and Police Constable 2316 SCOTT managed to push back the crowd,

blocking the gap, allowing the people who had fallen to get back

onto their feet, otherwise I believe that they would have been

trampled on. It was at this stage that I tried to get through on the

radio, saying " Emergency", but I couldn't get through to control.

It was about 2.45 pm (1445) when I finally got through and asked

control to send the horses detailed to work at the rear of the

South Stand up to Leppings Lane. They arrived at approximately

2.50 pn (1450).

It was about this time when I saw supporters that was in the pen being
                                                                           PAGE     6
                                                                           S1374

        ushered round towards Gate C. I would say that approximately 100

        went towards Gate C.     This still left approximately 200, still trying

        to push their way through towards the turnstiles.     About 2.50 pm (1450)

        I then saw Gate B open which allowed the remaining supporters in the

        pen to enter the ground on mass.     I saw Gate B close and we then

        allowed supporters to filter through towards the turnstiles.

        It was at this point that I went to the turnstiles and put ray horse right

        up to the wall.     I saw two youths approach the turnstile, one had

        a ticket in his hand, the other had a ten pound note.      It was at this

        time that I heard a message over the radio asking for all turnstiles

        to be closed.     I irrmediately stopped further entry into the ground by

        putting the horse in front of the turnstiles.

        I would say regarding radio communications that because of the position

        I was in, the noise of the crowd and actually trying to organise

        Mounted deployment, I found it very difficult to hear anything clearly.

        Whether it was because of the noise round me at the time or because of

        traffic on the radio I cannot say.

        I have nine years Mounted experience, having worked at all the grounds

        in South Yorkshire, plus others at Derby, Chesterfield and Leeds United,

        and I would like to say that I have never experienced crowd behaviour

        like that.    It seemed that people did not and would not, listen to

        advice. They seemed to totally disregard what was said to them.

        Totally disregarding the safety of people at the front of the

        turnstiles.


                                                       S. THOMAS   PS1764 SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:



•
OFFICERS SIGNATURE:



                                                                                        2848
Incident     102        260390 OP8064        DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                                STATEMENT NUMBER    S1350

                                                                                   Station

iHrname                 WILSON

Forenames               ELIZABETH    JAYNE

Age                                             Date of birth

Address                 RING FARM,CUDWORTH, BARNSLEY.


Occupation              POL PC3186

Telephone

IC                      Height                  Build

Hair colour

Hair type

ils                                             Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses                 Use                     Accent

Number of Pages 8

Dated                                                                     Signed


           On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), my tour of duty was 7.30 am x

           9.00pm (0730 x 2100). Camnencement of duty at Ring Farm Stables,

           Barnsley. Prep>are horse for football duties at 8.30 am (0830).

           Depart by horse box to Niagara stables. Briefing at Niagara Club

           House by Inspector HAND-DAVIES and Superintendent MARSH AT 10.00 am

           ( 1000 ) .

           1130 hours parade for duty on horseback. 11.45 am (1145) all 29

           horses parade for duty briefing by Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD,

           after which I then ccnxnenced patrol with full commenced patrol with

           twenty nine mounted contingent to rear of South Stand of the

           Hillsborough Football Ground, where we were given our respective

           duties by Inspector DAVIS. I then proceeded with my supervisor

           Police Sergeant 1764 THOMAS, Police Sergeant SMITH of Merseyside,

           Police Constable 1696 STANBRIDGE and Police Constable 1300
                                                                PAGE      2
                                                                S1350

GRUNHILL, also of Merseyside. Being one horse short (original number

being six). All five riders then rode to the Leppings Lane Reception

area for the Liverpool fans.   This area of the Leppings Lane side and

road in front of the turnstile area inclusive to the Catchbar Lane

traffic lights, was our patrol area for the next three hours.   We

stopped in this area and were again briefed by Police Sergeant 1764

THOMAS as to our duties and to familiarise the Merseyside Officers

with the ticket system. That is the appropriate coloured ticket for

entry to gates A, B and C. The five of us then moved off on a

familiarisation tour of the immediate area for the benefit of the

Merseyside Officers. At this time there were no supporters of rote

around, and the turnstiles were open.   We completed the tour of the

area and returned to the Leppings Lane turnstile area.

Due to the fact that horses are worked in pairs normally, and

that I didn't have a partner, Police Sergeant THOMAS advised me to

work on my own, paying attention to Leppings Lane and Catchbar Lane

vicinity.   The horse I was riding, 'DANUM' is a young horse, only

having been in the Department six months, and I felt that crowds later

in the day may become too much for him to contend with, so my position

on the approach of the reception area would be a better duty to work.

Police Sergeant THOMAS agreed with this, enabling the more experienced

horses to work directly inside the busy turnstile area.   Police

Sergeant THOMAS and Police Sergeant SMITH remained together at the

turnstiles, Police Constable GRUNHILL and Police Constable STANBRIDGE

went off in a pair and again toured the area. I then patrolled the

area alone for approximately fifteen minutes then returned to stand

with the two Sergeants and the two Merseyside Officers who had by this

tirna also returned.   We remained in this position for sometime.    No

problems arose with the approaching fans, the usual assistance was

given directing them to their correct entrance gate number, many fans
                                                                     PAGE     3
                                                                     S1350

seemed to be looking at the 'gangway letter' on their tickets and not

the turnstile entrance letter. As time passed and the number of

approaching fans increased, all were directed to the turnstiles. We

each shouted to them, instructing them that those with tickets to go

into the ground and those without tickets to move back out of the way

and not to obstruct the reception area.     That is the area frcm the

blua iron gates to the footpath of Leppings Lane.       This situation went

on and worked satisfactorily for about approximately one hour.        The

atmosphere was good humoured without problems.     However, I noticed

that a number of fans were carrying many cans of beer and 2 litre

bottles of lager/beer.     I saw a foot Inspector, Inspector SYKES,

taking the beer from a number of fans, but due to the ever increasing

numbers, this task became impossible.     I noticed a general arctna of

beer coming from the crowds of fans in general.        It appeared to me

that they were affected by alcohol consumption and becoming more

hostile.    The combination of drink and sunny day seemed to taking

effect.

I continually advised fans that they would not get into the ground

drunk, many ignored me and I was not in a position to do much about

it. Many were standing around obstructing the footpath approach to

the reception area, in particular in front of a sweet shop to Vere

Road, also at the c o m e r of Leppings Lane bridge.

I continually advised fans that they would not get into the ground

drunk.     I made a number of sweeps of the footpaths to clear them from

in front of the shop to the first road junction (Vere Road) but it was

like walking through water, as I moved away the crowd closed in behind

me.

Due to a radio message, I became aware that a Special Train had

arrived and the fans arrival was inminent.     The arrival area of the

fans was heavily congested between Vere Road and the shop, also a
                                                                 PAGE      4
                                                                 S1350

considerable number of approaching fans all the way along Leppings

Lane. I asked Sgt THOMAS if we could sweep the area together in

order to clear the footpath approach.    After a couple of minutes this

we did just prior to the arrival of sight of train escort.

When the escort was some 30 yards away, we made a further two full

sweeps of the area successfully moving all the supporters towards the

turnstiles.   Police Sergeant THOMAS then went with these supporters

further towards the terrace 'C' gate turnstile area.     I stayed on the

roadway channelling the arrival of train escort fans into the

reception area, ensuring traffic was still able to pass through on the

road behind me.   Some five hundred fans were in the train escort but

easily as many more fans had been collected along the approach route.

Their arrival at the turnstile area would be approximately 2.20 pm

(1420). When dealing with this arrival, I noticed that many

hundreds of fans were arriving from the Middlewood Road

direction over the Leppings Lane bridge, I estimate nearly one

thousand fans at this time.   It was as if we had suddenly become

swamped.   The bridge was becoming heavily congested.

As the horses on the train escort, being led by Inspector DAVIS, went

into the 'Terrace C Gate turnstile area' I noticed that

Policewoman 156 MAIN of the Nottingham Mounted Branch had become

separated from her partner, Police Constable SCOTT.     My other four

mounted Officers were also within the crowd in the terrace turnstiles

area.   I therefore joined with Policewoman 156 MAIN.

At this time the road was becoming blocked with fans from the bridge

up to Catchbar Lane interrupting the flow of traffic, and pavements

becoming blocked with Liverpool supporters who I understood to be non­

ticket holders.   I assumed they were non-ticket holders, as they made

no attempt to approach the turnstiles.    Sane of them stated they were

waiting to meet their 'mates' coming in private cars. The majority of
                                                                     PAGE
                                                                     S1350

these people were also in possession of a can of beer.

A fight was taking place outside the Gas Showroom at the crossroads of

Catchbar Lane and Leppings Lane and foot officers smrmoned our

assistance in detaining some youths.     By this time the fans apparently

numbered thousands.     The road was almost impassable, so myself and

Police Constable 156 MAIN briefly joined two other mounted Officers,

who i don't know, and attempted to keep the fans on the footpaths but

this was almost impossible.     A further disturbance of fighting

occurred on the bridge where we assisted in their disperal, again

traffic was brought to a halt.     TVro fans were detained by foot

officers.     Wa again retained the flow of traffic. What had a few

minutes earlier seemed to be a carnival kind of atmosphere, was

rapidly becoming electric and very hostile with evil looks together

with vile obscene ccmnents coming from the passing fans objecting to

our presence. At approximately 2.45 pm (1445), an assistance call

was made from my mounted colleagues for any mounted assistance to the

Leppings Lane turnstiles.     At this point I was positioned at the

corner of the Bridge, approximately 15 to 20 yards away from the

from the C Gate Terrace turnstiles.     I saw that the whole area from

the turnstiles outwards was a solid block of people stretching out

into Leppings Lane. The whole area seemed to be blocked with no

movanent through the turnstiles.     I saw many fans climbing over the

walls above the turnstiles into the ground.     I saw Inspector H DAVIS,

who was nearest to me, completely surrounded by the crowd, his horse

having difficulties in standing due to the weights of people pushing

around him.     I saw my other colleages at the turnstiles also

surrounded tightly packed by supporters pushing their horses backwards

It was a frightening sight, a crowd of thousands frantically pushing

forwards which seemed to be easily knocking half a ton of horse off

its feet. Inspector DAVIS beckoned for myself and Police Constable 156
                                                                    PAGE     6
                                                                    S1350

MAIN to join him, but as we tried to do so the crowd were pushing so

tightly they physically prevented our access into the crowd by

purposely pushing at the horses' chests.     I then noticed that a Police

Land Rover had arrived and the driver wished to get the vehicle into

the crowd in order to appeal to the crowd over the loud speaker

system. We again tried to get our horses into the crowd appealing to

people to stop pushing and allow the vehicle in, but our attempts

were hopeless.     It appeared to me that this crowd had made a

determined and concerted effort to prevent any Police control of the

situation along with a definite intention to force entry into the

ground. The crowd were at a complete standstill refusing to move and

it was not safe to force the "bottle neck situation".     Because of the

noise of the crowd, the loud speaker announcements had no effect.       I

continually shouted to the fans to stop pushing forwards as people

were being crushed at the front, few took notice - others pushed even

more.     I could see that the situation at the front of the turnstiles

was at danger level - that there would be fatal injuries if the

pressure of the crowd was not released, the only way of doing this was

to release pressure at the front.

All of a sudden this happened after having heard shouts "Open the

gates".    I never saw which gates had been opened, only the extreme

right metal iron gates being shut some 10 yards in front of the

turnstiles of the C Gate area.    A gap then appeared in the crowd in

front of the Land Rover where I finally managed to ride my horse

through and joined Inspector DAVIS and the other mounted Officers.      We

were then instructed to form a cordon of horses nose to tail across

the entire length of the reception area which effectively stopped any

further access to the whole entrance area.     This then gave the

opportunity for the fans already at the front of the turnstile to get

through safely without pushing.     Even once the cordon was formed many
                                                                  PAGE     7
                                                                  S1350

fans tried to get through the horses by slapping them on the head and

flanks and pulling on the reins.    It was a very hostile situation, we

each did our best to calm the fans.    I was under the impression that a

delayed kick off was being requested over the radio.    This I shouted

to the fans that the game was going to be delayed thirty minutes.

This seemed to calm many fans, but then a large cheer was heard frcm

inside the ground, which I assumed the match was underway.    The fans

became frantic again pushing violently and shouting obscene remarks,

furious at being delayed further.

I was positioned at this time in front of the Land Rover with Police

Sergeant SMITH to my right and another Merseyside Officer on a

chestnut horse to my left.   The cordon was broken a couple of torses

behind me due to the resulting crowd pressure and a large group surged

through the gap.   Wa regained control of the situation, then

faced the crowd and allowed them to filter through steadily between

the horses.   The atmosphere had calmed somewhat though I continually

requested that they stopped pushing as they were' only causing injury

to their own fans.   Very few took notice.

A radio message was then received of a possible pitch invasion, a

group of mounted Officers were detailed by Inspector DAVIS for this

and moved off to the Penistone Road entrance to the pitch.      Another

group of mounted Officers dispersed the remaining crowd of youths on

the bridge area - who I assumed to be the non-ticket holders.      I was

then detailed to Penistone Road together with other Merseyside and

Nottingham Officers to standby.     On reaching Penistone Road, as a

result of radio messages, I heard of the vast number of fatalities

inside the ground from the West Stand.

On receipt of announcement of match abandoned, I was instructed by

 Inspector DAVIS to resume patrol of Penistone Road Area Coach Parks,

 etc, in company with Police Constable 156 MAIN.    Approximate tune
                                                                            PAGE    8
                                                                            S1350

       being 4.30 pm (1630). Some ten minutes later radio call requesting

       assistance in Hillsborough Park, fight taking place.     Attended by

       myself, Police Constable 156, Police Constable 2472 WHEACROFT and 1498

       SWAIN.     Saw approximately twenty youths throwing glass bottles,

       cans and four 4 foot lengths of wood towards to Panda Patrol

       Officers. Youths were dispersed and detained by van crew.     Further

       report of fighting in Middlewood Rd, Hillsborough Park.     All area

       searched, no trace.     Normal patrol resumed until ordered to stand down

       from control - time not known.

       OBSERVATIONS

       This record is made of a sort of moving picture.     I started duty as

       stated, but the following times are approximate,    as during the whole

       period I made little reference to my watch, especially after the

       arrival of the train escort at 2.20 pm (1420).

       Hundreds of fans were seen to be drinking out of beer cans.     Marry of

       them seemed to be well affected by drink, certainly within the last

       thirty minutes before commencement of the match.

       Although I have previously not worked on Mounted Duties on a Semi-

       Final at the ground before, I have, however, worked many large crowd

       first Division games at this ground in my nine years of mounted

       service.     I have never experienced such a hostile crowd, nor a crowd

       of such capacity arriving at the ground so late.     The general

       demeanour of many fans can only be described as extremely hostile and

        full of hate of the Police Force in general.    I have also never

       noticed the process of fans through the turnstiles to be so slow.




                                                  E Jayne Wilson PC1836 SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:
          TIME:           DATE:      260589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     E J Wilson

      REPORT




                                              2857
Incident    102     260390 QP8064       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                        STATEMENT NUMBER   S808

                                                                           Station

^Krname             SMITH

Forenames           P.S.

Age                                        Date of birth

Address             GREENHILL RD PSTN


Occupation          POL PS1952

Telephone

IC                  Height                 Build

Hair colour

Hair type

^^s                                        Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses             Use                    Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                190489                                                  Signed


           MUTUAL AID COMMITMENT - SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

           SATURDAY 15TH APRIL 1989 (150489)



           On Saturday 15th April 1989, (150489) I was engaged, together with

           other members of the Merseyside Police Mounted Department, in giving

           'Mutual Aid' to the South Yorkshire Police, on the occasion of the

           F.A. Cup Semi-Final being played between Liverpool F.C. and

           Nottingham Forest F.C. at Hillsborough Football Club, Sheffield.

           I was riding Police Horse No.10, NIMROD.

           The Merseyside Police contingent arrived at Sheffield at 1000 hours

           and after refreshments and briefing by the South Yorkshire Police

           Mounted Inspector, Inspector HAND-DAVIES, we were deployed at 1130

           hours.

           I was detailed to patrol in company with Sergeant 1764 THOMAS
                                                                 PAGE
                                                                 S808

of the South Yorkshire Police Mounted.    We had responsibility for the

LEPPINGS LANE end of the ground and in particular the turnstiles

which were to be used by the Liverpool F.C. Supporters.    Assisting us

at this venue were Constables 1300 GRUNNIL and 1696 STANBRIDGE of the

Merseyside Police and Woman Constable 387 HENWOOD of the South

Yorkshire Police Mounted Department.     Sergeant THOMAS took me and my

colleagues on a short 'tour' of the Football Ground to acquaint us

with the geography of the ground and then Sergeant THOMAS and I went

around the surrounding streets in order that I would have some

knowledge of the area.

At this time, about 1200 hours there were groups of youths, Liverpool

supporters, in the area of the ground and the surrounding streets,

many of them drinking alcohol.     There were, however, no signs of

disorder and the mood was one of good humour.    We passed a couple of

public houses and off licences which were being well attended, but

again with no signs of disorder.

We returned to LEPPINGS LANE to supervise the arrival and entrance of

the Liverpool supporters.    The turnstiles at the LEPPINGS LANE end of

the ground give access to those supporters entering the NORTH STAND,

WEST STAND and TERRACE area below the WEST STAND.     The front of the

turnstile area is divided into three sections by the use of iron

railings and gates and an iron wall between the entrances to the WEST

STAND and the TERRACES.     (Please see attached sketch plan which I

have prepared.   This plan is not to scale but gives an indication of

the layout of the area).

There is a total of twenty three turnstiles, with seven of them

providing access to the TERRACE area, which I understand holds 10,000

people.   Hie layout of the front of the turnstile area is such that

the gateway leading into the confined (sectioned off) area is

narrower than the distance across the actual turnstiles, thus



                                                                          2859
                                                                  pas:
                                                                  S808

creating a 'funnel' leading to the turnstiles.

From 1300 hours to about 1400 hours there was an intermittent flow of

supporters into the ground, with no build-up at the turnstiles.       The

number of supporters in LEPPINGS LANE itself was increasing, but many

of them were reluctant to go into the ground, despite numerous

requests from us, and other Police Officers.     Many of these

supporters were sitting on the pavement, on walls and grass verges,

drinking, but again no disorder was taking place.

About 1400 hours we made a concerted effort to get supporters to go

into the ground.   Some did, but others chose to remain outside, and

these people were moved away from the area of the turnstiles to allow

easier access for those who wished to go into the ground.

About 1415 hours a party of sane 500 Liverpool supporters arrived at

the ground, under escort from other Mounted Officers.     These

supporters entered the ground without problem, but shortly after the

volume of people began to increase around the turnstile area.     I

noticed that entry through the turnstiles was slow, in part due to

the fact that supporters were being searched prior to entering the

ground.

At this point there were, to the best of my knowledge, 9 Police

horses in the area of the turnstiles and a further two Police horses

in LEPPINGS LANE trying to clear people from the roadway and

adjoining areas.   The crowd volume quickly built up and a crush began

to develop around the turnstiles, in particular those giving access

to the TERRACE area.   The mood of the crowd at this time was one

'high spirits', what may be described as a carnival atmosphere

prevailed, with many people singing and chanting, but all good-

humouredly.   Constables GRUNNILL and STANBRIDGE entered the confined

area in front of the TERRACE turnstiles and began to organise the

crowd into orderly queues.   I stayed outside the confined area,



                                                                            2860
                                                                 PAGE      4
                                                                 S808

supervising the entry of supporters into the NORTH and WEST Stands.

Suddenly there was a large influx of supporters into the turnstile

area and a serious crush began to develop.    Many of these supporters

had arrived at the turnstile area from the opposite direction from

which we had been told to expect them and sane of them were obviously

under the influence of alcohol.

Serious crushing was now taking place and a line of horses was placed

across the front of the turnstile area to prevent further access to

the turnstiles.

Constables GRUNNILL and STANBRIDGE remained within the confined area

of the TERRACE turnstiles and slowly were able to regain sane order.

A gap of about 10 feet then developed between the supporters in the

confined area and the line of horses outside the confined area and I

saw the iron gates at the entrance to the confined area shut.

Despite there now being space at the rear of the supporters at the

turnstiles and despite the loud and repeated appeals of the Mounted

Officers, the crowd at the turnstiles refused to move back and reduce

the crushing.     At this point, one of the horses in the line of horses

became agitated and moved out of position, leaving a gap of about 10

feet in the line of horses.     The crowd which had been held back now

surged forward, forced open the iron gates and rushed into the back

of the people at the turnstiles.     I saw people fall to the ground in

the rush, I saw people ducking under the horse to gain access and

although there was nowhere for these people to go, other than into

the backs of the people in front, they continued to surge forward.

By this time, Constables GRUNNILL and STANBRIDGE had removed their

horses from the crowd, because of the serious risk of injury to

people in the crowd.     The crush became so dense that it was now a

physical impossibility to put horses back into the crowd.     I saw

young children being passed out over the heads over the crowd and



                                                                               2861
                                                                   PAGE   5
                                                                   S808

other people being pulled out over the side barriers.    Despite

vehement pleading from the Mounted Officers, the crowd would not take

heed and the crushing intensified.    The mood of the crowd had now

changed to one of panic with sane hostility.    I began to fear for

the lives of people in the crush, and felt that unless sane drastic

action were taken, then lives would, undoubtedly be lost.

At that point, I saw the exit gate for patrons of the NORTH STAND was

open and supporters were going through.    I first thought that the

gata had been forced and moved to secure it, but quickly realised

that it had been opened on purpose.     (This gate is marked 'A' on the

attached sketch). The gate was only open for a matter of two minutes

and was then closed again.   The inxnediate effect of opening this gate

was to reduce the pressure on the NORTH STAND turnstiles.

I returned to the area of the TERRACE turnstiles and saw thatthe

bulk of the crowd had now gone.

I was informed that both exit gates from the WEST STAND and the

TERRACE area had been opened to allow people into the ground.      I

cannot be sure of what time this occurred, but would estimate it to

have been some 5 to 10 minutes before kick-off.

We then began to move the remaining people, who were without tickets,

away from the ground.   The turnstiles were then closed and at about

1505 hours I heard a radio transmission to the effect that there was

crowd trouble inside the ground.     A short time later an ambulance

arrived at the TERRACE exit gate and I saw casualties being brought

from the ground.

I was then instructed to remain in the area of the LEPPINGS LANE end

of the ground until further instructed.     We remained there until the

game was abandoned and then patrolled the surrounding area of the

ground until stood down at about 1815 hours.

I have been a Mounted Officer for 7 years and in that time have


                                                                              2862
                                                                       pas:    6
                                                                       S808

        attended more than 300 football matches, including giving 'Mutual

        Aid' at Hillsborough in January 1988 (000188) at a match between

        Sheffield Wednesday and Everton. In that time I have never seen so

        many people in the streets, consuming alcohol, before a match, nor

        have I ever been confronted by a crowd of football supporters so

        unruly and unwilling to listen to reason.   I have never before seen

        experienced Police Horses, such as were present at this incident,

        reluctant to go into a crowd of people.




                                                           P.S. Smith SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

          TIME             DATE:   190489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE

END OF REPORT




                                                                                   2 8 63
Incident    102    260390 OP8064      DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                        STATEMENT NUMBER   S810

                                                                           Station

^Brnc
    lame           GRUNNILL

Forenames

Age                                       Date of birth

Address            GREENHILL ROAD   MERSEYSIDE POLICE


Occupation         POL PC1300

Telephone

IC                 Height                 Build

Hair colour           GREY

Hair type

                                          Complexion

Facial hair        MOUSTACHE

Glasses            Use                   Accent

Number of Pages 2

Dated               190489                                                   Signed


           MUTUAL AID COMMITMENT - SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE SATURDAY 15TH

           APRIL   1989 (150489)



           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I was amongst a party of

           Merseyside Police Officers giving mutual aid to the South Yorkshire

           Police on the occassion of an FA Cup Semi-Final, being played at

           Hillsborough Football Ground, between Liverpool FC and Nottingham

           Forest FC. At 1130hrs that day I commenced my deployment in LEPPINGS

           LANE in company with Constable 1696 STANBRIDGE of the Merseyside

           Police. Other officers in LEPPINGS LANE were Sgt 1764 THOMAS of the

           South Yorkshire Police, Sgt 1952 SMITH of the Merseyside Police and

           Woman Police Constable 387 HENWOOD of the South Yorkshire Police. Our

           main responsibility was the turnstiles at the LEPPINGS LANE end of

           the ground, which at this time were quite. Together with Constable
                                                                   pas:
                                                                   S810

STANBRIDGE I went for a patrol around the surrounding area of the

ground to aquaint myself with the geography of the location. Outside

a public house called the PARK HOTEL I saw a large crowd of Liverpool

supporters, drinking.

From approximately 1245 hrs to 1345 hrs I was engaged in keeping

clear the entrance to the turnstile area, encouraging people with

tickets to go into the ground, and those without tickets to go away

from the ground.

About 1345 hrs I, together with Constable STANBRIDGE, moved my horse

to within the confined area of the terrace turnstiles, to encourage

people to move into the ground and use all the turnstiles. At this

time the crowd were orderly.

About 1410hrs I noticed that the crowd had begun to increase and

spread out around the turnstiles. This was due in part to the fact

that supporters were being searched prior to going into the ground,

but mainly due to the slowness of them going into the ground.

Constable STANBRIDGE and myself took our horses into the crowd

immediately in front of the turnstiles and began to work our way

through the crowd, towards the turnstiles, asking supporters to ease

back and release the pressure on the people at the   turnstiles,

many of wham were being crushed against the wall. We begem to

succeed, in part due to the fact that some supporters recognised us

from working on the KOP at Liverpool, but mainly due to the stead

fastness of the two Police Horses who were withstanding increasing

pressure and tension. After about 5 minutes, there was a massive

surge from the back of the crowd, and my horse was pushed even

nearer to the wall. He became agitated and I was able to turn him and

allow him to face the bulk of the crowd, which helped to calm him.

Despite loud appeals to the crowd from myself and others, the crowd

refused to ease back. Many people in the crowd were appealing for



                                                                          2865
                                                                  PAGE   3
                                                                  S810

help but the crush was now so intense that it was becoming impossible

for the horse to move. I felt the horse become agitated again and

realised the pressure of the crowd was forcing his feet from the

ground. I decided for the sake of safety to these supporters to

remove my horse from the crush, which I did with some difficulty. I

took my horse to side of the crowd, near to the back to try to ease

the pressure. I could see children being passed out of the crush

over the heads of the crowd and others being pulled out of the

crowd up onto the top of the metal wall dividing the Terrace

turnstile area from the stand turnstile area. I also saw that people

were crawling underneath my horse, which his agitated state was a

very dangerous thing to do. I could see a foot Constable trying to

close the iron gates at the entrance to the Terrace turnstile area,

but without success. I moved my horse over towards him and was able to

move some of the crowd sufficiently for him to close the gates.

Constable STANBRIDGE and I then moved back into the contained

turnstile area and attempted to move the crowd back into the gap which

now existed at the back of the crowd at the turnstiles, between them

and the iron gates. Some people did move back, but most chose to

ignore us and continued to push forward. At this point there was a

sudden large influx of people, the crushing intensified and I was

forced to the side of the crowd.   I again asked my horse to go into

the crowd, but he became stubborn and apprehensive about doing so. I

have never known him to behave like that in the sixteen years he has

been a police horse. I did eventually manage to get him to go back

into the crowd. At this point I noticed people moving away from the

back of the crowd and moving to the right of the of the terrace

turnstiles, in the direction of the side passage leading to the club

car park. The immediate effect of this was to ease the pressure on

the crowd. After a while people began to make their way back into the



                                                                             2866
                                                                        PAGE
                                                                        S810

       crowd and at this point I saw the exit gate for patrons of the WEST

       STAND open and people were being allowed in. It was open for a short
                            *

       time only, and then closed. The remaining supporters, of which there

       were not now many, passed through the turnstiles in an orderly

        fashion. Some time later, I cannot be sure how long, we were ordered

       to close the turnstiles, which we did. I cannot recall hearing the

       customary noise, from inside the ground, which greets the start of

       the game, and it was only when I heard a loud speaker appeal to fans

       to ease the crushing, that I realised that there was a problem inside

       the ground.

       We were then instructed to patrol the surrounds of the ground, and

       at about 1810hrs we were stood down and returned to the horse boxes.

        I have been a Mounted Officer for 31 years and in that time have only

       once been confronted by a crowd of people so un-cooperative and

       unwilling to listen to reason, and that was on the occassion of a

        football match between Scotland and Wales, played at Anfield in 1977.

        (000077) tty horse is a very stable and brave horse and I have never

       before known him to show apprehension as he did on this occasion.




       F N GRUNNILL

       Constable 1300




                                                         F N GRUNNILL SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:   190489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:


                                                                                2867
Incident    102   260390 OP8064        M O M E N T RECORD PRINT

                                                          STATEMENT NUMBER   S817

                                                                             Station

^feiame            FRY

Forenames          S

Age                                        Date of birth

Address            GREENHILL RD PSTN


Occupation         POL PC5043

Telephone

IC                Height                   Build

Hair colour

Hair type

% s                                        Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses           Use                      Accent

Number of Pages 6

Dated              240489                                                      Signed


           MUTUAL AID -SOUTH YORKSHIRE - 15.4.89 (150489)



           I am Constable 5043 'M' Stephen Frank Fry of the Merseyside Police

           currently serving with the Mounted Department.

           On Saturday, 15th April, 1989, (150489) I was deployed with 11 members

           of the Department to cover the F.A. Cup semi final between Liverpool

           and Nottingham Forest football clubs at Hillsborough Park, Sheffield.

           About 1030 hours I attended a briefing with the other members, who were

           present were members from Nottingham and South Yorkshire Mounted

           Department.   The briefing was conducted by Inspector Hands-Davies

           of the South Yorkshire Mounted Department.

           I was detailed to work with Inspectors Hands-Davies and Wilkinson and

           Constables 5855 RIMMER, 6878 LUNT and 7081 RADFORD.     Our brief was

           to cover the arrival of the special train and escort of the passengers

                                                                                        2868
                                                                  PAGE     2
                                                                  S817

to the gates in Leppings Lane, we were also briefed to oversee the

approaches to the ground via Halifax Road and Leppings Lane.

The entire Mounted Deployment paraded at 1130 hours.   We rode out in

troop onto Halifax Road then Penistone Road to the club car park

where we split into the detailed sections for the pre match duties.

The section I was detailed to continued through the club car park to

the Leppings Lane entrance.   Inspector Hands-Davies pointed out the

exit gates that we would be supervising at the end of the game.     We

continued onto Leppings Lane and onto Halifax Road to the railway

station where we were further briefed as to the grouping and movement

of the train passengers to the ground.

At 12.10 hours we split into half section (twos) to patrol Halifax

Road until the arrival of the special train between 13.45 and 14.15

hours.

With Constable 7081 Radford I made my way along Halifax Road away from

the ground.   I saw that there was a steady flow of coaches and

pedestrians making their way to the ground.   However there were

several groups moving away from the ground visiting the 'GATEWAY'

shopping centre and off licenses on Halifax Road.   There were queues

outside the off licences and I noted that more of the supporters

heading towards the ground were carrying cans and bottles of beer.

They were in good humour.

I made along Halifax Road to the junction with Wilcox Avenue.      There

I spoke to a South Yorkshire foot Sergeant, he told me that a pub

nearby was full of supporters who had been arriving from the

direction of the ground on public transport and taxis.   This location

was about 2 miles from the ground.

From Wilcox Avenue Constable Radford and I returned along Halifax Road

towards the ground.   I saw that the pub the 'White Horse' appeared to

be shut however the tables, chairs and walls around the pub car park



                                                                               2869
                                                                 PAGE
                                                                 S817

wera full shoulder to shoulder with supporters drinking beer frcm

bottles and cans.    The off licence opposite still had a queue outside

as I observed on my way up Halifax Road.     Closer to the ground the

grassed areas around the 'Gateway' shopping centre was being used

like a 'picnic' site with groups of supporters eating, and drinking

alcoholic beverages from cans and bottles.

At 13.45 I returned to the railway station to await the arrival of

the special train.    On arrival the mounted section along with the foot

officers grouped the passengers together on 'bloc' escorted the

supporters to the Leppings Lane entrances.

Aftar arrival at the ground Constable Radford and I moved back along

Leppings Lane to the chip shop, from there we moved slowly along

covering the football and roadway encouraging supporters to move on

towards the ground.    Having swept large numbers of supporters to the

entrances in this manner.    I took position about 50 yards away frcm

the entrances towards Halifax Road encouraging supporters to move off

the roadway onto the footpath to allow the passage of vehicular

traffic.    Constable Radford was about 25 yards beyond me engaged in

similar duties.

There was now a steady flow of supporters towards the entrances.

A short time after taking this position Constable Radford and I were

called by radio to return to the turnstile entrances as the situation

was becoming difficult to manage.

On arrival I saw large numbers of supporters inside the wrought iron

perimeter gates, there was some crushing but I could see Constable

1300 Grunnill and 1696 Stanbridge in the area close to the turnstiles

endeavouring to control the supporters entrance to the turnstiles.

The situation was being frustrated by more supporters flooding into

the area.    I positioned myself across the left hand perimeter gateway

of the terrace turnstile entrance to stop the flow.     A large crowd



                                                                           2870
                                                                 PAGE         4
                                                                 S817

quickly gathered against the horse by those further out.    All were

demanding entry to the turnstiles and some were making determined

efforts to pass me.   I constantly appealed for the supporters to

WAIT and BACK OFF. GIVE THOSE INSIDE A CHANCE TO CLEAR THEN YOU

MAY GO.

These appeals went largely unheeded and supporters continued to push

against the horse and indeed some tried to beat him out of the way.

A gap of 8 to 10 feet (8' - 10') opened up between myself and the back

of the crowd close to the turnstiles.     I called to them also to BACK

OFF, repeated calls were unfruitfull and even though no pressure was

directly on them those at the back continued to push towards the

■turnstiles.

Similar efforts were made by other mounted officers at the other

gateways some of the wrought iron gates were shut a short time

but continued pressure caused them to reopen.

Eventually the pressure from outside the perimeter was too great, my

horse was forced sideways by the pressure into the turnstile area.        I

was forced to turn and ride out of the gates.     I again endeavoured to

slow down the flow of supporters.    With other mounted officers I

moved across the perimeter gates leading to the North and West Stand

turnstiles.    Similar conditions existed in this area but was less

severe than in the West Stand terracing entrance.     I continued to

appeal to the supporters to 'back off' but there was a clear

determination to enter the ground.

A nose to tail cordon of horses was formed across the entire Leppings

Lane entrance area.    I was at one end closest to the shop adjacent

to the north stands entrance.    A crowd quickly built up on the road

 side of the cordon and we were very soon under pressure frcm the

 supporters trying to enter the ground.    Those closest to the horses

were forced against them by those behind.     I repeated requests to BACK



                                                                                  2871
                                                                 PAGE     5
                                                                 S817

OFF, GIVE THOSE INSIDE A CHANCE, TAKE IT EASY, WAIT.    These requests

still had a negligable effect. Supporters continued to make very

determined efforts to pass the horse.

Passing under his neck and belly between his legs even squeezing

between his tail and the shop front.

Some members of the crowd beat my own horse on his muzzle, face, neck

and flanks, and seemed to be enjoying the situation.

A very slow relief of the pressures around the turnstile was becoming

apparent but was still critical, the pressure outside the line

continued to grow with groups of supporters occasionally breaking

through the cordon of horses. My requests to WAIT AND GIVE THEM A

CHANCE and so on were increasingly met by complaint and abuse.

Trying to reason the crowd had no apparent effect they did not want

to be reasoned with and continued to make very determined efforts to

pass the line of horses despite the fact there was still no where to

go.

I continued to check the state of the crushing in the area

immediately around the turnstile where for a long time little relief

was apparent.   There was however a sudden and rapid reduction of the

crowd around the turnstiles, this was coincidental with a relief of

pressure outside the horse cordon.     A few supporters remained in the

area of the turnstiles and very few out of Leppings Lane.     I fell into

a line of other mounted officers close to the fence between the river

and club car park entrance.   At this time there were several radio

messages and I saw a large number of foot officers run into the ground

via exit gates, I was not aware of the nature of the emergency.

I was instructed to then move out onto Leppings Lane to clear those

supporters who had not entered the ground away, I moved slowly away

over the river clearing supporters in a 'sweeping' manoeuver for

about 200 yards I turned around and returned to the entrances in



                                                                              2872
                                                                            PAGE
                                                                            S817

         order to repeat the manoeuver.

»        On nny return I saw a foot cordon had been made.      Close to the line I

         saw Constable Narey remonstrating with a man in front of the foot

         cordon.   The man threw his hands up disturbing the horse.     The horses

         reared slightly catching the man on his leg kicking him to the

         ground.   A passerby assisted the man to his feet, he limped over to

         the bridge parapet and punched the stonework.      He made no complaint

         or comment to me.    I took a static position outside the foot cordon.

         Inspector Hands-Davis and Inspector Wilkinson took several mounted

         officers including myself around onto Penistone Road to stand by in

         the event of disorder on the pitch.

         At the announced abandonment of the game I went with Inspector

         Wilkinson back to Leppings Lane to oversee the departure of Liverpool

         Supporters.   When the bulk of supporters had cleared the ground we

         commenced to patrol the area.    There were radio calls of disorder but

         I did not see any.    I continued to patrol until 1830 hours when the

         mounted contingent were stood down.




                                          Constable 5043 FRY




                                                                 S.Fry 5043 SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:    CONSTABLE 5043 FRY

           TIME:              DATE:   240489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

E ^ COF REPORT


                                                                                     2873
Incident      102   260390 OP8Q64       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                           STATEMENT NUMBER   S1388

                                                                              Station

      lame          WATSON

Forenames            C    G

Age                                         Date of birth

Address              IOUNTED SECTION


Occupation           POL PS1710

Telephone

IC                  Height                  Build

Hair colour

Hair type

m                                           Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses             Use                    Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                                                                           Signed


             RECOLLECTIONS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

             FROM SOT 1710 WATSON - MOUNTED SECTION

             I am a Police Sergeant in charge of the Nottinghamshire Constabulary

             Mounted Section, stationed at the stables, Police Headquarters,

             Sherwood Lodge, Arnold, Nottingham.

             On Saturday, 15 April, 1989 (150489) eight officers and horses of the

             Nottinghamshire Constabulary Mounted Section attended Hillsborough,

             Sheffield, to assist the South Yorkshire Police with the Liverpool V

             Nottingham Forest FA Cup Semi Final.

             The officers attending were - Sgt 1710 WATSON

                                           PC      790 KERRY

                                           PC      560 MARSHALL

                                           PC   1463 ALLEN

                                           PC      459 HINES

                                                                                         2874
                                                                  PAGE       2
                                                                  S1388

                                 WPC   63 BENTLEY

                                 WPC   156 MAIN

                                 PC

Deployments was as follows - Sgt WATSON, PC's KERRY, HINES,            and

WPC MAIN performed duty on Penistone Road.

PC's ALLEN,           and WPC BENTLEY were at the Railway Station

reception - these officers were never deployed at the ground.

The Penistone Road continegent were deployed along with a serial of S

Yorkshire horses in supervising the Forest supporters who were all

required to enter the ground through the Penistone Road turnstiles.

The Forest supporters arriving at Penistone Road, although in large

numbers, were well behaved and policing their entry into the ground

presented no unusual problems.

At 2 50 pm (1450) I received a radio message frcm the match control

to the effect that trouble was being experienced at the Leppings Lane

entrance to the ground and that I was to take any Mounted Officers

that could be spared to this entrance to assist.     Accordingly I took

PC 790 Kerry to the Leppings Lane entrance via the back of the South

Stand.   Already there were WPC 156 MAIN, WPC WILSON (S Yorks) and 12

Mounted Officers from Merseyside.

The Leppings Lane entrance was being used for the Liverpool supporters

to gain access to the ground and in particular to the West Stand.

Upon our arrival at Leppings Lane I saw a large crowd of between 2 -

3000 Liverpool supporters attempting to gain entrance to the ground

through the turnstiles.   The turnstiles were divided into two

sections, a large brick wall divided the two sections and the approach

from Leppings Lane to the turnstiles had iron gates across it.

The larger of the two sections had a large number of people in it but

the people appeared to be under control.      The smaller of the two

however was packed solidly with people.
                                                                 PAGE    3
                                                                 S1388

This area allowed access to six turnstiles, on the approach to than

the area was bounded to the left by the above mentioned brick wall and

to the right by a steel barrier.    Many had been trapped in this area

and were being crushed by some of the 2 - 3000 who were pushing them

from behind.   I could see that the people at the front were under

extreme and unbearable pressure against the walls and turnstiles; in

the crush I saw several young children, seme of wham were pulled from

the crowd by Mounted Officers and carried to safety.

Many of the large group who had caused the crush had only arrived

in the previous 15 minutes, they were badly affected by drink and in a

most un co-operative and foul temper.

Along with other Mounted Officers at the scene I began to use my horse

to force an entry between the element at the back and the innocent

people at the front; during this operation I was genuinely and

gravely concerned for the people at the front, I was sure that if the

situation was not resolved then some people would be at the very

least, badly injured.

Whilst myself and the other officers were attempting to move the

unruly element from the back of the people being crushed PC KERRY went

to the gates between the turnstiles and Leppings Lane, he used his

horse to drive back the youths who were charging up behind the people

at the turnstile and then closed the gates.    This had very little

effect as many of them climbed over the fencing at the sides of the

gate and into the turnstile area.

In the meantime myself and the other officers had been partly

successful in removing the youths who had been pushing from the back,

however, as previously stated they were in a state of drunkenness and

persistently ran back into the space we had cleared causing the people

at the front to be crushed even further.

During the whole time that I was at the scene the walls were under
                                                                 PAGE    4
                                                                 S1388

constant siege with many youths climbing them and gaining access to

the ground without a ticket.   The walls were about 12' high but this

did not deter these youths frart climbing over and into the ground.

The whole incident was barbaric with the late arrivals who had been

drinking, showing no regard for the safety of the people at the front,

in fact with the youths climbing the walls etc, I would liken the

scenario to one of a medieval battle.

Many of those at the back seemed to think it was amusing to push the

people at the front and I would describe their attitude as being one

of having great fun at taking part in such a confrontation.

At one point I had put my horse into the crowd to split it, I then

stood him there to protect the people at the front frcm the ones at

the back, the pressure frcm the back however was so great that the

horse was lifted upwards and had to scramble to regain his footing.

Suddenly a large gate to the rear of turnstiles opened up, I am not

aware of who gave instructions for the gate to be opened.     As the gate

opened I saw officers on foot directing people into the ground through

this gate, this meant that within a few minutes most of the crowd had

entered the ground and the people previously been crushed had been

saved.   At the time I thought this was an excellent decision as it

had undoubtedly saved the lives of seme people.

During the whole of the time that I was at this incident I saw about

200 people standing watching the crush, it was obvious that these

people did not have a ticket, periodically seme of them would sieze

the opportunity to run forward and climb the walls into the ground,

similarly when the gate was opened all of them ran forward and through

the gate.

After the 2 - 3000 crowd had cleared at Leppings Lane I along with the

other Mounted Officers at the scene were directed to Gate '0' on

Penistone Road.   Upon our arrival there we were told to standby on a
                                                                          PAGE      5
                                                                          S1388

        nearby garage forecourt.      Whilst waiting there it became increasingly

        obvious that something was terribly wrong inside the ground.

        In producing this document I would like to point out that I have been

        a Mounted Officer for 12 years.      Frcm 1984 - 1986 (000084 - 000086) I

        was put in charge of the Mounted Section in acting rank and from 10.11.

        86 (101186) I have been in charge of the Section as a substantive

        Sergeant.     I attend football matches regularly in Nottingham, Derby

        and Leicester.     I also go to other parts of the country on mutual aid

        and have seen many examples of crowd behaviour.

        In fairness I have to say that I have experienced far worse violence

        than the Liverpool supporters used on this occasion but the crush

        caused by their irresponsible behaviour was the worst I have ever seen

        at any time in my career.




                                                        C G WATSON PS1710 SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:               DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                        2878
Incident    102   260390 OP8Q64             DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                             STATEMENT NUMBER   S881

                                                                                Station

fj^nam e          WHITLAM

Forenames          PHILLIP        KENNETH

Age                21   -   100                 Date of birth

Address            S YORKS POLICE
                   ECCLESFIELD

Occupation         POL PS468

Telephone

 IC                Height                       Build

 Hair colour

 Hair type

^^s                                             Complexion

 Facial hair

 Glasses           Use                          Accent

 Number of Pages 11

 Dated             030589                                       P WHITLAM PS468 Signed


           SEMI-FINAL HILLSBOROUGH 15.4.89 (150489)

           At 9.00am (0900) on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I paraded

           for duty at Ecclesfield Police Station in respect of the semi-final,

           together with other members of D Group. We were transported by bus

           to the ground where we took up positions in the North Stand for a

           briefing to be held at 10am (1000).

           On the day I was already aware of my basic duties and the serial

           number and identity of officers contained in it.         My Serial No was 17

           and consisted of myself and ten officers.         PC2913 AUCKLAND, PC2933

           WADSWORTH, PC3027 TAGG, PC393 PALFREY, PC809 ELSON, PC880 WHITEAN,

           PC16 WILSON, PC43 KIRBY, PC602 MOORE and PC346 THOMPSON, all these

           officers, with the exception of PC THOMPSON, being frcm D Group.

           The prescribed duties for this serial was the supervision of

           turnstiles 1-8 at the Leppings Lane End of the ground, giving access


                                                                                          2 8 79
                                                                 PAGE    2
                                                                 S881

to the North Stand, a duty which both myself and the majority of

these officers have carried out on a number of previous occasions.

Prior to the day each officer in my serial had been given a copy of

the duties of Serial 17, and details of the parade time location.

The serial was identified in the order as being under Sub Sector 8,

and I was responsible to Inspectors PURDY and SYKES, whom I reported

to on arrival at the ground.

At 10.00am (1000) a briefing was conducted in the North Stand by Chief

Superintendent DUGKENFIELD, Supt MURRAY and C/Insp BEAL.

At the conclusion of this, arrangements were made with Inspectors

SYKES and PURDY for a briefing of the serials, at the Leppings Lane

end, at 11am (1100) at the rear of the West Stand.

The serial was then provided with a snack meal and a drink and I

collected a personal radio and earpiece.   The radio was checked and

was in working order.

At 11.00am (1100) all the serial went to the rear of the West Stand

where Insp SYKES briefed the serials as to their specific duties and

the security of persons entering the ground.   I advised officers as

to care with searching and seizure of articles, also action in

respect of drunks.

Following this briefing, the majority of the serial remained at the

rear of the West Stand as no turnstiles appeared to be open for the

North Stand.   However a short while later, I would say approximately

11.20-25 (1120) (1125) one turnstile opened, so 2 officers were

deployed to that one, there being quite a number of officers outside

the ground at this time and very few fans.

Around 11.45am (1145) all the turnstiles for the North Stand opened,

so the whole serial was deployed outside on the turnstiles, 2

officers to each and the remaining 2 and myself initially stood in

the triangular area formed by the turnstiles wall, the adjacent shop


                                                                             2880
                                                                     PAGE   :
                                                                     S881

and the perimeter fence, the gates of which were opened and pinned

back.   At this time there were only a few supporters arriving at a

time and officers were scsnetimes under employed with searching.

As is normal two or three officers were deployed together with the

coach reception teams on Lepping Lane itself.     I believe 3 were

actually used, PC2913, PC809 and 880.

During this early period I made arrangements for black dustbin bags

to be brought to collect items seized or disposed of by fans entering

the ground.   Normally quite a number of fans are in possession of

cans of soft drinks on entering the ground, these are not permitted in

the ground.   They are given the opportunity to drink or dispose of the

cans.   Also, where fans have cans of alcohol the same applies except

they are informed to dispose not drink them.

A short while after we had obtained the bags and labels for property,

a number of large plastic dustbins arrived.    These were sited in

between four turnstiles for the same use as the bags.

Initially, as I have stated, there were very few fans arrived frcm

Liverpool and the officers were able to make searches of virtually

every person arriving at the turnstiles without causing any delays on

entering.   Orderly queues were formed but they amounted to perhaps

6 or 8 at one or two turnstiles, all the entrances were not used by

the fans at this time.

During this early period there were no great problems with the fans

or their behaviour.     The majority consisted of middle aged and

family groups.   There were light hearted exchanges with them.

From this early stage a problem started to arise which later on grew

quite considerably.     The North Stand was reserved for Liverpool

Supporters with brown tickets and the turnstiles, although numbered,

were also lettered A.    Also adjacent to the turnstiles were plaques,

brown in colour, about 15 inches by 12 inches at about head height.



                                                                                2881
From this period onwards numerous ticket holders came up to me

confused as to where they should enter the ground.    They did not

appear to understand the significance of the colour coding.

A further cause of confusion was the layout of the actual ticket.

Numerous people asked for entrance X, Y, M etc, these being the

gangway not the entrance, but the layout of the ticket is such that
                                                 I
the gangway, entrance and row, etc were all in the same size print.

Further confusion was also caused by ticket holders not knowing which

colour related to which entrance, ie, Brown North Stand, Red West

Stand, Blue Leppings Lane terracing.    As a result an increasing number

entered the area in front of stiles for the North Stand who wanted

other areas of the ground.

As time progressed, the number of persons arriving at the ground

steadily increased.   They were arriving on foot, by coach and service

bus.   Initially, they were searched and seen by the officers on coach

reception and then came towards us.    Quite a number started to

arrive as time progressed in possession of and smelling of alcohol.

As a result the dustbins at the side turnstiles started to fill with

empty or full cans of beer.     I instructed about 4 or 5 personally to

place part full cans in the bin.     I did, however, see other officers

engaged on both North and West Stand turnstiles instruct fans to put

cans and bottles into the bins.

As the numbers steadily increased, the officers made more selective

searches of persons entering.     Orderly queues were formed and there

were no great problems in respect of maintaining them apart from the

confusion over tickets.

However, on about 3 or 4 occasions, I requested a mounted officer to

sweep the area in front of the turnstiles in respect of numerous

groups of youths who arrived without tickets and those who had arrived

and did not want to go in, or were waiting for friends with their
                                                                   PAGE        5
                                                                   S881

tickets.

On occasions there were about 50 or 60 persons milling about and on

one occasion upwards of 100.     The youths without tickets were

generally 18-24 age group and the ones I spoke with were generally

in groups of 4 or 6 in number.    Mounted officers then entered this

area and cleared these groups out of the area and away frcm the

turnstiles.

This continued from approximately 12 noon (1200) to, I would estimate

1330 to 1345, with a steady flow of fans gradually increasing.

At 1350 hours (1350), PC WILSON and PC PALFREY made two separate

arrests in respect of possession of cannabis.    The officers who had

been engaged on coach reception were brought back and continued with

searching.    The procedure carried on for some considerable time after

the arrests, the numbers gradually increasing but we did not appear to

be having any great difficulties, apart from those already mentioned,

with which I thought we were coping.    Once the turnstiles were fully

manned and officers were engaged in searched and queue control,      I

adopted a position about 10-15 feet (10'-15') in front of than,

checking tickets and monitoring those not making their way into the

ground and non ticket holders, etc.

I cannot say exactly at what time it was but I could estimate between

2.20 (1420) and 2.30pm (1430) the area in which I was working suddenly

became deluged in a large number of fans.    The whole environment

seemed to change abruptly from having organised queues and turnstile

entry to being overwhelmed. The whole mood seemed to change and the

make up of the crowd changing from mixed ages and sexes to a

predominantly male and younger ones.     The proportion of people under

the influence of alcohol also changed and increased, at a conservative

estimate I would say 30% had had a considerable amount to drink.         The

numbers who were confused and agitated of the tickets were



                                                                                   2883
                                                                 PAGE        6
                                                                 S881

considerable.   I was virtually inundated with enquiries at which

entrance they wanted.     This was adding to the congestion as those who

were at the wrong turnstiles were trying to get back out into

LeppingsLane. As the numbers increased I was gradually forced further

away frcm the turnstiles towards the perimeter gates and felt

completely isolated from other officers.     The only officers I could

see were mounted on Leppings Lane itself.     At one stage I saw officers

engaged on West Stand turnstiles attempting to close one of the

perimeter gates to ease the crush on those turnstiles, they managed it

once but had to open it again.

The numbers of fans seemed unending and it was virtually a river of

fans flowing towards the turnstiles.     At this point I saw a number of

youths had climbed onto the metal partition between West Stand

turnstiles and the Leppings Lane terracing.     They were making their

way along the top of it and over the wall into the ground.     I would

say about ten or twenty climbed over as I could see at this time.        I

radioed control at this time and received a reply that they would see

what they could do.     A short while later I saw Inspector BENNETT

stood on top of the wall, assisting more fans over.

As the numbers increased the presence inside the area between the

perimeter fence and the turnstiles became immense.     In fact at one

stage, together with some other supporters, I feared we would be

crushed behind the perimeter gate if it gave way, this being because

it was locked open with a pin on the floor and a bar across the top.

The pressure was such that this top bar was flexing and bending at

tines and we feared if it gave way we would be crushed between the

gate on the fence.      The numbers of fans continued to rise and there

appeared no end to them.     As I was talking to a fan regarding tickets

 I felt a spray of what I thought was water and a push frcm my left.

The man at my side then said, "You were lucky that can just missed



                                                                                 2884
                                                                PAGE       7
                                                                S881

your head."   I saw that he, a man dressed in a white trench coat, was

covered in a liquid.   He then said something about they're throwing

cans from the back, meaning Leppings Lane.

I can recall during this period also seeing a surge of supporters

through the perimeter gate about 6 or 8 people away and they cut

through the crowd like a knife, forcing a bow wave of pressure to the

side.   I would estimate there were about 20 or 30 in the group and

they were chanting and waving their arms in the air.   I could see that

a fair proportion had cans in their hands.   These were not the only

ones with beer cans I sawduring this period,   but due to the crush

and sheer weight of numbers, there was little I could do apart from

try and calm the ones near me down.

Although I knew there should be quite a number of officers around, I

did during this period feel very isolated and at this time could see

no one apart from Insp BENNETT on the wall, some mounted officers in

the crowd on Leppings Lane, Supt MARSHALL on the bridge paraphet and

another officer on the roof of a Police vehicle in Leppings Lane

near to the shop.

tty radio at this time seemed to be working, but has often not, and I

could hear shouts to open gates but due to the noise and officers at

one stage trying to closethe perimeter gate,   it is hard to say if

it was them or the radio.   Shortly after that, my earpiece became

detached during the crush and I cannot recollect any other

transmissions.

The situation was then as I have described and appeared to be getting

worse with confusion over tickets, fans pushing and shouting etc and

I was literally at times fearful of my life if I had fallen over.      I

was unable to make any headway through the crowd to check to see if

the officers on the turnstiles were alright, as I could not see or get

to them from where I was.   The next thing that happened was that Gate



                                                                               2885
                                                                  PAGE      8
                                                                  S881

A opened, which is situated to the left of the North Stand turnstiles.

It was then as if someone had let the plug out, the pushing and

crushing in the area in front of these turnstiles virtually abated

with large numbers surging through that open gate and into the North

Stand area.

It was at this point that PC2933 WADSWORTH joined me and said that

they had had to climb through the turnstiles for their safety.    The

crowd then eased off completely and the queues at the turnstiles

returned with an elderly gent who had been stood with me for safety

near the fence joining a queue of about 20 at the right-hand turnstile

and by this time Gate A had closed again.   I would say it only

remained open for 4 or 5 minutes at the most.

Shortly after the gate had closed and the queues reformed, a number

of officers ran from Leppings Lane and in through the turnstiles.       I

could hear nothing on my radio but heard one of them shout that there

had been a pitch invasion and all available assistance was required

inside.   Together with PC WADSWORTH and other officers, I entered the

ground by climbing over the turnstiles, turned right and ran across

the back of the West Stand towards the co me r with the South Stand.

As we ran past the tunnel entrance to the terracing and in the area

at the back of the stand, I can say that there appeared to be nothing

untoward and there was really quite a marked absence of people in

this area.

As we went to the pitch via the rear of the Police Control, I

gathered as many of my serial together as I could and it included, I

think, PCs 2933, 3027, 346, 880, 43, 809 and some other officers.

We entered the playing area from the South Stand and I am virtually

certain that the game had stopped at this time but I cannot be sure.

I looked across the Leppings Lane end and could see officers stood on

the fencing gesticulating to the crowd to move over to the left and



                                                                                2886
                                                                  PAGE      9
                                                                  S881

to move back.     The terracing area itself appeared full.   I went to the

central pen areas behind the goals, pens 3 and 4, and saw Insp PURDY

stood on the perimeter fence trying to       get   the fansto move across.

At this time I did not appreciate what was happening.     He shouted to

take a serial into pen 2, so I collected a group of approximately

10 officers together and went to gate 2, which was open.

As we went to enter the gate, I saw a young girl being carried over

the head of the fans and towards the gate.     Seme then shouted that

she was injured.     It was at this point that I realised, or started to

realise, that something drastic was wrong.     When the girl had cleared

I entered Pen 2 via gate 2 and we formed a cordon to push the fans

back away from the gate and made our way towards the railing fence

separating Pen 2 from 3.     As I reached the fencing and looked over

into Pen 3, the crowd seemed to part and move back away from the front.

I could then see what I can only describe as a huge pile of bodies

stacked 4 or 5 deep in places, laid on       the   floor atthe rear of the

perimeter wall.     They were as deep as the second step up on the

terracing.     About half way along I could see a youth stuck out from

the bodies who appeared to be trapped by his legs with the bodies up

as far as his waist, he was shouting frantically for help.

I remained in Pen 2 and PC809 and 2913 climbed over into the central

pen 3, to render assistance as were other officers who had entered the

central pen.     Those officers and scroe of the fans then passed the

injured and dead to myself and other officers and fans and we passed

them out onto the field where further first aid could be given.         I

cannot say how many were dead or injured but I can recollect passing

only 2 or 3 who were conscious over and well over 8 to 10 who were

either unconscious or dead.     As well as by this route, I saw people

being carried towards the rear of the terracing and out onto the pitch

via gate 3.



                                                                                2887
                                                                 PAGE     10
                                                                 S881

When I first looked into Pen 3, the only place I saw bodies or

injured persons was behind the perimeter wall and in front of the

broken crowd barrier on the terracing.     I did not see any injured on

the floor or otherwise in Pen 2, apart frcm the young girl being

carried overhead.    The persons who I assisted to carry out varied in

age frcm teenagers of both sexes to I believe one roan I would say was

in his 30's with a white shirt and jeans on.

After we had rsnoved all the injured and dead frcm the Pen, I returned

to the pitch area.    At this time I saw that there were numerous

persons being treated and carried away on stretchers by both Police

and fans.     I then saw fans ripping down the advertising hoardings from

the West Stand, again initially the reason for it was not apparent,

but it soon became evident they were being used as makeshift

stretchers.     I then went into Pen 3 with other officers and helped

pass these onto the pitch.    At this time it was apparent that numbers

of the fans still did not realise what was happening as seme must have

thought we were going to arrest those taking the hoardings down, so

they had to be told forcibly by other fans what was happening.

We then remained in the Pen and kept the fans away from the clothing

and belongings which were piled at the front of the terracing.      At

some stage a Scenes of Crime Officer entered the pen in plain clothes

and started to photograph the scene.     The crowd went literally wild

and surged forwards to get hold of him, from what was shouted I

believe they thought he was press. We had to fight our way out of the

Pen with the Officer and withdrew for safety.

After leaving the pen I returned onto the pitch area where there were

numerous Police Officers, a lot of whom were obviously distressed.

I gathered what officers I could of my serial together, and as there

appeared nothing else we could do on the pitch and in the absence of

any instructions, we returned to the rear of the West Stand where we



                                                                               2888
                                                                          PAGE    11
                                                                          S881

       were deployed as per the original orders on supervising exit of

        supporters when they were released.

        Obviously large numbers were distressed at what had happened as they

        left, but there were considerable numbers who still appeared worse for

        drink leaving the ground.

       We remained on this duty until all the crowd had dispersed and the

        removal of bodies from a temporary mortuary in the Lane outside

        Leppings Lane had taken place.                        N

        On completion of this duty, we returned to the North Stand Where,

        after submitting my debriefing sheet and radio, the serial returned to

        Claywheels Lane for standby and awaiting transport at 6pm (1800).        The

        serial finally went off duty at 7pm (1900) at Ecclesfield Police

        Station.

        I can say that I have worked duties at Hillsborough football ground

        over the past six years and the majority of those duties have been

        performed at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.   Whilst at D

        Division I was engaged on escort of fans frcm the City Centre and

        subsequently in the terracing.   Whilst at F Division since July 1988

        (000788), I have worked a number of matches and have invariably worked

        on the turnstiles for the North Stand.   I have never experienced such

        a sudden mass influx of spectators as happened on this occasion.




                                                     P K WHITLAM PS468 SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:    030589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                       28 89
Incident       102   260390 OP8064        DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                              STATEMENT NUMBER   S909

                                                                                 Station

^Surname
  r r                TAGG

Forenames            ALISON

Age                  21 - 100                 Date of birth

Address              ECCLESFIELD PSTN


Occupation           POL PC3027

Telephone

IC                   Height                   Build

Hair colour

     ir type

«    es                                       Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses              Use                      Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                                                                              Signed


           I am an officer in the South Yorkshire Police, currently stationed at

           Ecclesfield Police Station.

           On April 15th 1989 (150489) I attended the Hillsborough Football

           Stadium to work at the semi final for the F.A Cup between Liverpool

           and Nottingham Forest.       I attended the briefing at about 10 am

           (1000) and was in serial 18 which was going to be responsible for

           searching the Liverpool supporters who were at the Leppings Lane End

           of the ground. At about ten past eleven (1110) we went to stand on the

           turnstiles ready to search the fans.        I was stood with PC43 Kirby on

           the third turnstile along and waited for people ccming that were going

           into the West Stand.      At first there was a very steady stream of

           people ccming to the ground.       It was mainly families at this time with

           quite a few young children and also elderly people.         As the fans

           approached the turnstiles we checked the tickets, a lot of people were
                                                                 PAGE         2
                                                                 S909

unsure of where they were going and I gave them the directions as to

where they needed to go.     I started searching the fans who seemed to

be in a jovial mood in anticipation of the match, most of them at this

stage were good humoured and had a laugh and a joke with us, they

wera queuing quite sensibly and there didn't appear to be any problems.

We were given a large plastic dust bin to put any property in which

we confiscated.     I took a screwdriver off of one young lad who said

he was an electrician.     I also took a large banner frcm another young

lad.    We also confiscated quite a lot of cans but it was mainly pop,

not beer.   We continued searching in this manner until about half pest

two (1430) when it began to get more crowded.    As the crowd increased

it began more difficult to search people although I did try.     I saw a

couple of people (lads of about twenty) get in without ticket by one

person handing his ticket in at the turnstile and someone else bobbing

down behind him and they both went through at the same time when the

turnstile opened.

At this time it was too cramped to actually get to them to do

anything about it.

From about twenty to three (1440) the crowd of people seemed to

increase even more until it was just a solid mass of people.     I got

pushed away from the turnstile and became sort of wedged against the

wall.    People began to panic and one woman became hysterical

screaming because she couldn't move.    Small children were getting

lifted above peoples heads because they were getting trampled on.        So

they were just passed over the turnstile.     I can remember seeing a

couple of old men who were so drunk they could barely stand up and I

noticed that a lot of the lads had been drinking because I could smell

it on their breath. They didn't seem to care who they were squashing

at the turnstiles they were just intent on getting into the ground.

After a while I lost sight of most of the other PC'S on my serial and


                                                                                  2£9 1
                                                                          PAGE        3
                                                                          S909

was just wedged against the wall, the pressure against me was

tremendous, so much that I could feel my sternum bending and it was a

struggle to breath. I could breath in but not out, and just could not

mova at all. People were beginning to get angry about the crush and

were swearing at me saying someone was going to get killed out there,

there was nothing I could do because I was just as squashed as they

were, I hadn't got a radio and so couldn't comnunicate with anyone so

it was just a case of looking after yourself.           People were very

frightened in the crush and were panicked into pushing even more to

try and get out. Somehow one of the other PC'S grabbed me and pushed

me through the turnstile to get out of the crush.           I looked at my

watch when I got to the other side and it was about 3 or 4 minutes

past three (1503-1504) I didn't know whether the teams had kicked off

or not.          I spoke to an inspector on the other side of the turnstiles

and told him what it was like on the outside.           He realised the

situation but there was nothing he could really do about it.           People

caning through the turnstiles were still shouting about the crush and

children were still being passed over we stood on this side of the

turnstiles for about five or six minutes. People were ccxning up to us

asking where to go, they had come through the West Stand turnstile

with red tickets which I think were for the Leppings Lane end standing

part.       After a few minutes Inspector Sykes opened the right hand side

gate to let us back out onto the turnstile side and the crowd has more

or less completely vanished.           There were just a few stragglers left at

the turnstiles and I actually searched two more people.            I then heard

someone say we were wanted inside the ground and everyone started

r u n n in g .    I   jumped over one of the turnstiles and followed everyone

else and went onto the pitch halfway down on the right hand side.                At

first it looted like it was a pitch invasion but as I got closer to

the fences I could see that people were being crushed. The West stand



                                                                                          28 92
                                                                    PAGE      4
                                                                    S909

crowd were very noisy and were shouting 'Shitty Ground.'        I stood in

front of the wire at the centre of the pitch and there was just a

deathly silence.   There were three faces I can remember seeing pushed

right up to the wire, a girl had her face pushed sideways up to it,

her eyes were closed and she was blue, her lips were nearly black and

she was definately dead.    I can't remember much about the middle

person but next there was a boy who looked about twelve, the person

behind him had been sick on his head.    I can remember another

Policewoman stood behind me and she was looking into the pen saying

'She's dead , he's dead' etc and just picking them out.        I can't

remember anything else about looking into the pen.     There were some

officers pulling people over the fences and trying to rip them down.

At first I helped a few people that had walked out to sit on the pitch

because they were really dazed and confused.     I then saw PC Kirby have

a boy handed to him who was unconscious so I followed him.       We went to

the co m er of the pitch.   He wasn't breathing so Neil gave him mouth

to mouth and I gave him cardiac massage.     I don't know really how long

it was before he started to breath on      his own, but once     he had

started to PC Kirby left me with him.      The boy was about twelvevery

small and slim with blonde wavy hair he was wearing jeans and a

Liverpool top the only thing he had on him was     a ticket      for thematch

in his back pocket.   I put him in the   recovery position       and stayed

with him in case he stopped breathing again.     He was deeply

unconscious and didn't respond to my talking to him or pinching his

ears to bring him round.    A Liverpool fan came up to me and said "

Here's his programme" but I told I didn't think he'd really want it

now.   Seme of the fans began ripping down the wooden adverts from

around the pitch to use as stretchers and eventually they came up to

me with one.   We put the boy on the piece of wood and ran with him

over to the other side of the ground by the gym where the ambulances



                                                                                  2893
                                                                   PAGE     5
                                                                   S909

were. The board was very wobbly and I felt as if my legs were going to

give way as I was running.     We put the boy on the floor by an

ambulance and a doctor came over to look at him.     He stuck a sticker

on his back and said he was a priority patient and should go as soon

as possible. Another PC came to sit with me to make sure we were O.K,

I don't know who it was though.     Whilst I was sat outside the gym

people kept bringing more and more bodies round.     There was a middle

aged scruffy looking man with long hair, someone had put an airway in

his mouth and his friend was bashing his chest and screaming at him

but he was dead, he dragged a few more people to help him but it

wasn't any use.     Two policemen brought another man round who was dead,

they placed him on the floor and his trousers came down slightly

someone else threw a coat over his face and I thought what an

undignified way it was to die. People kept filing past me with dead

bodies and I tried not to look I can't remember seeing anyone else

alive by the gym.    After seme time someone decided that the boy could

go in an ambulance so I helped put him in.     I didn't know whether to

go with him or not so I stayed and went back out onto the pitch which

had cleared by now I saw a few people with injuries walking towards

the ambulances to get treatment.     By this time there was a line of

PC's stood along the centre of the pitch.     I carried on walking

towards the other end of the field.     I heard a PC ask ten officers to

go and stand in the centre pen because he said "People are robbing the

dead here." So I went in and stood with seme others.      There were all

sorts of property strewn around, mainly odd shoes and trainers that

had come off in the crush.     A scenes of crimes officers went into the

pen and began to take seme photos.     Seme of the fans must have thought

he was a press man and about a dozen ran over and tried to attack him.

After this I went from the centre pen and out to the Leppings Lane end

of the ground where we stood in a line whilst all the fans were let


                                                                                2894
                                                                         PAGE     6
                                                                         S909

         out of the ground.    Most of them left quietly but a lot of lads were

        making conments about us killing the fans and getting overtime for it

         also they didn't seem to realise that we had been inside as well.

        Whilst I was sat with the boy by the gym there was an incident where

         seme PC's had to draw their staffs but I didn't actually see what had

        caused it or what had happened when everyone had left the ground and

        all the casualties had gone to the hospital we went into the North

        stand for a debriefing.




                                                     Alison Tagg PC3037 SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:               DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                      2895
Incident      102   260390 OP8064       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                             STATEMENT NUMBER   S1264

                                                                                Station

      tame           KIRBY

Forenames

Age                                          Date of birth

Address              'F' DIVISION, ECCLESFIELD PSTN


Occupation           POL PC43

Telephone

IC                  Height                   Build

Hair colour

Hair type

f t                                          Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses             Use                      Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                230589                                                      Signed


             On Saturday 15 April 1989(150489), I attended at Ecclesfield Police

             Station at 9.00 am(0900) in full uniform and frcm there was

             transported to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club at Hillsborough to

             perform public order duty before, during and after the F A Cup Semi-

             Final between Notts Forest and Liverpool.

             I arrived at the ground in full uniform and was in serial 17 under

             the control of Police Sergeant 468 WHITLAM.     Our pre-match brief had

             been to perform duty at the Leppings Lane turnstiles, numbers 1 to 8,

             (those allowing access to the North Stand).      During Phase 1 of the

             event and after a briefing, together with other officers on duty at

             the ground for the match, our serial took up our positions on the

             outside of the turnstiles at Leppings Lane, the tine being

             approximately 11.45 am(1145).

             I was stood outside the penultimate turnstile for the North Stand


                                                                                          2896
                                                                 PAGE      2
                                                                 S1264

(together with WPC 3027 TAGG), before the turnstiles for the West Stand.

Between approximately 11.45 am(1145) and 1.45 pn(1345) on that date,

fans entered the turnstiles at my location in a slow manner.     I was

surprised at the lack of persons who had arrived by 1.45 pm(1345).

Daring this period (11.45 am - 1.45 pm) (1145 - 1345). I searched

several persons entering the turnstiles and removed several unopened

pop cans and a banner from persons.     Seme people decided to open the

cans there and then and drink them before entering and I saw a number

of persons stood some distance away from the turnstiles drinking

slowly.   I could see by 1.45pm(1345) that a large number of cans of

beer and pop had been placed against a wall nearby.

From about 1.45 pm(1345) onwards, the number of persons arriving began

to increase dramatically.    Searches became more infrequent as the

number queueing up to enter began to increase.    At this stage the mood

was generally good natured but a lot of people had begun to

congregate about 15 yds away from the turnstiles and were makingno

attempt to enter the ground.     I saw a mounted Police Officer on

several occasions ask those congregating to make their way into the

stadium, but a large number ignored these requests and just moved from

one position to another.    A few people were asking me if they could

enter without tickets and I informed them that they couldn't and many

people were queueing up at my turnstile to then be told by myself

that they had the wrong ticket and had to go to another part of the

ground.

After a while I saw that the crowd waiting to enter had begun to

increase considerably.     At this point a youth was refused entry by

one of the officials on the turnstile.     I approached this youth and

could smell intoxicants on his breath.     I informed him to leave the

area due to his apparent drunkenness.     (I did not want to arrest the

youth because I had to give consideration to the numbers arriving at
                                                                 PAGE      3
                                                                 S1264

the turnstiles).    He used some abusive language and then joined a

queue at one of the other turnstiles.    I approached him and seized

his arm, informing him that he was under arrest for attempting to

enter the ground whilst drunk.    As I did so he began using abusive

language and began to struggle.    On looking around for assistance I

could see that the crowd had become considerable and there was no

Police back-up available within a reasonable distance.    Several

persons stood near the youth told me they were with him and would

take him away.   Seme persons were becoming hostile and in view of

this I decided, in the interests of safety and to prevent injury, to

allow them to do so.    I saw them escort the youth a few yards away

before losing sight of them in the crowd.

I managed to squeeze my way back to the turnstile entrance I had been

stood at and saw several youths sitting on a corrugated steel wall

which divided the seating turnstile fran the turnstiles for those

wishing to stand.   As I looked ahead I saw that the crowd of people

had become so large that I could no longer see past them.    They

stretched in every direction.     I informed WPC TAGG that it would be

dangerous to continue searching persons due to the numbers arriving

and the density of the crowd in the immediate vicinity.     I saw that

many of the younger persons in front of me were chanting loudly and

had cans of beer in their possession.    One person had hold of a

bottle of beer and was waving at me.    He was extremely unsteady on

his feet and appeared very di^unk.    I suddenly felt a surge of people

begin to push forwards and I could see a mounted Police Officer in the

background signalling with his arms for people to hold back.     I was

pushed momentarily against the wall next to the turnstile.     I shouted

for people not to push, yet those immediately in front of me did not

appear to have been pushing and one man shouted 'It's those behind".

Persons with tickets for the wrong turnstiles were now experiencing
                                                                  PAGE      4
                                                                  S1264

difficulty in leaving the turnstile area and I was having to

physically hold people backwards in order to make a small gap for

these persons to squeeze through.    Still more people seemed to be

pushing forwards and the numbers sat on the steel wall began to

increase.    People were climbing onto nearby fencing.   The mounted

officers were further in the background and there was a mass of

people between these officers and ourselves on the turnstiles.     I

began to think at this stage that some people could end up being

seriously injured and began to feel concern for my own safety.     I

asked Police Constable Tagg, who was looking pale, if she was okay

and she said, "Yes"

Suddenly, I felt a large sustained surge towards the turnstiles and I

was pushed forcibly against the wall next to the turnstile I was at.

I could not move for a second.    I pushed back to gain some space and

saw that the people in front of me began to look scared.    An old man

was pushed forward through the crowd and people near me were pleading

with me to let him through.   He looked badly shaken and I had to push

amongst the crowd and make a small gap to allow him in through the

turnstile.   Several men passed me clutching their children, many of

whom were crying and one child had a bright red colour to his face.

I assisted these and a couple of old men through the turnstiles.       I

was by now facing the crowd with my back against the wooden frame of

the turnstile and pressed right up against it.    I was having extreme

difficulty staying in position and by now I had lost sight of WPC TAGG

and my other colleague on the turnstiles, other than a WPC on my left

who was having extreme difficulty moving and appeared very upset.       I

raised my arm in the air hoping to attract the attention of a

mounted officer but they were not looking at me, there was a sea of

people, some in front of me were drunk and there was a lot of abusive

language being used by some in the crowd.    I heard people shouting,
                                                                     PAGE    5
                                                                     S1264

'It's going to be another Heysel' and 'People are going to get fucking

killed here'.    I now feared for my life and the lives of those near

me as the surge for the turnstiles reached unbearable pressure.        One

man shouted to me, 'There's an old man on the floor here'. I could

not see for the sheer number of persons in front of me.      I shouted to

the persons I was facing to stop pushing and lean back - there's a

man on the floor.    A white teenage male youth shouted at me 'Fuck

off' as the surge continued.    There was a look of sheer panic on the

faces of those directly in front of me.     I could now see some people

pushing forward hard and chanting.     I was pushed sideways against the

wall next to the turnstiles and by now was experiencing difficulty

breathing.     I signalled frantically towards the mounted officers but

they did not appear to respond.     I could feel my back pressed against

the wall and I was on my tip-toes.     I began to feel extremely

frightened and faint.     I could hear shouts of, 'There's going to be

another 'Heysel'' and 'Someone's going to die here'.      I feared for my

life by now.     I saw the turnstile next to me and grasped the wooden

frame with my hands.     I forced a deep breath and pulled myself towards

the turnstile.     People were pushing fran every side.   I forced

myself into the turnstile and shouted at the official taking tickets

to let me through.     As I passed through the turnstile and looked back

into the crowd, the people at the turnstiles were pushed right up

against them.     As people came through they were by now extremely angry

and frightened.     Many shouted towards me that people were going to

die outside and voiced their annoyance and anger that they had been

through such an ordeal at the turnstiles.     I assisted one child who had

been helped over the turnstile and lost his father.       I saw that seme

of the officers who had been with me earlier were now on the inside

of the turnstiles with me.     They also said they had been crushed

against the walls outside.     I informed a nearby Inspector of the



                                                                                 2900
                                                                     PAGE     6
                                                                     S1264

gravity of the situation outside and the fact that we had lost control.

He acknowledged my concern. I then saw that several people were

jumping over a crash barrier behind the turnstiles which separated the

North Stand supporters from the West Stand supporters - they were

jumping across to the West Stand side of the barrier.     Seme then pushed

the barrier out of the way and just ran through.    There were people

running past me in all directions.     I was now fearful for my safety on

this side of the barrier - several youths were threatening a nearby

Police Sergeant, swearing at him and behaving in a very hostile manner

and some began shouting at me voicing their anger over the situation.

I saw several people who ran past me on the North Stand side had

tickets for the West Stand.    On looking to my right I saw several

people stood on top of the wall next to the turnstiles.

Suddenly I saw the gate at the side of me open and a sea of people

run through towards the Leppings Lane stand.     In a few seconds the

rush was over and on the instructions of a Police Sergeant (whose

identity I do not know), I ran through the gate to the outside of the

stadium towards the position I had originally occupied at the

turnstiles.    I saw that there were very few people now on leppings

Lane.   As soon as I reached the turnstile area the same Police

Sergeant shouted to me that there were people on the pitch.     We both

jumped over one of the turnstiles and round to the Police control box

in the ground.     There were a large number of Police Officers running

with us now.     We passed the Police box and ran onto the pitch and as

we did so, I saw that the Leppings Lane stand appeared to be

completely full of Liverpool supporters.     I saw several climbing frcm

the lower tier to the upper tier.     There were dozens of

Police Officers in front of the fencing between the Leppings Lane

stand and the pitch and several Liverpool fans were on the pitch.        My

first impression was that they were invading the pitch.      I ran
                                                                 PA£2!
                                                                 S1264

towards the fence and as I did so I saw a middle aged man being

passed overhead by the crowd and the Police Officers assisting some

to climb over the fencing. At this point I realised something was

wrong though I didn't appreciate the gravity of the situation.    As I

reached the fence near to the goal area I saw several Police Officers

inside the terracing among the crowd - they appeared to be jostling

with some fans and a lot of abuse was being directed towards them.       I

saw some persons attempting to grab the officers and being held back

by other fans and I saw some fans climbing up from the lower terrace

to the higher terrace.   I then looked to rny right and saw a large

number of people lying in different positions on the floor near to

the barrier.   There were young and old alike and I saw a pair of legs

sticking up with the rear of the body buried beneath other bodies.

It was at this point I realised the gravity of the situation.    The

next thing I ranember I was stood near to one of the gates in the

barrier giving access to the pitch.   This gate was open.   A small

child, white male, about 10 years old, wearing a red T-shirt and

jeans was being passed through the gates.   I grabbed hold of the

child and carried him onto the pitch where I saw St John's Ambulance

people attending to some injured people.    I placed the child on the

floor and saw that he was limp, he was not breathing and he was white

with purple colouring around his lips and eyes.     I could not feel a

pulse and began to give heart massage while two nearby St. John's

Ambulance members approached and began to give artificial respiration

and assist with the massage.   Eventually he began to breath again and

a pulse returned, though he remained unconscious.     I left this youth

with the St. John's Ambulance people and returned to the above

mentioned gate.   (I do not know the identity of the youth but see

Appendix 'A' at the end of order).

As I returned I saw several Police Officers' helmets being thrown in
                                                                    PAGE    8
                                                                    S1264

an aggressive manner from Leppings Lane lower terraces over the fence

towards officers near the pitch.     There was a lot of chanting and

abuse being directed towards the Police by a large number of

supporters in Leppings Lane.     I saw that people were crushing

forward to get out of the gate but that the back of the lower

terrace was almost empty.     I shouted for people to move back into the

space and some did, but many kept pushing foward.    After several

people had been carried out of the gate I went in towards a barrier

down the middle of the terrace, believing there were still dead and

injured on that side.    As I entered several people became abusive and

some were hysterical.     I approached the barrier and saw there

appeared to be no injured on my side but I still saw many bodies

lying on the floor on the other side of the barrier.    Sane fans

shouted hysterically at me and I was fearful for my safety.    Police

Officers and several fans were carrying them out and trying to assist

them.    I saw there was a very aggressive attitude by fans on that side

of the barrier towards officers and abusive language was being

directed towards them.     I climbed out of the gate I had entered and

went round to another gate on the other side of the dividing

barrier.     There were many Police Officers there and as people were

passed out of the gate we all took turns at carrying them on to the

pitch.     It was obvious that many of those we did carry were already

dead.    I saw an ambulance next to this gate and several ambulancemen

assisting.    All the time Police helmets were being thrown towards us

from the terrace and I saw one hit a Police Officer.     I handled many

bodies, some alive and some dead and assisted in taking them onto

the pitch.     I do not know their identities.

I heard the Notts Forrest fans chanting though I could not hear what

they were saying and this added to the hysteria of the Liverpool

fans.    Many fans were pulling up boarding to use as stretchers and
                                                                   PAGE         9
                                                                   S1264

assisting to take dead and injured towards the Penistone Road side of

the pitch.     I assisted with this.    One youth who was drunk grabbed

hold of me on the pitch as I was doing this, his face was covered in

blood.   He kept telling me he wanted to see Kenny DALGLISH and he

would not let go of my clothing.       It took several minutes for me to

shake him off and continue assisting.       I began comforting some of the

injured and family and friends of the dead on the pitch.       I was then

ordered to join a line of Police Officers stood across the centre of

the pitch and prevent Liverpool fans, other than injured, passing.          I

saw a large number of Police Dog Handlers and dogs appear on the

pitch behind me.    The atmosphere in the ground was still very tense

and I was fearful for my safety.       Many Liverpool fans were incensed

at the Notts Forrest fans though a broadcast by Kenny Dalglish asking

people to co-operate over the ground tannoy system helped ease the

situation.   Liverpool fans began to calm down though several

approached Police Officers in a threatening manner and some of these

were obviously hysterical and many were shouting abuse at us.      Seme

fans were, however, extremely co-operative and assisted in the

removal of bodies and supporting upset fans.

After a while I was ordered, together with other officers in the

line, to leave the ground via the Penistone Road exit, which I did.

I then performed duty in Penistone Road, directing Notts Forest

supporters to coaches and vehicles, ensuring emergency vehicles had

unobstructed exits available from the ground.

After de-briefing at the ground, I returned to Ecclesfield Police

Station at 7.00 pm (1900) and went off duty from that location.

APPENDIX 'A'

The youth I refer to above (who I carried onto the pitch and assisted

in reviving) is unknown to myself.       However, in
                                                                           PAGE 10
                                                                           S1264




         During the event I was not issued with a personal radio and was

         unaware of the situation elsewhere outside and inside the ground

        whilst I was involved in the crush.


                                                              N KIRBY SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

           TIME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                     2905
Incident    102   260390 QP8064         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                          STATEMENT NUMBER    S1268

                                                                             Station

^fenam e           MOORE

Forenames          CHRISTOPHER

Age                21     100               Date of birth

Address            ECCLESFIELD PSTN


Occupation         POL PC602

Telephone

IC                 Height                   Build

Hair colour

Hair type

f t                                         Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses            Use                      Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                                                                         Signed


           I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police Force and am

           currently stationed at Ecclesfield.

           At 9.00am (0900) on Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), I started duty

           at Ecclesfield Police Station.   At 9.30am (0930), we were transported

           to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground, Hillsborough, Sheffield,

           where after the briefing we were deployed to turnstiles 1 to 8 of the

           North Stand.    I was one memeber of serial 17, under the direct

           supervision of PS 468 WHITLAM (and Inspector SYKES).

           For the first few hours of my duty on the stiles very few people

           entered the ground.    I noticed that the mounted police had to move a

           number of groups of people who were 'hanging around' rather than

           entering the ground straightaway.     Also the amount of alcoholic

           beverage taken frcm the fans or dumped on the Leppings Lane

           approached increased as the start of the match approached.
                                                                    PAGE    2
                                                                    S1268

At approximately 2.30pm (1430) that day, whilst carrying out my duty

on one of the turnstiles, the number of people entering the queue for

entry to the ground increased so greatly that it became impossible to

search everyone, instead we carried out random searches and searches

of any bags.

In the next few minutes the numbers of the queue swelled even

further until people were stood at least three abreast to enter the

turnstile.     At this point it became impossible to search people and

instead I concentrated my efforts in turning away people who were

undar the influence of intoxicants.     I noted at the time the number

of people who were drunk and trying to enter the football ground

increased as the start of the match approached.     The age of the

people who were affected by drink was not confined to the teenagers,

one man who I turned away informed me that he was 58 years old.

People who were turned away did not leave either, one youth who had

drunk a can of lager whilst in my turnstile queue and who I turned

away walked to the next queue and opened a second can to drink whilst

waiting.     The amount of drink taken from the fans was such that the

dustbin which we had for rubbish was overflowing.

A large number of youths with blue tickets (West Stand) tried to

enter the North Stand and seme even jumped the turnstiles having to

be evicted by the Police inside.     Only one or tvro people attempted

to enter my turnstile without tickets, although, I heard the

turnstile attendant shout to the Police on the inside of the ground

on a number of occasions.     At approximately this time I can remember

seeing a dozen or so youths climbing up the metal barrier (separating

the West Stand seating from the terraces) and onto the roofs of the

turnstiles.     Although I shouted at the youths, I know that any

attsmpts to stop them by myself were futile.     I then saw an Inspector

on the turnstile roof and my attention again returned to my turnstile.
                                                                  PAGE
                                                                  S1268

The number of people increased even more towards the start of the

football match until the numbers were so great that I was hemmed

against a wall unable to move.     A wcanan was pushed next to me and was

near to hysteria.   She begged me to help her but there was little I

could do other than move a few surrounding people away from a few

seconds.   I could see the Mounted Police near to the Leppings Lane

entrance gates and what I thought would be the back of the crowd.       I

trisd to attract the Mounted Police's attention to move some of the

crowd further back but could not manage to do so.     In the next few

seconds my left leg began to numb as it was crushed against the wall

by the ever increasing crowd.    At this point I decided to enter the

ground via the turnstile as I was in fear for my own safety and in an

attempt to contact a supervisory officer and inform him of the

situation outside the turnstile.

Once inside the ground I approached an Inspector and informed him of

the situation outside.   I was told that 'We know of what is happening

and are looking into the situation'. Upon checking myself and my

equipment I discovered that my Police staff were missing.     Before the

crush had started the staff was in my trouser leg pocket.     I reported

this loss to my Serial Sergeant PS 468 WHITLAM at the first available

tine.   For the next few minutes I was approached by a number of

people who informed me that they were disgusted by the situation

outside the ground and that we should do something irrmediately.

Whilst situated at the rear of the turnstiles my attention was

drawn to the gate at the side of the North Stand turnstiles which

had been opened and had a contionuous flow of people passing

through it.   (Previous to this I had heard banging caning from

this door and had seen two stewards holding it closed).

At this point PS WHITLAM received a message to attend on the

football pitch as a disturbance was taking place.     Upon entering
                                                                    PAGE    4
                                                                    S1268

the pitch I saw a large body of Policemen near to the West Stand

terrace and saw the gates in security fencing being opened.    As I

approached a number of bodies began to be passed through the

gates.   I assisted with the transportation of these bodies onto

the football pitch for a few minutes before myself entering the

West Stand (via number 2 Gate).

Inside the stand I approached the front section near to the crowd

control barriers.    Here I saw a large number of people lying on top

of each other on the floor.     I moved a number of people who were

stood around, back away from the bodies on the floor.     I then took

hold of one of the bodies and with the assistance of a member of the

crowd moved the body further up into the stand.    Here I checked the

pulse and breathing.    Whilst the person assisting loosened the clothing,

I rendered mouth to mouth resuscitation upon the body.    After a few

seconds the person began to breath again whereon we carried the body

away from the stand, via the tunnel to the area between the turnstiles

and the back wall of the stands.    Here after checking the pulse, I

placed the body in the recovery position.     I spoke to a nurse who was

dealing with a number of persons, before returning into the stand.

I again went to the front area of the stand near to the crowd

control barriers.     By this time people had been taken from the

pile of bodies and were lying on the terracing.     I approached a

number of bodies but could tell by looking at them that they were

beyond help.     My attention was then drawn to one person who was

rolling around on the floor holding his leg.     I approached this

person and spoke to him but got no reply.

Upon checking the man he appeared to be in deep shock, with an

injury to his right leg.     I placed the man's arm around my neck

and was irrmediately joined by a memeber of the public who took

his other arm.     Together we lifted the man and carried him out
                                                                PAGE      5
                                                                S1268

through the tunnel into the yard area.   Here I sat the man

against the wall, loosened his clothing and placed his head

between his knees.

I left this man in the care of the person who had assisted me to

carry him out and I again returned to the stand.   Here I assisted

with a human chain that had been formed to pass some of the

bodies still lying in the stand out through the gate of the crowd

control barrier and onto the pitch.   When all the bodies had been

moved I myself went onto the pitch where I joined the rest of

my serial.

After a short time the serial was again deployed into the stand

to move the remaining crowd away from the front of the

terracing.   Some memebers of the crowd were complaining of people

looting purses, clothing and loose change from the front area of the

stand where the people crushed had been lying I myself saw no

looting and tried to pacify the crowd as best I could for the next few

minutes was a time of talking to members of the crowd and keeping them

from the front of the stand. Then a photographer (who I now know to be

from Scenes of Crime dressed in plain clothes) entered the stand and

began talcing photographs.   The crowd thinking him to be a press

photographer was angered by this and started throwing objects and

moving towards the man in an aggressive nature.    The photographer was

moved from the stand by the Police and the uniformed Police in the

stand were also withdrawn. When all of the Police were out of the

stand seme members of the crowd thinking they may again be looting,

threw all the clothing and money laying around out onto the pitch.

Also at this point someone from the Police ranks shouted that coins

were being thrown at us and that we should keep our heads down.

After a time of stanidng around waiting, our serial was deployed back

to the Leppings Lane entrance where we formed a cordon between the
                                                                         pact :    6
                                                                         S1268

         'G' gate and the fence near the Don.   When all the crowds had left the

        stadium we were called back to the North Stand for a de-brief.




                                                          C MOORE PC602 SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT



•




                                                                                       291 1
Incident    102   260390 QP8064        DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                        STATEMENT NUMBER   S1274

                                                                           Station

^^name            THOMPSON

Forenames         ANDREW

Age               21    100               Date of birth

Address           S.YORKSHIRE POLICE
                  ECCLESFIELD PSTN

Occupation        POL PC346

Telephone

IC                Height                  Build

Hair colour

Hair type

^^s                                        Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses           Use                     Accent

Number of Pages

Dated              270489                                       A THOMPSON Signed


           I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police Force presently

           stationed at Ecclesfield Police Station.

           At 9.00 a.m. (0900) on Saturday, 15th April, 1989, (150489) I was on

           duty in full Police uniform and conveyed to Hillsborough Football

           Ground, Sheffield, to ccnmence duties at the Liverpool versus

           Nottingham Forest F.A Cup Semi-Final football match.   On arrival and

           following the match day Police briefing, I ccnmenced duties along with

           several other "F2' officers as per serial 17, supervised by Police

           Sergeant WHITLAM.   This serial's duties were to man the turnstiles at

           the Leppings Lane end of the ground, turnstiles numbers 1 to 8,

           searching Liverpool supporters and checking their entrance tickets

           before allowing them to enter the ground, to sit in the North Stand.

           At 11.15 a.m. (1115) that date whilst on duty at the above mentioned

           turnstiles, it was quite noticeable that large numbers of Liverpool


                                                                                     2912
                                                                  PAGE    2
                                                                  S1274

supporters were gathering in Leppings Lane.

At approximately 11.45 a.m. (1145) I was directed to join another

serials officers also in the Leppings Lane area, together with other

officers from my own serial.    I was now required to assist in the

searching of buses for alcohol and the searching of supporters getting

off the buses at the Leppings Lane end.    Although by now there were a

great number of supporters in the area, none of them were making any

attempt to form a queue and await their entrance into the ground,

instead they were intent to wander in the area.     Seme made their way

to nearby takeaways and shop®, some wandered away frcm the leppings

Lana area altogether and others were just hanging around in the area

sitting on the bridge walls and window sills of the terraced housing

in that street.   Numerous times as supporters were getting off their

respective buses I was asked where they could buy tickets to allow

them into the ground.     They were advised accordingly.

By 12.15 p.m. (1215) the majority of the turnstiles at the leppings

Lane entrances were open however, very few supporters were taking

advantage of this fact and those in the area were still quite happy

to be wandering around.     There was becoming quite a build-up of

supporters on the opposite side of the road across frcm the leppings

Lane entrance, apparently I was informed by other officers, that the

majority of these pjeople had no tickets and were waiting for somebody

offering to sell their own tickets.     A lot of supporters it could be

noticed at this time were carrying and drinking bottles and tins of

ale.   I as well as numerous other officers, advised supporters

regarding drinking ale before entering the ground and numerous

supporters were required to dispose of their intoxicants in black

bins provided by the Police.     They toere then advised accordingly.

Also at this time supporters were arriving in privately owned motor

vehicles and hired mini buses.     On several occasions I saw vehicles
                                                                 PAGE     3
                                                                 S1274

packed full of supporters and a lot of those travelling in privately

owned motor vehicles could be seen to be consuming alcohol.    Those

still arriving on buses were by now being directed to the turnstiles

and enter the ground to stop any further build-up of people wandering

the streets.   Some took notice however, the majority just crossed the

roads towards the turnstiles then walked away either towards

Hillsborough town centre or towards Penistone Road.    As the time drew

nearer to the kick off, more and more people were being required to

dispose of intoxicants they were drinking and more and more people

were gathering in the area who it was known had no tickets.    On two

occasions I had to advise large groups to disperse when they were

bidding for tickets being sold by other supporters, as not only were

they blocking the footpath, but people were spilling onto the road

and causing traffic to come to a standstill.    A lot of people advised

re consuming alcohol and disposing of it looked to be under age and

these supporters, more than the other older age groups, were abusive

towards myself and other officers when they were required to dispose

of their intoxicants.

At approximately 1.15 p.m. (1115) my duties were deviated back to

normal and to man the turnstiles mentioned earlier.    Seme of the

officers on my serial had arrested supporters for being in possession

of drugs which left one man to each turnstile.    There was by now a

steady influx of supporters entering the ground, mainly at this stage

the older end, forty years of age upwards.     Several attempts were made

by younger supporters to obtain entrance without tickets, these were

turned away following being advised.   Some supporters were caning to

the turnstiles in pairs and they had t o m one ticket into two pieces

trying to deceive me into believing they had one full ticket each.

These were also advised and turned away.     People of ages 16 years

upwards were walking up to the turnstiles smelling of intoxicants and
                                                                    PAGE
                                                                    S1274

also carrying such in plastic carrier bags. They were required to

empty the containers of ale in a black plastic bin.    However, they

could not be sent away as the number of supporters now at the

turnstiles were becoming vast in amount and as no uniformity in

respect of queues was being continued, the people who had consumed

alcohol could not be turned away and were allowed into the ground.

By this time, 2.30 p.m. (1430) people at the front of the turnstiles

were being squashed by those pushing from beind who were becoming

extremely rowdy.    I made numerous attempts to shield elderly, young

children and women from being squashed against the turnstile walls.

At this time it was impossible to search any supporters for tickets,

alcohol or drugs etc. and my attention was drawn solely to people

being squashed.     I could see that the same situation was occurring at

all the other turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end.     I also saw

younger supporters trying to climb over the walls of the turnstiles

to gain entry.     Supporters being crushed and those who were pushing

were now becoming very abusive towards myself and other officers,

threatening violence and requesting for the concertina doors at the

side of the turnstiles to be opened to alleviate the problem.

People were becoming injured with squashed ribs, grazing their faces

against turnstile walls and finding it hard to keep their feet.       The

longer time went on the situation was becoming worse.     I could see

the officers on horseback trying to force the crowds back but were

having no luck.      One of the horses was virtually being lifted off

the ground.   I was by now being squashed against the turnstile wall,

the black dustbin which had contained alcohol disposed of by

supporters had collapsed and the contents also squashed.     I made my

way to the turnstile which I was at and went through it and told a

senior officer at the other side of what was happening.     People on

the other side were now becoming very angry and were trying to force
                                                                         PAGE
                                                                         S1274

        the concertina doors open which led to the North Stand.    People who

        were still coming through the turnstiles were complaining of injuries

        to limbs and ribs . Finally, the gate to the North Stand was opened

        and a stampede of supporters ran through and into the North Stand.

        As the main problem had now been alleviated, the gates were closed

        again.    It was then announced that all personnel should attend the

        pitch area at the front of the Leppings Lane Stand.     I can't remember

        what time it was other than the game hadn't been long kicked off.




                                                              A THOMPSON SIGNED

          TAKEN
          PLACE

          TIME              DATE

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE

END OF REPORT
Incident      102    260390 OP8Q64        DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                           STATEMENT NUMBER   S581B

                                                                              Station

      lame           HORSFIELD

Forenames            KENNETH    EDWARD

Age                   37                      Date of birth

Address              S YORKS POLICE
                     ECCLESFIELD

Occupation           POL PCI171

Telephone

IC                   Height                   Build

Hair colour

Hair type

^ls                                           Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses              Use                      Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                270489                                                    Signed


             KENNETH EDWARD HORSFIELD

             POLICE CONSTABLE 1171

             'F2' ECCLESFIELD - SERIAL NO 18



             9.00 a.m. (0900) on duty at Ecclesfield

             9.45 a.m. (0945)in North Stand at Hillsboroughforbriefing,       nice

             sunny day for a football match.

             11.15 a.m. (1115) at rear of Leppings LandStand for    a short briefing

             with Inspector SYKES.

             11.40 a.m. (1140) outside ground on turnstiles to Leppings Lane Stand

             centre portion, took turnstile No. 16, turned out to be a bad move.

             12.04 p.m. (1204) my turnstile opened up, had a chat with the

             operator.     No supporters going to the ground and only a handful in the

             road.

                                                                                         2917
                                                                    PAGE    2
                                                                    S581B

1.00 p.m. (1300) very quiet, half a dozen people passed through my

turnstile, coaches dropped fans off right in front of the

turnstiles.     I didn't count the coaches, maybe six, perhaps a dozen,

the fans did not enter the ground.     I didn't see one go to the

turnstiles, they all walked off along Leppings Lane in both

dir actions.    I just stood around with Jeff ALEXANDER and the others,



By 2.00 p.m. (1400) there were a few more people about, some going

through the turnstiles into the ground, no problems, no queues.

2.15 pm. (1415) now an endless stream of people, small orderly queues

forming at the turnstiles.

A man, late 50's, early 60's, wearing a Notts Forrest Cap and Scarf

approaches the area outside the turnstile, he appeared to be a bit

slow.    He was carrying a plastic carrier bag and a tan coloured ladies

purse.     I spoke to him and told him that he was at the wrong end of

the ground, he seemed a bit confused.     I asked him for his ticket so

I could direct him.    He said he hadn't got one.   He pointed to his

purse and said , "I've got ten pounds, do you know where I can buy

one".     I directed him to the Penistone Road End but advised him to go

hone.

By now it was about 2.30p.m. (1430), it was very busy, a lot of peqple

about.     I spoke to several youths who were hanging about in small

groups and told than to go into the ground, they didn't, they hadn't

got tickets.     I told than to go away, I was wasting my breath.   I

became aware of ever growing groups of people, youths, late teens

early twenties, stood about, a lot sat on walls near the bridge.

Suddenly Leppings Lane is full of people, just a mass moving towards

us.     I've worked dozens of matches at Hillsborough, a few of the

other semi's, but I've never seen anything like that.     Next thing,

the queues had disappeared, there was just a mass of people in the
                                                                     PAGE          3
                                                                     S581B

enclosure, a lot had got the wrong area.     People with tickets for the

North Stand and standing tickets in our enclosure, getting bad now.

People pushing to get in and out of the enclosure.

Found myself right in the c o m e r next to the large metal fence.        I

could see through a small gap of about 4" next to the wall into the

standing terraces queues, people were getting squashed badly.        It

must have been 2.45 p.m. (1445) by now, but I'm not sure.    Young lads,

teenagers, had climbed on top of the barrier to escape the crush, seme

came into our enclosure, others climbed onto the brick wall over the

top of the turnstiles into the ground.     I've no idea how many climbed

over into the ground, but a lot did so.

The horses outside were totally ineffective, it looked like they were

being pushed by the crowd instead of the other way round.     I got seme

young lads, early teens, off the barrier, they had tickets for the

terraces, I pushed than to the front and through turnstiles No 16

into the ground to get than out of the crush.     The man on the

turnstile appeared not to be checking tickets, he had his foot on the

pedal and the turnstile was just going round.     It seemed that if

someone had a ticket they were in.   I saw no one refused entry.

I was trapped in the comer, couldn't move easily, people, grown men

now climbing over the barrier from the crush at the other side,       Not

much better this side, heard people crying out and shouting for help,

people standing on my head and shoulders as they climbed over into

our enclosure.   I suddenly became worried and concerned for my own

safety.   I managed to grab Jeff and, together, we pushed along the

barrier to the front of the enclosure,     Together we tried to close

the gates at the front, no chance.   A mounted Officer saw us

and moved his horse over in front of the gates.     The right hand gate

was pushed shut and after a struggle the bolt put into the floor.             We

triad to close the other side, got thumped by a fan for my trouble,
                                                                      PAGE     4
                                                                      S581B

couldn't manage to close the gate.

Leppings Lane seemed full of people as far as I could see, fans now

climbing over the gate we had shut.       Seme fans smelled strongly of

beer, one or two, not many, still drinking from cans, not soft

drinks, beer and lager.     Saw one drinking from a brown bottle, it

looked like Pils lager, couldn't stop than.       I couldn't get than.     I

couldn't see any other Police Officers except the mounted lads who

were totally swamped with people.       I know the others were there, I

just couldn't see them. The crowd just kept coining, pushing and

shoving forwards.     The turnstiles couldn't cope.     I didn't knew what

to do, we couldn't stop them caning.       I thought to myself ('someone is

going to get hurt here').

I then saw Gate 'A'     to the North Stand open, people poured

through.    After a couple of minutes the crush eased but there were

still hundreds of people about.       I could see seme of the other

officers near the turnstiles.     The plastic dustbin that I had been

putting cans in was still in the comer, but it was squashed flat,

the cans that had been in it were strewn all over.        Someone nearby

shouted, "Get inside they're on the pitch".      I went through one of

the turnstiles, I don't know which one, I followed seme other lads.

Once inside I saw a large number of officers running towards the

South Stand End behind the Leppings Lane Stand.        There were forty or

fifty officers.     I followed into the South Stand.     I saw people on

the edge of the pitch and the last couple of players leaving.         There

were quite a few officers on the edge of the pitch near to the goal,

fans were climbing over the perimeter fence onto the edge of the

pitch area.     I got down to the edge of the field but I couldn't see

or tell what was happening.     Police Sergeant John MORGAN ran passed

me back towards the South Stand.      He shouted, "Come on round the

back".     I followed, as did Jeff.   We ran back round to the rear of
                                                                     PAGE
                                                                     S581B

the Leppings Lane Stand and into the centre tunnel which was just

about empty.    There were no injured people in the tunnel.   John

MORGAN, myself and Jeff got to the end of the tunnel.     There were

three or four other officers with us but I don't know who they were.

I started grabbing hold of people pulling than back and shouting at

them to get back and go out.     People in the stand above me were

hysterical, shouting and pointing to the front of the terraces.        I

couldn't understand than, it was like a foreign language, but I

realised that something was very wrong.     I pushed forwards pulling

people back and shouting for them to leave to go back as I did.        John

MORGAN was near me and was doing the same.     I got to the first

barrier, I found a man, in his mid-twenties, slumped over the

barrier.    He was on the bottom side near the pitch, I pulled him up.

He had blood coining from his mouth, quite a bit, he was having

difficulty breathing.    He was pale, crying, asking for help and

saying, "Get me out".     I pushed him under the barrier and as I did

two fans came from the back got hold of him and dragged him off

towards the tunnel.

I turned to go towards the front and went under the barrier.        I was

still pulling people back.     I was kicked two or three times on the

legs, it was not by accident.    One man spat in my face from just a

couple of feet away.     I thought ('what's wrong with these people').

Suddenly I lost my footing on the steps and fell, my helmet came

off.   I was terrifed for a few seconds.     I got to my feet faster

than I've ever done before, someone pulled me up as well, I don't

know who.   I was confronted by a man screaming at me, I can't

remember what, but I got the gist.     I remember one sentence, "People

are dying down there, do something".    He grabbed me, my tie came off,

my jacket was pulled open.     I pushed passed him and pushed him

towards the tunnel.     I still couldn't see the front of the terraces,
                                                                    PAGE
                                                                    S581B

people were still climbing the perimeter fence.

I saw three or four Police Officers pulling at the fence from the

pitch side, trying to pull the wire mesh from the frame.       I looked

down, there were two fans knelt, one was giving mouth to mouth and

the other was doing heart massage on what I think was a young lad.

He looked very dead to me, ashen.     I bent to help, his lips were

blue, I felt sick.     I shouted at them to move him back, give him

air.     People around me had started to move back a little.   There was

an area towards the tunnel starting to clear.     I again turned to the

front, oh hell, bodies under the wall, ten, fifteen, I pushed

forwards, to my right, bodies almost to the top of the wall, ten feet

back from the wall.     The ones on top were dead, ashen, blue lips eyes

open, all young.     One at my feet wearing a red scarf, I grabbed him,

pulled, dragged, carried him out up the tunnel to the rear of the

stand.    There was noise, shouting, confusion everywhere.     I put him

down, he didn't seem dead.     I got on my knees and attempted to give

him mouth to mouth.     I don't know how long for, not long, someone

running passed kicked me on the right side of my stomach, I was

winded for a bit.     I looked up, people all around, people laid

everywhere, some dead, many injured.     I realised he was too far gone,

I couldn't help him, thought ('Sorry pal you're dead').

I went back down the tunnel and got to the Terraces.     Someone in the

stand above spat at me, it landed on my right shoulder, someone threw

a drink cup, I was splashed with what I think was cold tea.        I helped

to carry another to the back up the tunnel, went back, another one,

then another, both dead and injured.     I thought ('this is not

happening, it's not real').     I felt numb, brain not working at all,

got to the bottom of the tunnel again.     A big guy in black top and

with a moustache similar to mine approached me, he was crying, he put

his arms round me and said, "Its's not your fault kid," he had a real
                                                                    PAGE
                                                                    S581B

Scouser accent.

I felt exchausted, I went to the back of the stand again, I looked

back down the tunnel, the playing area was a mass of people.       I can't

raoanber what happened then.     I wanted to go heme, run away, my legs

were like jelly.    I couldn't stop shaking.     I went out of the ground

to the fence next to the river and lit a cigarette.       I can't remember

what happened then, I joined a line of Police Officers outside the

gats to the rear of the Leppings Lane Stand.       The injured were being

put into ambulances.    A dozen bodies were laid on the road next to

the fence and behind our line.     How did they get there?    Some fans

were in the toilets in the Leppings Lane Stand, their arms were

waving out of the windows and they were making two fingered

signs directed at us, the line of Police Officers, they were shouting

at us, couldn't tell what, but I don't think it was praise.

Inspector SYKES asked who had dealt with a bocfy.      I was given a Form

Gen 18.    I looked round, a lad with a red scarf on was laid behind

me.   He looked like the lad I had removed.      I can't remember what he

looked like.    Dr ASHTON examined him then wrote on the Gen 18, 4.27

p.m. (1627) and handed it back to me.    That couldn't be the right

time, where had the last hour and twenty minutes gone.       I checked my

watch, the time was right.     I was then transported to the gynasium

along with my body.    Twelve dead out on the road, how many more.    Got

to the gym, lines of bodies.     How many, mine's No. 75 and more to come

from Leppings Lane.    I looked around at my friends and colleagues in

the gym.   They looked like I felt, sick.      Nobody said a great deal

that evening.    Perhaps the worst time, sat in the gym all night,

waiting for a relative to identify your body.      No one came for mine.

No. 75 is believed to be D.G. GODWIN.     He had a rail card in his

pocket. Officially unidentified.

Got to go hone at 7.00 a.m. (0700) Sunday morning.
                                                                    PAGE     8
                                                                    S581B




                                         KENNETH E HORSFIELD PC1171 SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

           TIME:        DATE:   270489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                 2924
Incident    102   260390 QP8064          DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                             STATEMENT NUMBER   S708A

                                                                                Station

^^name             MARSH

Forenames          KEITH   RAYMOND

Age                32                        Date of birth

Address            S. YORKS. POLICE, ECCLESFIELD PSTN


Occupation        POL PC159

Telephone

IC                Height                     Build

Hair colour

Hair type

%s                                           Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses           Use                        Accent

Number of Pages 6

Dated             270489                                             K R MARSH Signed


           'B' GROUP ECCLESFIELD.     LIVERPOOL V NOTTS FOREST

           SERIAL 18

           9 a.m. (0900)             Start Ecclesfield.

                                     Conveyed to Hillsborough by P.S.V.

           9.45 a.m. (0945)          Stand for briefing.

           10.50 a.m.(1050)          Walked to Leppings Lane end, remained

                                     inside with other Police Officers.

                                     Briefed by Police Sergeant MDRGAN

                                     (Serial Sergeant).

           11.15 a.m.(1115)          Brief by Inspector SYKES at rear of

                                     West Stand (Leppings Lane Stand).

           11.40 a.m.(1140)          Took up position at side of turnstiles

                                     with other officers.

           11.50 a.m.(1150)          In company with Police Constable

                                                                                          2925
                                              PAGE
                                              S708A

SCHOLEY, deputed to coach reception.

 (11.50 a.m. - 12.50 p.m.) (1150-1250)

Approximately 10-12 coaches attended

de-bused - no alcohol found by me.

Majority of fans left vicinity remainder

stayed in vicinity of bridge Leppings Lane.

All well behaved.     Numerous attempts to

move crowd stood on bridge away, proved

negative.     Area reasonably quiet for

occasion.     4 horse officers on patrol near

turnstiles.     Numerous fans (Liverpool), asked

directions to Fox public house.        Ascertained

landlord entered advertisement in Liverpool

paper.      We ran out of beer last year, I've

got more this year.

Onwards large numbers of Liverpool fans

carrying and drinking alcohol.      All advised

regarding regulations of alcohol at sporting

events.     Still fairly quiet.   No trouble.

Large group congregating on bridge Leppings

Lane.     Attempts to move them on proved

negative, simply kept circulating.

More people seen carrying and drinking

alcohol, all advised - little response.

Occasionally supporters threw alcohol away.

All in good spirit.     No problems.    One or

two coaches arrived, one member of Liverpool

Board etc.    Escorted to entrance.

A number of groups congregating around stop.

Going to and fro.     Most suspected of having
                                                                    PAGE    3
                                                                    S708A

                       no tickets, refused to enter ground.

                       Large groups on bridge area.

                       Orderly queues for turnstiles.

                       Liaised with P.S. MORGAN and Inspector SYKES.

2.30 p.m. (1430)       Number of fans increasing, still

                       orderly queues.

                       Large numbers congregated outside shop and on

                       bridge area.

                       Still with P.C. SCHOLEY in area of coach

                       reception.     Large number carrying and drinking

                       alcohol.     (Majority cans, odd large bottle).

                       All in good spirit.    No disorder.

                       Outbreak of public disorder near to bridge,

                       Leppings Lane.    Transit dealt with situation.

                       Number of fans entering area building up.

                       Horse officers positioned before iron gates to

                       turnstiles.

                       C.I.D. officers working area for possible

                       pickpockets.

                       Still attempting to move groups from bridge area,

                       an almost impossible task.    Horse officers used

                       to break group and direct towards turnstiles.

2.45 p.m. (1445)       Leppings Lane from Niagara like a river of

                       people approaching.    Turnstiles extremely busy.

                       Horse officers assisting in fan direction

                       towards turnstiles.    Attempts to slow flow of

                       fans towards turnstiles futile.       Supporters

                       impatient.     Ticket check supporters directed

                       to appropriate turnstiles.

Moved nearer to iron gates, alongside horse officers.    More and more
                                                                      PAGE
                                                                      S708A

people pushing refusing to wait in an orderly manner.        Majority

impatient and refused to take advice and queue in an orderly manner

away from turnstiles.

leppings Lane full of supporters, area overflowing in such a short

space of time.     Attempts to stem pressure on turnstiles impossible.

Majority's only concern is to ask directions to gate, applicable to

their tickets.     Reasoned with large groups, impossible, totally

impervious to surroundings.     Trapped in comer near bridge.

Superintendent MARSHALL on bridge directing officers on horseback.

Fans pushing crowd inpenetrable and motionless.      Attempted to push my

way through the crowds, met up with Police Constable PRATT.

Eventually got to front.     Road flowing with people.   Land Rover

attended, driver used address system on vehicle.      Requests made to

stop pushing.     People still refusing to listen.   I could see Police

Officers near turnstiles lifting young people from the crowd and

passing them onto the wall.     The crowd was motionless.    Horse

officers being pushed onto iron gates.     Gates now shut to step flow

of people.     Superintendent MARSHALL shouting from wall.    Not able to

hear, extremely noisy.

More requests from driver of Land Rover for orderly queue.        Little if

any response.     Bridge area was almost clear of people, majority

pushing towards gates.     Pleaded with people to stand back and step

queuing.     People standing getting irate, majority resent queueing and

frightened to miss start.     Crowd near turnstiles motionless.      Thought

I heard someone say the match had been delayed to allow entry to the

ground.    Still people fighting to get into turnstile queue, just a

total mass of people.     Officers at front of turnstiles still pulling

people from crowds.     Horses being pushed about unable to work, due to

area around them, densely packed.     One horse was physically being

lifted from the floor with the sheer volume of people pushing forward.
                                                                     PAGE
                                                                     S708A

Turned away, still pleading with people to stand back.      People

demanding that I do something (agitated, aggressive).

Unable to prevent people pushing.     The iron gates were opened, the

crowd surge forward, moment of freedom.

At that point I feared that someone would be hurt if the stem of

people pushing was not prevented.     The atmosphere was electrifying,

there were still people pushing in a chain attempt to gain entry.

People were shouting and the noise was overpowering.     All of a

sudden the crowd surged forward and I was taken along towards the

turnstiles.     Like a pack of lenmings.   At that point the pressure

seemed to have been released and people seemed to be orderly, with

space all around us, and for a couple of minutes I wandered around in

freedom.    It just seemed as if someone had plucked half the crowd

away into the sky.

I then recall hearing someone shout get inside they're asking for

help on the pitch.    My first reaction was, they're fighting.

So obviously we all ran into the ground via the large metal gate and

round to the right hand side.

That side of the terraces was empty and there were numerous people

shouting.     I then saw a large number of people including Police

Officers on the pitch and the football players were walking off

towards the tunnel.     I made my way to the perimeter fence near to the

goal posts, along with other Police Officers.     There were people

being passed from the enclosure behind the goal area.

I fought to get through and saw a small boy being passed towards the

gate.   I grabbed hold of the boy and dragged him forward.    It was

absolute bedlam, people were packed like sardines, motionless.

People were being passed into the stand.      I carried a young boy, from

the crowd and was assisted by Police Constable JENKINSON.     The young

boy, who I now know to be Lee NICQL, was unconcious.      I checked for a
                                                                             PAGE
                                                                             S708A

         pulse, but was unable to find one.     Consequently, I began

         resuscitation                                                        I

                                       did mouth to mouth resuscitation,

                                 Again I applied the same procedure along with

         chest massage.   At that point I was joined by a man who said he was a

         doctor.   We both repeated the procedure, still no response.      I then

         decided if the boy did not get oxygen or medical treatment he would

         die.   I carried him a short distance to a stretcher and then wheeled

         him to an ambulance at the entrance.

         He was placed inside and en route to the Northern General Hospital, I

         repeated the resuscitation and eventually we got a response.

         Eventually the young boy, NICOL was taken away.    I then assisted the

         hospital staff with other bodies conveyed to the Northern General

         Hospital.

         5.30 p.m. (1730) returned to Hillsborough.

         Involved in procedure regarding the dead.

         11.30 p.m.(2330) off duty.



         K P Marsh 159


                                                               K R MARSH SIGNED

          TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:             DATE:     270489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT
Incident    102     260390 OP8Q64         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                           STATEMENT NUMBER   S2489

                                                                              Station

Surname              HEMSWORTH

Forenames

Age                                           Date of birth

Address


Occupation           POL PC782

Telephone

 IC                   Height                  Build

 Hair colour

^^r     type

 Eyes                                         Complexion

 Facial hair

 Glasses             Use                      Accent

 Number of Pages

 Dated               160589                                     HEMSWORTH PC782 Signed



           APPROX.

           09.00am (0900)           Travelled to Hillsborough frcm Ecclesfield

                                    Police station.

           10.00am (1000)           Briefing and Parade in North Stand area

                                    of the ground.

           10.30am (1030)           Meal in North Stand area.

            11.05am (1105)          Took up position on turnstiles at leppings

                                    Lane end of the ground, where we were briefed

                                    by Insp SYKES with regard to our specific

                                    duties covering turnstile 9-16.

                                    Serial No 18 Sergeant John MORGAN.

               11.20am (1120)       All very quiet outside the West Stand, not

                                    many people about apart from Police Officers,

                                    Stewards and Club Officials.

                                                                                         2931
                                                                  PAGE     2
                                                                  S2489

    11.45am (1145)   Still quiet outside West Stand area.

^   12.15pn (1215)   Turnstiles were opened at Leppings Lane. I took

                     up my duties on turnstile No 11, with PC513

                     FRANCIS assuming duties on the adjacent turnstile,

                     that being No 12.   The turnstiles gave access to

                     the West Stand seated area.   Our specific duties

                     were search fans and check tickets for appropriate

                     colour coding for ground section (RED=WEST STAND

                     SEATS).

    12.30pn (1230)   The first coaches began to arrive at this end of

                     the ground.   However, departing supports made

                     their way away from the ground towards Catchbar

                     Lane and Penistone Road.

    1.15pn (1315)    A steady increase in activity on the turnstiles,

                     mainly father and son fans, family groups.    These

                     people were obviously here to enjoy what should

                     have been an afternoon of festivity; jokes were

                     shared between myself and these fans and they had

                     no objections to drinking their small bottles of

                     pop before entering the ground.   Any small queues

                     which build up at this time were orderly, with

                     people waiting patiently for admittance to the

                     ground, they were in no hurry they had arrived in

                     plenty of time to get a good view from the front

                     of the stands.

    2 .OOpn (1400)   An increase in fans arriving at the leppings Lane,

                     yet still no significant numbers.   I was beginning

                     to think that I was policing the wrong game, since

                     there seemed to be very few fans around at all.       I

                     remembered the days when my dad would take me to


                                                                               2932
                                                PAGE    3
                                                S2489

cup matches at Elland Road and Bramall Lane and we

would arrive at least one hour before the game was

scheduled to kick off; even at this time there

would be large queues waiting to go in.

Out of nowhere they came.    An ocean of red.

Thousands of 'fans' arrive at our turnstiles.

Pressure was beginning to build.     Inpossible now

it was to search fans.    Large quantities of

alcohol were confiscated not by searching, since

this was not necessary.     Boisterous youths were

waving than about.   Now there was no organised

queuing.   The only colleague I could see was PC513

FRANCIS on the adjacent turnstile and a WPC on my

other side.

At this point I began to fear for the safety of

people, myself and colleagues included.     On six

occasions I was completely lifted off of the floor

and pinned against the turnstile walls.     I tried

to communicate and restore some order with the

public, but my cries were drowned out by the

uncivilised contingent before me.     Youths of 18-25

years pushing and jostling.     Now not only were the

tickets waved by them red; they were brown and

blue as well.

Queues by the minute are thickening.     A bottle

neck was being created as still more fans arrived

pushing and chanting.

One could not now communicate with these people as

they continued to push, all the time hurling abuse

and criticising the 'set up' and crowd control.
                                                                 PAGE    4
                                                                 S2489

                  What was now occurring could only be described as

                  absolute chaos.   Between myself and the WPC on

                  turnstile 10 was a flimsy grey barrier.    Minute by

                  minute increased pressure was evident on this.

                  People were junping over and helping people over

                  in order to try and jump queues.    Eventually it

                  just collapsed under the strain and people fell to

                  the floor.   No one attempted to help than up, I

                  was 10 yds away and could not assist.

                  These so called fans would not even help their

                  own.   The reason not being inhumanity the reason

                  being that they were so drunk, they weren't aware

                  of what was going on around than.

2.55pn (1455)     Mounted Police presence could not make their way

                  through the swarm.    Under normal circumstances

                  order could have been restored, since policing was

                  more than adequate.    However, on this occasion it

                  was hopeless; the hooligan element amongst the

                  supporters would not co-operate.    A public address

                  system message is passed over the air, clearly

                  heard by myself. The fans were 'asked' to stop

                  pushing as people at the front of queues were

                  being crushed. Seme still continued to push

                  regardless of the requests.

 3.00 pn (1500)   Fans had now moved into the ground, it almost

                  seemed impossible from the numbers seen before

                  my   five minutes previously.   Fans now are

                  scaling the wall and fences, ignoring pleas

                  from a mounted Merseyside officer not to.

3.05pn (1505)     I move away from the turnstile and rejoin my



                                                                             2934
                                            PAGE       5
                                            S2489

serial and serial Sergeant at the blue metal gates

in front of the walkway to the turnstiles. It is

now relatively quiet on the turnstiles.   I was

stood inmediately next to my sergeant and heard

via his personal radio that there is disorder on

the playing surface inside the ground and that

Police and stewards are to attend this area.      We

made our way towards the South stand from the rear

of Leppings Lane, past the Police ground control

box and entered the playing surface from the West

side of the South stand.    I arrived on the surface

to see players leaving the field, I had no idea of

the severity of this   incident, neither I think

had anyone in the ground.

we walked up to the blue fence of the leppings

Lane end and saw fans trying scale it and get onto

the pitch.   At first it was thought that they just

wanted to cause disorder with rival supporters, what

was not evident at this stage was the magnitude of the

disaster occurring only feet away from us at the other

side of the blue fence.

I ran with members of my Serial back to the rear

of the Leppings Lane end of the ground. I entered

the terraces and begged fans to leave via the rear

tunnel so as we could help the people at the

front.   They would not co operate and answered me

with comments like 'FUCK OFF' and 'WE'VE PAID TO

WATCH A FUCKING MATCH.'

I made my way to the front of the terrace and it

was only then did I realise the severity of the
                                                 PAGE    6
                                                 S2489

incident.     Bodies were piled up in the gutter area

beneath the bottom step of the terrace.     Myself

and another officer had to physically throw people

out of the way to get to them.     The first one we

got to was a woman in her mid twenties.     She was

blue and had barely had any clothes on.     She had

obviously unfastened clothing in the crush before

collapsing.     She was dead.   We carried her to the

rear of the west Stand where a St Johns attendant

took charge.     We rushed back to the front of the

stand and brought out another casualty, this time

a slightly older woman than the first. We carried

her to the rear of the west Stand where another

St Johns attendant took over.      We returned to

carry out another three or four people not knowing

whether they were dead or alive.      Not much

attention was paid to the removal of these

people I did not have time to observe, I just had

to get back to relieve more people frcm the

horrific macabre scenes on the terraces.

It seemed strange that the pitch was only a few

yards away and that why could they not be carried

to there. The reason being that it was difficult

to get people up and over the fences.      In the

meantime Police Officers and other emergency

 services began to try and rip down sections of the

 fence, in an attempt to release the trapped

 fans.   Once there was a way through onto the pitch

 I climbed out onto the cinder perimeter track and

 continued to pull people free frcm the nightmare
                                                                   PAGE    7
                                                                   S2489

                     they were experiencing.

                     For some it was far too late.   Everything paled

                      into insignificance for me, all I was concerned

                     over was assisting these poor people, everything

                     else was just blotted out.

                      I can remember very little detail of the remainder

                     of the afternoon.   I carried injured and deceased

                     on advertising boards, ripped down by 'concerned'

                     fans across the playing surface and to the

                     gymnasium.   On each occasion I returned to the

                     scene; never once staying with a particular

                     victim, there always seemed to be soneone on hand

                     to assist.   The hours frcm 3.05pm (1505) passed

                     extremely quickly and when it was apparent that

                     the ground had been emptied, due to announcements

                     that the match had been abandoned, I just

                     proceeded to stand and stare in disbelief thinking

                     of the events which had just occurred on what

                     should have been a great day for British football.

6.00pm (1800)        Assembled in the North stand for debriefing.

6.45pm (1845)        Claywheels Lane - meal and transported back to

                     Sub Division.

NB   The most upsetting and indeed unbelievable thing about the events

of that afternoon and indeed the thing that chums over in my head

time andtime    again since that fateful day was the lack of co­

operation and concern for injured and deceased frcm their own fellow

'supporters'.

Why should emergency services such as ourselves have to struggle

through a crowd to assist injured and dying and to carry victims back

through these crowds to torrents of abuse and insults.    All the time
                                                                       PAGE    8
                                                                       S2489

         being spat upon, punched, kicked and generally obstructed in our

         actions.




                                                    D HEMSWORTH PC782 SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

           TIME:           DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                   2938
Incident    102   260390 OP8Q64            DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                               STATEMENT NUMBER    S1270

                                                                                  Station
Surname               PURDY

Forenames             ROBERT

Age                   21   100                 Date of birth

Address               HQ DIVISION


Occupation            POL INS

Telephone

IC                Height                       Build

Hair colour

  ir type

« es                                          Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses           Use                         Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                                                                              Signed


           I attended at the ground at 9.20 a.m. - 9.30 a.m.(0920 - 0930) booked

           in and received a radio.       I was under the supervision of Chief

           Inspector Creaser and Superintendent Greenwood.

           At the briefing, I saw all four Serials and Inspector Sykes, they were

           all present.

           One change in 'E' Division, Police Constable Duffy.

           I saw Sergeant Payne brief his men.         He did it well, very

           professional.       It was agreed all would meet at the rear of West

           Stand, when Inspector Sykes would brief the Serials.         He had worked

           that location in the past and it seemed totally applicable he should

           complete it.

           I was aware after that about safety of the officers under my

           command.    I saw Sergeant Payne and told him to ensure they were in

           pairs for the turnstile and to keep soneone with him.
                                                                     PAGE    2
                                                                     S1270

Detactive Constable Cerrone was with me.

I saw Sergeant Whitlam.     He had his Serial well organised, he was

familiar with his area of responsibility.

Sergeant Proctor was on the road with Inspector Sykes, who was in

overall conmand of the road area.     As such, I decided to supervise

all other Serials on the turnstiles.     I had ascertained there were

problems of relief.   Serial 16 relieved Serial 13, as I thought it

pertinent to establish their full duties.     I saw Inspector Bullas in

the company of Sergeant Payne.     We all discussed strategy for Phase

2.   It was a concern of mine that we had full cover on half time in

that West Stand.   This was agreed by Inspector Bullas.

At Leppings Lane I formed a liaison with the horsemen, they were

clearing the non ticket holders.     There seemed to be hundreds, young

and old mixed, some drunk.

The CID were there outside the gates in the 'pull-in', everyone

seemed to gather there.     We urged people to go into the ground, they

seemed reluctant and abusive.    You kept seeing the same faces again

and again, seme with cans of beer, some with plastic bottles.

I kept going round all my men.     I also kept seeing the Sergeants and

liaising with the CID.

The fans were very mixed.     I talked with a London woman and her

friend, they were the Liverpool Club London Section.      They were nice

but others were not, and it was apparent by the general attitude of

some of the Liverpool supporters that they resented the police

presence.

I don't know what time it was but we knew that the trains had arrived

just after 2.00 p.m. (1400) The CID were outside the shop.     There were

ticket touts I think there.     Someone said the horses would clear the

pavements as they arrived.     I warned the CID.

They arrived but it didn't seem as hectic as I thought.      The
                                                                     PAGE
                                                                     S1270

turnstiles seemed to fill. I seemed to do nothing at that stage but

direct people and inspect tickets.

You could smell the beer in the atmosphere.

At seme stage I went to turnstile A.G.     I had kept checking the

turnstile at regular intervals.

Soon after that the crowds were there.     All the large perimeter gates

were open, the funnel was filling, there were others on the river

side.   I knew they hadn't tickets.   I had that area swept by the

horses to get them back out to the road.     I knelt down on the side

bar of the funnel and saw all the PC's on the gate, they were

struggling but coping.   I checked them.    I saw Police Constable 963

Evans, he was red in the face, he seemed to be so busy.     The others

seemed to be just pressed against the wall.

I think then I saw Chief Inspector Creaser.     I mentioned my concern

for the safety of the police officers on the gate.

It was decided to leave the officers in position and to continue to

monitor the situation which I did.

The horses were assisting us then.    I directed them to assist the

turnstiles.   It was most difficult for them due to the construction

and siting of the bar which acts to funnel them into the turnstiles.

They had to start at the back.    They tried to get them into queues,

but it was a problem.

I just can't remember what happened next.

The next thing was I looked over again.     I stood at the co me r of the

wall on the bar, and then climbed up there to achieve a vantage

point - I saw the two horses.    There was the 'E' Division PC frcm

Hackenthorpe at the far side, Police Constable Evans in the middle

and Police Constable Duffy nearest.    I saw the horses go towards the

gate.   Police Constable Duffy stumbled but quickly regained his

position.
                                                                     PAGE
                                                                     S1270

I think I saw Inspector Sykes again, maybe Chief Inspector Creaser,

I'm not sure.     A decision was made to take the officers out of that

area.     I stood on the rail.    I told the remaining officers to get

out.     They couldn't go up the funnel.    Police Constable Duffy had

triad but had been forced back by the crowd.

I think there was just Police Constable Evans and the "El' PC.         I

signalled to him and he went, I think through the turnstile.         I had

been shouting to them, the public, 'get back, get back'. Police

Constable Evans was left, he couldn't get off the wall, he was

stuck.     People were just pressing and pushing.    I'm not sure now of

the order of events.

I could see people being squashed up at the turnstile walls, the

horses had moved back.     I think Police Constable Evans was still

there, I shouted at him.     He just couldn't move, and I was concerned

for his safety.

There was a strong smell of alcohol in the air.       People were throwing

things at the horses, beer cans and such.      At some point I saw

Detective Superintendent McKay.      He was behind me near the river

barrier.     I do not imagine that he could see the crowd to the same

extent as myself due to the vantage point I held.

At some stage I saw that Police Constable Evans got through the

turnstile.    They were crushed up against the wall, the turnstile,

the far wall, the barrier.       I saw people in pain, suffering.

I saw Detective Superintendent McKay.       He looked at me and said

'They'll have to open the gates or something will happen.'

I think I just got back on the rail, but this may be out of

sequence.    There was a child passed from well in the middle of the

crowd to me on the rail.     He was limp.    I thought at first he was

dead.    He was limp in my hands.     I have since established that the

child was passed to safety and is now recovered.
                                                                     PAGE
                                                                     S1270

I think a TV camera was there or had been, a man with curly hair,

sports coat, about 35-45, perhaps ITV, BBC.

There was another child being either crushed or passed out.        We tried

to get to him.     I think Detective Constable Cerrone tried but a man

was pulling him back saying 'He's going in.'

The pressure was so great then that people were crying, screaming.

They could not move.      They were pressed up around the bar, the wall

and the stiles.

That child I thought then had been squashed or suffocated in the

crush.     I got down.

I saw, either before or after, Superintendent Marshall on the wall

outside the perimeter gate.      He had taken a vantage point to get an

overall perception of the situation.

I went to him, signalled him.      All the side was full now.   I started

off.     I shouted Detective Constable Cerrone.   If I had any personal

fear of injury this was the only time.

The crowd appeared uncontrollable and their behaviour was

deteriorating.     I was pushed, jostled, punched.   Detective Constable

Cerrone followed me, I never lost sight of him.      When I got there, I

think I had re-swept the side with horses, and the side gates were

shut.    I remember a big fat youth in my way.    I shouted at him to

move.    I saw Superintendent Marshall.    I said 'We're going to have to

do something, someone is going to die.'

We mentioned the gates.      He stopped, obviously assessing the

situation.    He said 'Open the gates'.

The situation was life or death for the public trapped in there.

I returned to the barrier on the side of the turnstile.

I organised the horses to block off the gates at the perimeter.        It

seemed that we could deal with the numbers in there if we contained

the people outside.      When that was secure by all the horses, now
                                                                     PAGE
                                                                     SX270

five perhaps, and uniform PC's, I caused the gate to be opened down

the side.     I think Detective Constable Cerrone was there and Police

Constable Evans.

It was the only way to save life in there at that time.

A throng moved in, I was pushed to the left.      Then I ordered the gate

closed, although they may have already been closed.

I looked, or soneone did, to see if it was clear outside.        It was and

I want out.    The horses were there.

It had alleviated the situation but people were still trapped on that

sida bar.     I pulled them under.   Those with tickets were filed

through by horses to the open gates.      It was orderly.    There appeared

to be room now.     I then thought it was no longer life threatening and

the gates were shut again.

The surges were in two bursts, the first larger, the second short but

a steady flow and controlled.

I saw the Superintendent on the wall again.      The people in the funnel

had pulled back and it appeared safe.

The Superintendent signalled for the centre gate perimeter to be

opened.    The horsemen did this.    It then filled again.

I was somewhere down the side near the river now.

Then, sometime after that, the gate I was facing opened and it just

anptied.    That was the gate on the left when approaching the

turnstiles.    I think Inspector Bennet was sat above it.

It seemed to empty then.     I had not ordered that or knew why it had

happened but I felt initial relief for those people.

The next thing I can recall is a message either on the system or

radio, saying 'All officers onto the pitch.' This is the first radio

message I had received or heard transmitted for nearly one hour.       I

took a Serial, under the supervision of Police Sergeant Whitlam,

around under the cortmand box into South Stand and down onto the track
                                                                        PAGE
                                                                        S1270

at Leppings Lane.

At sane point very shortly afterwards I went to the centre of

Leppings Lane and behind the goal.      I saw the extent of the disorder.

Superintendent Greenwood was in the centre, there was only one gate.

There was not physically room to do anything there.

I moved to my left, I saw only four ways out for the trapped and

injured, to the front, to the back, left, right even perhaps up.           I

decided to go to the left.     There were no other senior officers there

so I took responsibility for that area.      I climbed on the fence and

pleaded with the fans to move to my left, I used my arms.           It worked

in part.    There were some officers and people now, getting others

out over the spiked railings.

I was joined by Inspector Darling.      I remember trying to get a Serial

into the pen on the left to keep the crowd back so that we could

evacuate the injured.     They did this.

People started to come out this way.

I could not continue where I was and I got onto the track again, I

carried a small person from the gate on my own.        Others wanted to

help but I insisted I did it.     I carried her or him onto the pitch.

Someone took over then.     I went back and got another person out.

At the track I could see spiked railings, fans boxed in.        No way out

and still hostile youths wanting to invade the pitch and fight.

I walked along at some point and someone said "That one's dead, try

another.'    I saw a blue bar (crash barrier) being hurled over the

fence, I thought by the fans at the Police.

I remember dealing with a     lad. I don't know if    this is the one I

carried or after.     He had a white shirt   on.     Hewas alive.    His

breathing was short and rushed.      I put him in the recovery position.

I kept his airwayopen.     I kept talking to him.      I had to clear his

mouth out, it was    full of white     froth. I was joined by someone.
                                                                              PAGE
                                                                              S1270

        One a I thought his breathing was increasing we placed him on a board.

        I want back to the gate.      I had instructed a PC to go with each

        person.     I spent some time then I think with a man with a grey

        beard.     I had seen him before but thought him dead, then they had

        attempted to start his heart again.      I performed heart massage.    A

        doctor or surgeon did mouth to mouth.      His lungs started to fill up

        then.     I thought he had a chance.   We kept going for a number

        of minutes.     Someone wanted to take over but I refused.

        I think I carried him into an ambulance or I carried one person into

        an ambulance.     Someone said he was dead.   Police Constable 851 Wicken

        was present.     I can recall an officer saying 'They're picking up

       money' referring to Liverpool fans on the pitch, but I said 'leave

        them'.

        I think everyone was out now.     I tried to re-group people.   Chief

        Superintendent Nesbit was there in the middle.

        There was some trouble then in the crowd in Leppings Lane.      At this

        point they wanted to fight.

        I took three serials and told than to walk to Halifax Road.

        Following that tour of the ground I spent some time in the canpany of

        Superintendent Greenwood, concerning the welfare of the officers

        involved.

        I went off duty at 7.30 p.m. (1930)




                                                                R M PURDY SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:               DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

  riCERS SIGNATURE:


                                                                                      2 9 46
Incident    102   260390 QP8064          DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                             STATEMENT NUMBER   S565A

                                                                                Station

^u:
 'Umame            BENNETT

Forenames          JOHN     JOSEPH

Age                45                        Date of birth

Address            COMMUNITY LIAISON DEPARTMENT ECCLESFIELD PSTN


Occupation         POL INS

Telephone

IC                 Height                   Build

Hair colour

  ir type

« es                                        Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses            Use                      Accent

Number of Pages 9

Dated              280489                                     J J BENNET INSP. Signed


           JOHN JOSEPH BENNETT - INSPECTOR

           CQMUNITY LIAISON DEPARTMENT

           ECCLESFIELD POLICE STATION

           On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), I performed duty as a logistics

           officer at Hillsborough Football Ground for the occasion of the semi­

           final match between Nottingham Forest and Liverpool.

           I commenced duty at 6.00am (0600) at the ground and had responsibility

           for the supervision and planning of no parking cones and barriers

           around the roads in the area of the ground, the administration

           arrangements for the briefing, the issue of radios, meal tickets and

           refreshment arrangements for all officers deployed at the match and

           general administration.

           Additionally, I had responsibility for the supervision of two property

           stores. One location in the Owls Shop under the Spion Kop and the
                                                                 PAGE    2
                                                                 S565A

second a mobile cabin situated behind turnstiles 1-16 at Leppings

Lana. I was responsible to any Senior Officer, requiring assistance

with administrative matters, but in practical terms liaised directly

with Inspector SEWELL.

From 6.00a.m. (0600) events proceeded without any problems.

About 2.15p.m. (1415) I went to the perimeter track in front of the

Spion Kop with Police Constable 3082 FLETCHER. At that time I estimate

that the Spion Kop was about two thirds full, but looking to the

opposite end of the ground there were far fewer Liverpool supporters.

The two clubs pens on the Leppings Lane terrace appeared to be about

two thirds full, there seemed to be few supporters in the outer pens

and a few supporters well dotted around the West Stand. I was so

surprised by the lack of Liverpool supporters that I made specific

reference to it to Police Constable FLETCHER and noted the time as

being between 2.15 (1415) to 2.20pn (1420).

We then walked to the Property Store under the Spion Kop which was

manned by Police Constable 3063 MARSHALL and Mrs. DRABBLE, Civilian

Administrator. It was very busy under the Spion Kop, Nottingham

Forest fans were still arriving in large numbers. The mood of those

fans was good natured which I judged from their routine enquiries

about the location of toilets, refreshments and entrances to the

terraces and their general behaviour.

After checking that all was in order at the property store, I walked

with Police Constable FLETCHER towards the second property store at

the Leppings Lane turnstiles. We walked along the lower passageway

beneath the North Stand which was allocated to Liverpool fans.

Moving towards the Leppings Lane turnstiles it became quite busy with

supporters entering the ground to gain access to the North Stand.

At the end of the passageway we passed Sergeant 758 MORGAN who was en

route to the gymnasium with an off duty Police Officer who had had his
                                                                  PAGE    3
                                                                  S565A

wallet stolen. At this stage I saw nothing abnormal or untoward in the

behaviour of the crowd.

The property store was situated inside turnstiles 1-16 and on the

ground side of the metal fence which seperated supporters using the

North Stand from those going to the West Stand and terraces. There was

a further mobile cabin for programme sellers alongside the Police

property store. This store was manned by Police Sergeant 1153 BOOTH

and Police Constable 3253 CAMPBELL. Whilst walking to this location,

when passing under the end of the North Stand, I had warned Police

Constable FLETCHER that on the occasion of the semi-final the previous

year,the area had resembled a waterfall of urine from people using the

stand.At that time the ground was dry.

At the property store matters were quiet with little property seized

from fans. After discussing meal arrangements with Sergeant BOOTH and

Police Constable CAMPBELL we left the store intending to return to

the gymnasium. However, immediately on leaving I was approached by

a gataman who was manning Gate A. This gate is normally used to allow

Police Officers and other authorised people to enter the ground

without using the turnstile. The gateman was in an agitated state. He

told me that because the crowd outside the gate was so heavy he was

unable to open the gate to allow authorised access and accordingly he

locked the gate. I assured him he had taken the correct course of

action, but during the course of our discussion fans started to appear

on top of the gate having climbed up the outside to a height of about

15-20 feet (15'-20'). I signalled and called out to them to get off

the gate and they did in fact climb down to the outside. Because of

this situation the gateman was clearly worried and asked for a Police

Officer to assist him at this gate.

My only view of the crowd at that stage was through the very small

windows in Gate A, but I could see there was a large crowd outside. I
                                                                  PAGE    4
                                                                  S565A

then went to the turnstiles adjacent to the Gate A but found only one

Police Officer who was clearly unable to leave his post. It was ray

assumption that all other officers deployed at this position were

engaged with prisoners or escorting those who had gained unauthorised

access from the ground. There were no supervisory officers present. A

small number of officers were deployed at the next group of turnstiles

but were fully engaged.

I next went to turnstiles A-G which allowed supporters into the ground

to use the terraces. Then I saw Inspector White. He had with him a

number of officers but they were also fully engaged. It was clear more

officers were required to man the turnstiles 1-16. I radioed a request

to Police Control to send more men to that location. The request was

acknowledged. That was the first time I had used ray radio, ray message

was both transmitted and acknowledged.

For some time prior to using the radio there had been interference and

distortion of messages but all the message I had heard had been

intelligible.

I returned to turnstiles 1-16 and would estimate the time as 2.45pn

(1445)perhaps with an accuracy of 5 minutes. On this occasion many

officers were present. I could see through the turnstiles that a large

crowd was present outside and there was a considerable crush.

Supporters were entering the ground only very slowly through the turnstiles

and there were a number of reasons for this. One turnstile operator was

elderly and worked slowly. One younger operator left his turnstile to

remonstrate with a supporter. The crush was so great outside that

people were having difficulty in detaching themselves from the crowd

to enter the turnstiles. The greatest problem, however, seemed to be

the number of people reaching the turnstiles who had the wrong ticket,

who tried to pay to gain admission or who attempted to gain

unauthorised admission.


                                                                              2950
                                                                 PAGE    5
                                                                 S565A

As those who succeeded in passing through the turnstiles entered the

ground they approached Police Officers directly. Some were abusive and

offensive, but the over-riding impression I gained from than was of

panic and fear that serious injuries or death were about to occur in

the crush outside.

The information passed to me by those supporters coupled with my

somewhat restrictive vision of what was happening through the

turnstiles, convinced me that action was needed to relieve the

pressure on the crowd outside. I passed a radio message to this effect

to Police Control with a view to action being taken outside the ground.

I do not recall this message being acknowledged. I directed officers,

including Police Constable FLETCHER, to assist supporters in through

the turnstiles as quickly as possible. I instructed that everybody

should be allowed in with or without the correct ticket, whether

authorised or not.

Within a short time of my first radio message, Inspector DELANEY and

members of 'F' Division Crime and Vandal Squad arrived and began to

assist at the turnstiles. At that time I became aware of supporters

gaining access to the ground by climbing upon a wall and shinning

their way along the top of Gate B. They were being intercepted within

the ground by Police Officers, but the people gaining access in this

manner appeared to be in considerable danger from electrical cables

and lamps on the top of Gate B. I gained access to the roof of the

turnstiles alongside gate B by climbing on a small brick structure at

the rear of the turnstiles and then climbing to the roof with the

assistance of a Liverpool supporter. It had been my intention to

prevent people gaining access in this manner.

When I climbed to the roof I became fully aware of the situation

outside the turnstiles. I could see the areas outside turnstiles A-G

and 1-16 were completely filled with a crush of people. The crowd



                                                                             2951
                                                                 PAGE    6
                                                                 S565A

then extended beyond the perimeter gates taking up the full width of

Leppings Lane extending over the river bridge to the left and along

lappings Lane to the right about 50 yards (yds). Under normal

circumstances I would have estimated there to be a crowd of about

2,000 but, on that occasion people were so tightly crushed together I

estimate there to have been twice the number. The pressure from the

crush seemed at its greatest at the turnstiles as the crowd pushed to

gain admission. I could see Superintendent MARSHALL standing slightly

above the ground on the stonework at the head of the bridge in

Leppings Lane. There were numerous Mounted Officers in the area and I

recall a radio message for more to attend, I believe frcm the

Directors entrance in the South Stand car park. When I first climbed

to the roof there were two Mounted Officers trying to control the

crowd outside the turnstiles A-G. Eventually they left that area and

joined other Mounted Officers attempting to hold the crowd back in

Leppings Lane to relieve the pressure on those people between the

perimeter gates and the turnstiles.

Those supporters who were gaining access by climbing over Gate B were

first climbing on top of a fence which separates the turnstiles A-G

from turnstiles 1-16. I saw about 30 young men sitting outside this

fence waiting their turn to climb on to the wall. Others were climbing

directly to a position near me frcm the turnstile enclosure. On my

arrival these people were swarming over the wall. I could see it would

not have been safe to try and force them back into the crowd. In view

of the desperate crush below I allowed them to climb on to the roof of

the turnstile, one at a time, and showed to them the safe route back

to ground level inside the turnstiles by the way I had climbed to the

roof. Some of these men had difficulty standing and had been drinking,

but non was disorderly.

A substantial proportion of these people were in possession of tickets
                                                                   PAGE    7
                                                                   S565A

which they were waving to gain access. Others made no effort

to justify this means of access. A small number having climbed to

the turnstile roof tried to pass tickets back to those outside the

turnstiles. I prevented this happening. I became so engrossed in

ensuring the safety of these people that I took no great account of

what was happening elsewhere. I was aware of snatches of radio

messages about opening gates, but I was not aware of the origin of

those messages. The crowd outside turnstiles A-G reduced suddenly

which could only have happened by the opening of Gates B & C. I did

not have gate C in view but I saw the last of the crowd, about 40-50

entering via gate B, which I saw was open. Shortly after the crowds

outside turnstiles A-G reduced, the same happened outside turnstiles

1-16 indicating that Gate A had also been open. When that crowd

reduced to such an extent that it filled about half of the enclosure

within the perimeter gates, I managed to signal to Inspector

HANDDAVIS, Mounted Department and he directed one of his officers into

the enclosure and that officer prevented any more supporters climbing

into the ground.

I gauge that the mood of the supporters that I came into contact with

was mixed.   Some were abusive and had been drinking.     Others were

abusive about what they considered to be lack of Police action to

prevent crushing outside the turnstiles.   Many were simply fearful

that serious injury would occur at the turnstiles.      The majority

demanded Police action to reduce the crush.   There is no doubt in my

mind that the most appropriate action in the circumstances was to open

gates A, B & C to prevent injuries in the crush.     I did not see the

actions of the crowd when the gates were opened because it was

necessary to ensure the safety of those people climbing into the

ground.

With matters under control outside the turnstiles, I returned to the
                                                                     PAGE       8
         *»                                                          S565A

ground and was rejoined by Police Constable FLETCHER.     Within a few

ironants a clear radio message was transmitted directing officers on to

the pitch in front of Leppings Lane terrace.     A large number of

officers ran into the ground and went in the direction of the pitch.

I then went with Police Constable FLETCHER towards the Spion Kop.          As

we passed the area where I had warned Police Constable FLETCHER of the

waterfall of urine I saw there was a large patch of ground covered in

liquid which I took to be urine.     We then walked to the perimeter

track in front of the Spion Kop.     I could see large numbers of people

including Police Officers on the pitch in front of the Leppings Lane

terraces.     I could see fans climbing from the terraces into the West

Stand.     After what seemed like a period of many minutes, Police

Officers and civilians began carrying casualties towards the Spion

Kop.     A St. Johns Ambulanceman and a South Yorkshire ambulance drove

onto the pitch.     A short time later I heard a radio message repeated

at least once frcm Police Constable 2988 BURKINSHAW stating there was

a need to set up a temporary mortuary.     I passed this message to a

senior ambulance officer, using the radio in an ambulance service

Range Rover to indicate to him the severity of the incident.

I then went to the gymnasium to try and organise the reception of

casualties.    Within a short space of time it became apparent that

large numbers of casualties had occured.     Having ascertained that

casualties were being taken to the Northern General Hospital, I

travelled with Police Constable FLETCHER and 538 HORN to that hospital

to carry out hospital liaison duties which are specifically allocated

to Community Liaison Officers in the event of a major disaster.       We

arrived at hospital at 4.00 p.m (1600).

I did not handle any bodies at the ground.



END OF REPORT
                                                            PAGE     9
                                                            S565A


^                                       J.J. BENNETT   INSP SIGNED

iS a t e m e n t   TAKEN
                   PLACE:

                   TIME:    DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                    (




                                                                         2 9 55
Incident     102   260390 OP8064        DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                           STATEMENT NUMBER   S870

                                                                              Station

^fe'iam e           SYKES

Forenames           GORDON

Age                 46                     Date of birth

Address             S YORKSHIRE POLICE, ECCLESFIELD,
                    S YORKSHIRE.

Occupation         POL INS

Telephone

IC                 Height                  Build

Hair colour

Hair type

                                           Conplexion

Facial hair

Glasses            Use                     Accent

Number of Pages 10

Dated              280489                                                      Signed


            ACCOUNT BY GORDON SYKES - POLICE INSPECTOR STATIONED AT ECCLESFIELD



            I am a Police Inspector stationed at Ecclesfield PSTN.

            On Saturday 15th April,   1989 (150489) I was engaged on duties at

            Hillsborough Football Ground in connection with the Liverpool v

            Nottingham Forest F.A. Cup Semi - Final.

            On this day, I paraded for duty at Ecclesfield Police station at 9 am

            (0900 hrs). Together with other Officers I was then transported to

            Hillsborough Football Ground for a briefing at 10 am (1000 hrs).      This

            briefing was conducted by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield who

            outlined the overal Police strategy for the day and particularly said

            that the event would be policed in a firm but fair way and that safety

            to the public would be paramount.

            Superintendent Murray then outlined the emergency evacuation
                                                                 PAGE
                                                                 S870

procedures and that he would be overall ground Corrrnander.

My specific duties on this day was Corcnander of Sub Sector 8, I was

also assisted by Inspector Purdy.   These duties included overall

supervision of serials, 16, 17, 18 and 19.

Serial 16 - supervised by PS1288 Payne were responsible for Leppings

Lana turnstiles A - G .

Serial 17 - supervised by PS468 Whitlam were responsible for Leppings

Lana turnstiles 1 to 8.

Serial 18 - supervised by PS758 Morgan were responsible for Leppings

Lana turnstiles 9 to 16.

Serial 19 - supervised by PS323 Proctor were to be used as coach

reception and supervise the fans entering the ground.

After the main briefing I instructed all these serials that I would

personally brief then at 11 am (1100 hrs) behind the West Stand.

This I did, and went through the match order as to their specific

duties.   I instructed serials 16, 17 and 18 that they would be at the

turnstiles to prevent unlawful access to the ground and ensure queues

would be formed.

I told serial 19 they had a virtual roving comnission as per the

match order and to generally assist wherever they were needed.      I

also told all the serials to expect a high incidence of people to be

drunk, and although our policy is not to allow this, on the

particular day we would have to relax the rules a little and only

arrest people who were extremely drunk and couldn't look after

themselves, or were causing trouble.

I gave this instruction as I know from past experience that on F.A.

Cup   Semi-Final day, large numbers of fans come to the ground who

hava been drinking to excess and to start arresting them all would

only drain any manpower.

I also told the serials that if the crush at the turnstiles got so



                                                                         29 57
                                                                  PAGE     3
                                                                  S870

bad I would use horses to relieve the pressure.

On this day my serials and myself were under the supervision of

Section Commander Chief Inspector Greaser and under the overall

command of Superintendent Greenwood the inside Ground Corrmander.

After I had brief the men they all then went to their relevant posts.

I had been issued with a personal radio as had all the serial

sergeants.

After my briefing to the serials I immediately went outside Leppings

Lana turnstiles into the enclosure there.    This would be shortly after

II am (1100 hrs) and even at that time fans were hanging about

outside. Some had tickets and some were asking me if I knew where

they could purchase one.

Fans were also approaching the ground carrying cans of beer, bottles

of beer and bottles of spirit.    Any fans who approached the ground

carrying such items of alcohol had it taken from them and pit in the

large bins provided for that purpose.

From this time on the crowd started to swell.     Not all wanted to go

into the ground or had tickets to get in and were hanging about

outside and on roads and pavements leading to Leppings Lane

Turnstiles.   Periodically I sent officers to urge these people into

the ground or to move on those who hadn't a ticket.    Mounted officers

also assisted in this task.

At one stage I received a radio message that ticket touts were

operating in Leppings Lane.   In consequence of this I asked nearby CID

Officers to investigate a large crowd who were congregating about two

hundred yards along Leppings Lane towards Penistone Road.     Shortly

after I was told that ticket touts were operating there and were

pointed out to me.

I caused PC2902 Roberts to arrest the two touts concerned for causing

an obstruction to the footpath.


                                                                               2958
                                                                   PAGE   4
                                                                   S870

The build up of the crowd continued and fans still arrived who had no

ticket and some who had obviously been drinking.    Whilst I saw no

fighting I can best describe these fans as being stupid drunk and

wouldn't listen to advice and instructions.    By 2 prv (1400 hrs) the

build up of the fans was such that there was pushing and shoving at

the turnstiles and a build up occurred of fans trying to get into the

ground.

It was about this time that I saw some fans climbing over the wall

above Gate 'B' to gain access to the ground.    I tried to contact

ground control by radio but was getting no repsonse.    Other Officers

were telling me that the radios were down.

In view of this I gained access to the ground through Gate 'C' to

inform the Officers inside the ground that people were climbing

over.     The Officers inside were already aware and were ejecting the

fans through Gate 'C'.

Whilst inside I heard shouts from the turnstile operator nearest to

Gate 'C' that fans were getting in by not paying.    Those fans were

immediately held by Police Officers and ejected through Gate 'C'. I

saw some of those fans climb over the turnstile barrier and some

were crawling underneath, through the legs of people who had tickets.

I then went back outside through Gate 'C', as I did so I was asked by

the gatemen on this gate for advice.    They informed me that stewards

from Liverpool Football Club were seeking admission to the ground by

showing their Stewards passes.    Whilst the Sheffield Wednesday

Stewards had allowed some access to the ground they believed the

Stewards were then collecting the passes and taking than outside for

other people to use.     I told the Stewards that if this was the case

then no more persons should be allowed access to the ground by

showing a Stewards pass.

At this time there was about 30 people outside Gate 'C' with Stewards


                                                                              2 9 59
                                                                   PAGE    5
                                                                   S870

passes.   Some of these had children with then and were trying to gain

admission.   They were all refused on my advice.

I then made my way back towards the roadway at lappings L a m .    As I

did so fans were streaming through an open perimeter gateway towards

Gate 'C' and the turnstiles there.    This in effect caused the

orderly queues to disperse as people started to push and shove who

hadn't queued.

I caused this gate to be closed to prevent this happening.    I also

asked the mounted section to put a cordon of horses across the rows

of specators to prevent any further people approaching the turnstiles

in order to prevent crushing.

This had the effect of slowing down the crush at the turnstiles.       I

then went further towards Leppings Lane roadway and I could see that

fans were converging on the ground in vast numbers.    Many of these

were carrying alcohol and many were drunk.    I was shouting to them

not to push but they were taking no notice.    They appeared to have

one purpose and that was to get into the ground.

Many fans were milling about outside with no tickets and were

shouting if anyone had any spare tickets.

I could see that the fans converging on the ground were of such a

number that they were spilling over on to the road and into the path

of vehicles.     I tried to get through on the radio and ask for

Leppings Lane to be closed to vehicular traffic.     I was receiving no

response.    I was then joined by Superintendent Marshall and I asked

him to get the road closed.     He agreed with me that it should and

got through on his radio.     Vehicles eventually stopped caning along

Leppings Lane.

I have worked in Leppings Lane at football matches for the last eight

years and the rush of spectators at this time was so bad that this

was the first time I have known the road closed to traffic before a



                                                                               2960
                                                                 PAGE       6
                                                                 S870

match.

This would have been at about 2.30 pn (1430 hrs).

People were still coming to me asking for directions into the ground

with children and only the adult had a ticket.

Shortly after this I saw Inspector Bennett on the wall above Gate 'B'

helping people over the wall.    I was still trying to prevent people

pushing into the crowd from the back but they were not taking any

notice.

I have no actual timing of the next event but would estimate it to be

2.50 pm (1450 hrs) and I then saw Gate 'A' open wide.     People were

streaming through it and it was obvious tickets were not being

checked.    People gaining access through this gate would gain entrance

to the North Stand.

I pushed through the crowd to Gate 'A' and saw PS Higgins and seme of

his men.    He told me he had opened the gate as people were in danger

of being killed by the crush.

We then managed to partly close the gates and were checking tickets as

people came through.    This caused the crowd outside to thin to safe

numbers and we then shut the gate completely.     It was at this stage

that the call went up for all Officers to go inside the ground.

I cannot remember if I heard it on the radio or someone told me.

I made my way through Gate 'C' and went towards the Police Control

Box.     I climbed the steps to see what was going on.   I could see that

a large number of people were on the field and that Police Officers

were helping other people over the perimeter fence.

I could also see that people were pushing from behind as they couldn't

see what was happening.

 I decided to go to the tunnel under the West Stand that leads to the

Leppings Lane terraces. As I did so I told other Officers in that

 area to assist in moving people from the back of the terraces and out



                                                                                2961
                                                               PAGE      7
                                                               S870

of the ground.   This was to enable officers to reach the people

trapped at the front and allow people to be rescued.

Some of the fans not knowing what had happened were at first

reluctant to believe but we eventually managed to clear a way through.

I then saw some Officers struggling to carry a young girl (teenager).

who was unconcious and had stopped breathing.   I grabbed hold of her

and we carried her back up the terraces and through the tunnel into

the enclosure behind the West Stand.

Whilst we were carrying her up the terracing her tee-shirt had been

pulled up over her head in the crush exposing her breasts and I

distinctly heard someone shout "Throw her up here I'll fuck her".

I have no idea who shouted this and I didn't see the person who

shouted it.

When we got into the enclosure I gave the young girl mouth to mouth

resuscitation and got her breathing again.   I was assisted by a young

policewoman, I do not know her or where she is stationed.

When I had brought the young woman round I then saw that the

enclosure was filling with bodies and injured people.

I knew that we had to evacuate them from the enclosure in order that

they could receive treatment.

I organised the Officers who were present to clear the crowd and form

a way thorugh to Gate 'C' in order that we could use the sterile area

down the side of the ground.

This we did and all other bodies and casualties brought out of that

side of the ground were brought to this area.

Ambulances were then brought from Leppings Lane into the sterile area,

collected casualties and carried on down the sterile area past the

players entrance etc.

At first I decided which casualties should go into the ambulance but

I was then joined by a Doctor of Asian appearance who after treating



                                                                             2962
                                                                            PAGE   8
                                                                            S870

        people decided in his professional opinion should go to hospital.

         I also arranged for one of the Police transits to take people who

        wera not seriously injured.

         I cannot say with any authority how many people received treatment at

        this end of the ground but it was quite substantial.

        Eventually when all the injured were taken away I was left with ten

        dead people in the sterile area.       I arranged for the Officers who

        had brought out the bodies to stay with the body and detailed other

        Officers to assist.     I was later joined by Inspector Webster who was

        part of the body identification team who then took over the role of

        body identifications and removal of the bodies to the ground

        gymnasium. When they were all ranoved I went back to the Police

        Control at the back of the North Stand and liaised with other Senior

        Officers.

        At no time when I went through the tunnel at the back of Leppings Lane

        did I see any bodies in the tunnel, all the bodies were brought from

        the front of the pens and back up the terracing.




                                                                 G. SYKES SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:               DATE:   280489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                       2 9 63
                                                                        STATION

                GORDON
                SYKES

ADDRESS:        SOOTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                ECCLESFIELD, SHEFFIELD

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION: POL INS


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 180790                                                 G SYKES (SIGNED)



       Further to my statement/recollection dated the 28th of April 1989

           (280489) concerning my duties at the FA cup semi final at Hillsborough

       stadium I would like to add the following.

       I attended a pre-match briefing on Friday the 14th of April 1989

        (140489) at Hillsborough stadium for Inspectors and above.    The

       briefing was conducted by Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD.     He went

       through the Operational order for the match and gave the overview

       policy.     Views and ccnments were asked for and exchanged although I

       can't be any more specific about what was said in any detail.     The

       events that happened after the briefings have made more of an

       impression on my mind rather than the briefings themselves after a

       period of 15 months.

       At the conclusion of Mr DUCKENFIELD'S briefing, sector commanders were

       invited to brief their sub sector Inspectors.     To do this we split into

       groups with each Sector Commander speaking to the Inspectors who would

       be under his ccnroand.    There was probably 20 Inspectors or their

       Sergeant representative amongst our group.

       Mr GREENWOOD then reiterated the points already outlined by Mr




                                                                                    2963A
SYKES                   GORDON                                             2


DUCKENFIELD and was then more specific about the duties of each serial

under his cormand.

As can be seen by the police order, for all 3 phases of the match I was

under the direct command of Mr GREENWOOD, in practice for the first

phase I would be more involved outside the ground which was under the

cortmand of Mr MARSHALL.

At the pre-match briefing with Mr GREENWOOD he made particular

reference to Liverpool fans gaining access to the Spion Kop, this part

of the ground being reserved for Nottingham Forest supporters.      He

qualified a point in the match order stating that under no

circumstances were these 'foreign' fans to be moved frcm the sterile

area without his express permission and under his personal direction.

He qualified this by referring to the 1981 (000081) FA cup semi finals

where a large number of Tottenham supporters were either transferred

frcm the Spion Kop onto the Leppings Lane terraces or had been allowed

access into these terraces on production of a Kop ticket.    On this day

the transferring of the supporters caused serious public disorder as

they were marched past the Wolves fans.     Coins were thrown, abuse

shouted and insults exchanged.   This also caused serious crushing

problems on the Leppings Lane terraces.

I particularly recall Mr GREENWOOD saying this as it meant so much to

me.   I was actually on duty with Mr GREENWOOD at the 81 (000081) game

on the perimeter track when the crushing took place.    In view of our

experiences on that day Mr GREENWOOD asked me for my opinion of his

containment strategy.    I fully endorsed his views that the fans

shouldn't be moved from the sterile area.

I attended a further briefing on the 15th of April (150489) at the

ground which was attended by all personnel on duty that day.    It was

given by Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD.    He covered the main points
        SYKES                GORDON                                                 3


        that he had spoken of the day before.   Otter people followed briefing

        us on their particular aspect ie organisation intelligence.   I can't

        remember whether Mr GREENWOOD briefed us again that day or not but I

        certainly spoke to him on various matters.

        I then briefed ray serials on their individual duties and logistics.    I

        had no reason to speak regarding the transfer of Liverpool supporters

        frcxn the Kop as my serials duties were in the Leppings Lane end.

        As far as I am concerned the briefings that I attended were well

        conducted, informative and professional.

        G Sykes

                                                              G SYKES SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

          TIME             DATE

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:   G ICCOMBIE DS8792

OFFICERS SIGNATURE      G MXQMBIE DS8792




                                                                                        2963C
Incident    102   260390 OP8064       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                         STATEMENT NUMBER   S916

                                                                            Station

^^name             PAYNE

Forenames          STEPHEN   JOHN

Age                33                     Date of birth

Address            S. YORKS, HACKENTHORPE PSTN


Occupation         POL PS1288

Telephone

IC                 Height                 Build

Hair colour

Hair type

ft.                                       Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses            Use                   Accent

Number of Pages 6

Dated              270489                                 S.J. PAYNE PS1288 Signed


           At 0830 on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I commenced duty at

           Hackenthorpe Police Station, Sheffield and together with other Police

           Officers was transported to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground

           at Hillsboroough for duties in connection with the Football

           Association Cup Semi Final between Nottingham Forrest and Liverpool

           which was due to take place later that day.

           On arrival at the ground I was given my match serial briefings sheet

           by Inspector Purdy to whom I was to be directly responsbile

           throughout the game. We then moved to the North Stand for the full

           briefing by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and others. My serial

           was number 16 which consisted of myself plus 10 Police Constables.

           These were 1. PC 3066 Hickstepp; 2. PC 2980 Wright; 3. PC 1715 Best;

           4. PC 115 Hickstepp; 5. PC 259 Coney; 6. PC 607 Taylor; 7. PC 963

           Evans; 8. PC 620 Yates; 9. PC 1047 Duffey; 10. PC 2076 Cerrone. My
                                                                 PAGE     2
                                                                 S916

briefings sheet outlined duties at the Lappings Lane end of the

ground, both outside and inside the West stand. It also showed the

Inspectors in that area to be Inspector Purdy and Inspector Sykes. On

completion of the main briefing, Inspector Purdy and I briefed serial

16 in detail about our duties and responsibilities. At 1100 hours we

movad to the rear of the West Stand where we were further and

similarly briefed by Inspector Sykes. In phase 1 (from 1115 hours to

kick off) serial 16 would be responsible for turnstiles A to G of the

Leppings Lane end, outside the turnstiles.   Maintaining order, queues,

searching people for alcohol, banners, missiles, etc., Phase 2 (

during the game) we were to move into the upper West Stand and

maintain order and in phase 3 (10 minutes before the end onwards) we

were to be on duty outside the ground in Leppings Lane.

At 1130 hours, one of our turnstiles opened and in view of this I

deployed my serial outside the ground in the area directly outside

the turnstiles A to G on the attached plan. These turnstiles give

access to the West End Terraces which is standing room. They are

formed as 1 single turnstile with the other 6 formed in pairs, a

total of 7. This makes in effect 4 doorways to Police. In view of

this I deployed 8 officers in pairs to cover these' doors and the

remaining 2 officers were teamed up with Inspector Purdy and myself.

Pc 1047 Duffy being my partner.

At 1200 hours the remaining turnstiles were opened in this area and a

steady trickle of Liverpool fans started to enter the ground. This

continued until 1340 hours with small but steady numbers filing in.

The fans were sufficiently few in number that we were able to search

the majority if not all of them before entry. Many of the fans,

even from as early as 1130 hours, were entering the ground with

breath smelling of alcohol. They were not however sufficiently

affected by the drug to be denied entry or arrested (or there were



                                                                              2965
                                                               PAGE     3
                                                               S916

not the usual symptons of drunkenness to have enabled a successful

prosecution).

In any case to have arrested all persons affected would have depleted

the Police present in the area to nil extremely quickly. I saw dozens

of fans sitting and hanging about in the Leppings Lane area and in

particular on the bridge over the river, who were consuming

intoxicants out of cans. These people were in the main male and in

the teens to thirties age range. There were also dozens of people who

were without tickets for the match. They were milling around outside

the turnstiles and in the road generally causing a nuisance and an

obstruction. I personally told many to leave the area and on several

occasions the mounted officers were used to sweep them out of the

area. They kept on returning and the ideal would have been to arrest

them for obstruction however this again would have been counter

productive in reducing the Police numbers in the area. I believe that

there were about 30 to 40 Police Officers in the Leppings Lane area

at that time as well as the officers forming my serial.

At 1340 hours, Police Constable 3066 Huckstepp and I arrested 2

people, a male and a female, who were trying to enter the ground

with several cans of lager secreted in the females large handbag.

Both smelled of intoxicants and both admitted having been drinking

lagar prior to the attempted entry. The female was arrested for

attempting to enter the ground in possession of alcohol, and the male

was arrested for obstructing me in the execution of my duty in that

he had physically and violently tried to stop officers from searching

both himself and the girl. In view of these arrests, PC 3066 and

myself left the Leppings Lane end with the prisoners in order to take

them to the Police Room for booking in. The detention procedures

wera completed by 1400 hours and the arrest papers then had to be

completed.   PC 3066 was unable to complete hers as she was required to



                                                                            2 9 66
                                                                 PAGE   4
                                                                 S916

act as warder for the female and in view of this I went to the

gymnasium and there completed the paperwork. In view of this I did not

return to the outside of the Leppings Lane end of the ground. Whilst in

the gym I had my radio switched on and between 1445 hours and 1500 I

could hear ever increasing traffic concerning the crowd conditions at

the Leppings Lane end of the ground. I recall hearing request for

assistance and more men, I recall hearing messages that people were

being crushed, injured and that the crowds were out of control, the

Police overwhelmed. I heard reference to opening a gate or a request to

open a gate and then a few minutes later I heard a voice say 'open the

gate, open the gate'. This would have been about 1455 to 1500 hours.

About 1500 hours someone came in to the gym and rounded up all

complete serials which were there, some eating meals. They left and

I was left in the gym with just a few officers, seme doing paperwork

and others in charge of radio issue etc. About 1505 hours I heard a

radio message to the effect that all officers available were to

attend on the perimeter track of the pitch at the Leppings Lane end

of the ground. No reason was given. I immediately left the gym and

walked briskly onto the pitch area from the c o m e r between the kop

and north stand. I saw that play had stopped and the teams were just

in the process of leaving the field. I walked across the pitch and as

I did so I looked at the large clock on the South Stand. It showed

about 7 minutes past 3. I saw a large number of Police on the track

facing the west stand and terraces and I saw fans either climbing or

attempting to climb the fence from the terraces onto the pitch from

the 2 centre pens which are indicated as CN and CS on the attached

plan. These 2 pens looked full where as the outer pens N and S on the

plan did not. At first I thought that the crowd were attempting a

ptich invasion or were otherwise misbehaving however as I reached the

fence I could see straight away that people were being crushed



                                                                            2 967
                                                                 PAGE
                                                                 S916

against the wire fence on the perimeter and were trying to escape

this crush.

I went to gate 5 as shown on the attached plans. This gate leads into

a channel or alleyway between pens N and CN. This alley is formed by

a substantial spiked top fence about 7' in height on either side

and running from the front to back of the terraces. I could see that

people were climbing from the front RH c o me r of pen CN into this

alley and from there out of gate 5 onto the track I spent several

minutes pulling people out of this gate along with another sergeant

and a constable. I then forced my way into the alley with the

constable and we both assisted people to climb over the spiked fence

from pen CN into the alley. This was accomplished by allowing people

to use us as a ladder. After 5 minutes or so the crowd in this pen

thinned out sufficiently for me to see in a ground level.

I saw that there was a female form laying on the floor beneath the

front boundary wall of the pen CN close to my position. There were 2

or 3 people knelt over her giving heart massage and mouth to mouth

resuscitation. I climbed up and over the spiked top fence from the

alley into the pen and at the same time I used the radio to request

an ambulance for her. Once in the pen I had no sooner checked that

the woman was being properly treated than I saw what appeared to be a

fight further along the front fence by gate 4 as shown on the plan.

This gate opens onto the pitch close to the rear of the goal. I went

across and saw that people were fighting to get out of the gate.

There was a heap of bodies laying on the ground under the wall where

this gate is situated, about 3 or 4. Other people were clambering on

top of these bodies which appeared lifeless in an effort to get out.

People had fallen and the result was a log jam effect through which

no person could escape. I informed control by radio about the

apparent dead and requested more ambulances. I then tried to pull



                                                                        2968
                                                                  PAGE   6
                                                                  S916

people away from the gate in order to reach the injured/dead

underneath. As I did so many fought and punched out at me, many

were in a blind panic. I tried to explain that the danger was over as

the crowd had thinned out and I tried to point out the people who

they were treading on but they wouldn't listen. Many of these people

smelled strongly of intoxicants and in my opinion many were drunk.

There was an all pervading smell of stale alcohol in the air.

I then saw that officers outsdie the pen on the pitch, together with

fans in the pen were pulling and kicking at the mesh fence at the

front of pen CN. They succeeded in tearing the mesh away and via this

route the bodies were removed along with 2 or 3 who were carried from

the rear. I then saw other officers enter the pen from the rear who

were in the process of clearing people out into the rear tunnel. Once

pen CN was cleared I left it and climbed into pen CS where bodies

both live and dead were being removed in large numbers. I assisted in

this process until this pen was clear and then moved to gate 2 in the

S pen where further people were being carried out from the rear. I

then spent quite a long time on the pitch near the goal assisting

with heart massage and sorting out the living from the dead. This

process was being constantly interferred with by Liverpool fans who

were drunk and being a nuisance although the majority of fans in the

area at that time were well behaved and of tremendous help. During

this period I did see several young male fans picking up money,

wallets and other items which had obviously fallen from the pockets

of casualties. Some of this may have been with good intent but some

was no doubt theft as the 'offenders' made off quickly when I made

to challenge them.

ADDENDUM TO FOLLOW.

END OF REPORT




                                                                             2969
                                                              PAGE     7
                                                              S916




         S Payne PS1288




                                           Stephen John Payne SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

          TIME:           DATE:   270489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                           2 9 70
Incident     102   260390 QP8064       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                             STATEMENT NUMBER   S851

                                                                                Station

^ (rnlame
     e              BEST

Forenames           ANDREW

Age                 26                       Date of birth

Address             S YORKSHIRE POLICE, HACKENTHORPE PSTN
                    S YORKSHIRE.

Occupation          POL PC1715

Telephone

IC                  Height                   Build

Hair colour

Hair type

^^s                                          Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses             Use                      Accent

Number of Pages 5

Dated               080589                                         Andrew BEST Signed


            At 8.20 am (0820 hrs ) on 15.4.89 (150489) I reported for duty at

            Hackenthorpe Police Station I ascertained then that I was on Serial no

            16 under PS1288 Payne.

            Bus transport to Hillsborough and arrived for briefing in the North

            Stand well before 10.00 am (1000 hrs).    During the briefing found we

            were to work turnstiles A - G on Leppings Lane - outside the ground.

            Packed meal was provided and eaten in the stand prior to taking up

            positions at the turnstiles.

            Positions were taken up at the turnstiles in plenty of time for them

            opening at 12 noon (1200 hrs).    One turnstile opened up at about 11.

            50 am (1150 hrs), they were all open by about 12.10 pm (1210 hrs).

            Initially I was paired up with PC3066 Huckstepp at the turnstile

            nearest the barrier, furthest away from the wall.

            Onea spectators began to arrive the numbers were low enough to allow
                                                                  PAGE
                                                                  S851

that EVERYONE was searched before entering the ground.    Other

officers on the serial made arrests for various offences committed by

persons attempting to enter the ground.

The first arrivals at the ground were generally very good humoured,

sober and caused few problems.   As the numbers arriving at the

turnstiles began to grow - from about 2 pm (1400 hrs) onwards, the

searching of spectators became selective - but the atmosphere was

generally still good.

At this time, the number of Police Officers on duty had decreased at

these turnstiles due to prisoners having been arrested.

At 2.30 pm (1430 hrs) or thereabouts, the numbers at the gates

swelled considerably.   Many of these late arrivals were worse for

drink but may not be classified as drunk.   They were singing and

chanting and began to push from the back, causing congestion between

the barrier and the wall on the approach to the turnstile.

Further problems were caused by numerous supporters working their way

to the turnstiles and finding that they had no ticket at all, or that

they had a ticket for another part of the ground.

Many Liverpool supporters had bought their tickets from the

Nottingham area where they lived, but they wanted to stand with the

Liverpool supporters, not with the Notts. Forest.

Earlier in the afternoon, the turnstile operators, on the instruction

of the Stewards, had allowed people into the Leppings Lane end of the

ground, even though their tickets were for the Notts Forest Kop end

of the ground.

When the turnstiles became very busy however, this policy was changed

and no one was allowed through unless they had the correct tickets.

Consequently, people arrived at the turnstile, weren't allowed

through, but then couldn't get back, they were blocked in.    This

happened at most of the turnstiles and the crowd built up without



                                                                         2972
                                                                    PAGE
                                                                    S851

being able to get through.

After 2.30 pm (1430 hrs) the push at the turnstiles was so great that

the Police officers on them had to go back through the turnstiles

themselves.     I managed to get through the barrier and stand outside

the crush.     Despite shouting to the crowd to get back and stop

pushing - the rowdy mob at the back kept pushing forward.     It was

apparent at that time that a number of people were in difficulty up

against the barrier where I saw two young boys (separately) who were

just tall enough to have their wind-pipes pushed up against the top

rail of the bar.    With the help of their respective parents I managed

to push some room and pull the boys to my side of the barrier.

By this time there were a large number of youths and men -

considerably worse for drink - many were drunk.     They came down the

outside of the barrier and tried to force themselves in at the

turnstile.    This caused a great deal of trouble - resulting in fights

taking place between fans, and scuffles with Police officers who

were trying to prevent them.

The push on the crowd at the front of the turnstiles was so great

that many of the suffering fans were begging for the large gates to

be opened, they kept saying that they had all got tickets and that

people were getting hurt.

A number of children were lifted out of the crowd and carried

overhead towards me and to where Insp Purdy stood near to the

barrier.     We helped to lift them out of the crowd.   Of the drunken

youths trying to push in at the front of the turnstiles, one was

causing particular problems, he was so drunk that he had no idea

where he was.     I had pulled him out of the crowd twice already, he

had been assaulted several times by other spectators but still

continued to make for the turnstiles.     He was              -   I had to

arrest him and remove him from the area.     I took him through the



                                                                             2973
                                                                  PAGE    4
                                                                  S851

side gate to the Police room.    I should have been assisted in

escorting him but the situation was that Police Officers were

required more urgently on the outside of the ground.

      was detained at the Police room and I had to stay with him

until he could be booked in - there were already numerous prisoners

waiting to be booked in.

I did not have a Police radio, and there was no radio on in the

Police room.   No one there knew what was happening outside that

building.

Once booked in - I completed the pro forma statement - in the gym in

the company of other officers who also had no radio, and who were

also oblivious to what was happening anywhere else.

At approximately 3.10 pm (1510 hrs) I made my way back under the

North Stand towards Leppings Lane to return to my serial.    At that

time I still had no idea that anything was wrong.

On arrival at the rear of Leppings Lane I saw what can only be

described as confusion.    Police Officers and spectators were carrying

people from an area near to and in the tunnel, back towards the lane

outside the gates.

I had no idea what had happened and could not see any members of my

own serial.    I helped to carry persons from that area.

One man I helped to carry was large, approx. 25 - 30 yrs, fair hair,

not wearing any shirt - he was breathing when I put him on the lane.

Moments later when I returned with someone else I saw that he was

dead - I was shocked that this would happen at a football match.       When

I saw an ambulance man he suggested putting him at the side of the

lane with the others.     I carried him with other officers to where I

saw about 7 people covered up - obviously dead.     I still had no idea

what had happened.

At the back of the lane there were numerous Police Constables



                                                                              2974
                                                                      PAGE      5
                                                                      S851

        standing about, helpless to do anything.

        I couldn't see any of my serial and can't recall seeing anyone above

        the rank of Sergeant in that area.

        Man/ spectators were swearing and abusive towards the Police - a high

        proportion still in a drunken state.

        After most dead and injured had been removed from the Leppings Lane

        stand, I stood at the entrance to the tunnel with other Officers -

        attempting to prevent fans re-entering to find relatives - many

        became violent when prevented from entering the tunnel.

        Once the game was abandoned and the majority of spectators had left

        the ground, I made my way through the tunnel on to the pitch where I

        rejoined other msnbers of my serial.

        I later attended at the de-briefing and went off duty at El at 7.30

        pm (1930 hrs).

        During the push outside the ground - my fears were for the other

        Police Officers pushed up against the gates and the walls, and for

        the children, especially the ones with their necks pushed up against

        the barriers.

        If I had been in charge outside the ground I would not have hesitated

        in opening the gates - at that time.




                                                   Andrew Best PC1715 SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

          TIME             DATE:   080589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE

END OF REPORT




                                                                                    2 975
Incident     102   260390 OP8Q64         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                          STATEMENT NUMBER   S863

                                                                             Station

  umame            HUCKSTEPP

 Forenames         BRIAN     ROBERT

 Age               27                       Date of birth

 Address           S. YORKSHIRE POLICE
                   HAKENTHORPE PSTN

 Occupation        POL PCI15

 Telephone

 IC                Height                   Build

 Hair colour

 Hair type

^^es                                        Complexion

 Facial hair

 Glasses           Use                      Accent

 Number of Pages

 Dated             070589                                                      Signed


           At 8.30 am (0800) on the date shown I commenced duty at Hackenthorpe

           Police Station.     We were then taken to Hillsborough by bus arriving

           at the ground at approximately 9 am. (0900)      I was detailed to work in

           Serial 16 under Inspector Purdy and PS 1288 Payne at 9.55 am (0955)

           the briefing was given in the North Stand.

           Our serial was to be deployed directly outside the 7turnstiles A-G at

           entrance B at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

           At 11.15 am (1115) we made our way around to the rear of the West

           Stand in preparation for the turnstiles being opened about 11.45 am.

           (1145) At 11.45 am (1145) I commenced duty directly outside turnstiles

           A & B in company with PC 607 Taylor.      In the early stages there were

           just small numbers of fans entering in l's and 2's.      I turnedvarious

           fans away, who had either no tickets or tickets forthe Kop.         All

           fans were being searched at this time the mood was friendly and
                                                                  PAGE     2
                                                                  S863

jovial. Frcm approximately 2 pm (1400) onwards the number of fans

entering the ground at this end steadily increased.     During this build

up the number of officers in our serial were steadily depleted by

officers escorting prisoners through to the Detention Area, so much so

that from about 2.30 pm (1430) onwards it seemed that there was only

myself and PC 2980 Wright left directly outside the turnstiles. After

2.30 pm (1430) the crowd outside the turnstiles appeared to swell

enormously within a few minutes and frcm the queues being orderly and

well defined, it suddenly became one large mass pushing towards the

turnstiles.    I found myself being pushed into the wall at the side of

the turnstile entrance.    A police horse came up to the entrance in an

effort to regulate the crowd but this had very little effect as the

pressure frcm the back of the crowd grew.     Eventually myself and PC

2980 forced our way into the turnstiles and into the ground.     We went

around and back out of the large Exit Gate C and continued to try and

control the crowd, which seemed to be trapped into the area between

Exit Gate B and a single blue barrier which runs away frcm the

turnstiles.

From my position at the side of this barrier I could see that the

crowd pressure was becoming severe.    People near the barrier were

red in the face and straining to push back.     Some fans were

panicking.    Many were shouting and pleading at us to do something.

There were punches thrown as some fans came around the barrier and

tried to join the crush nearer the turnstiles.    A small boy was passed

over the head of the crowd to us.     I pushed a small space to allow a

young lad to escape the crush, but he wouldn't come under the barrier

shouting at me that he wanted to see the match.Behind me there were a

large number of fans standing away frcm the main crush just outside

Exit Gate C.    Many fans were shouting and pleading for the gates to be

opened to ease the crush.    I could see that there were numerous fans



                                                                               29 77
                                                                    PAGE     3
                                                                    S863

climbing on top of the outer wall and entering the ground.       There was

some talk amongst the Police Officers present and Inspector Purdy

informed the Officers directly outside Gate C that it was going to be

opened.    The Gate was opened a short time afterwards from inside and a

large number of fans rushed inside, someone stumbled as they went

through.    The gate was then closed again.   It had been opened for

approximately 30-60 seconds.     It had the effect of clearing the area

directly outside the Gate but did nothing to ease the general crush at

the turnstiles.     The situation continued to deteriorate, people were in

distress many fans continued to shout for the gate to be re-opened.

That they all had tickets. It seemed that it was only a matter of time

before someone was injured, if not already.       Many fans were helpless in

the crush and could hardly move as the pressure from the fans behind

forced them towards the turnstiles. I could see 3 or 4 Police horses

up near the large iron gates bordering on Leppings Lane, the crush

of fans seemed to stretch well into Leppings Lane itself. Most of the

Police Officers I could see were between the blue barrier and the

temporary barrier guarding the sterile area at the rear of the South

Stand.With the situation getting worse the Exit Gate C was opened

again from the inside.     This time there was a much a larger influx of

fans into the ground.     The majority of them weren't running but all

were anxious to escape the crush and get into the ground.       I

positioned myself directly outside Gate C in the flow of fans who had

to pass either side of me.     They were told not to rush, to take their

time.     Hundreds of fans must have passed me.    Only a few running, the

others were orderly.     The influx died down to a small trickle after a

few minutes and the Gate was narrowed to allow one fan at a time, and

this time each showing their tickets to a steward.       The area outside

the turnstiles was now clear.     I regrouped with officers from my

serial.    Almost immediately someone reported that there was a pitch



                                                                                 2978
                                                                  PAGE     4
                                                                  S863

invasion.    In company with other officers I went in through Gate C

past the tunnel to the Centre section of the terracing into the South

Stand and onto the pitch.    There were many people walking and standing

on the pitch.   There was a lot of confusion as to what was happening.

I could see that there were numerous Police Officers near the

perimeter fence behind the Leppings Lane end goal.    I couldn't see the

crowd beyond.   Next the Police Officers began to pass injured people

out from an open gate in the fencing.    Along with others I took them

from these officers and placed them in a safer position further on

the pitch.   Many seemed short of breath and distressed but each person

I helped was alive and conscious.    I helped one youth who said to me

that people were dying in there pointing at the terrace.    At this time

due to the number of people on or around the fence I still couldn't

see through to the terracing.    I moved closer and I saw that there was

a mass crush of bodies just inside the fence.    It was a confusion of

heads arms and legs. I saw one man who was obviously dead but he was

held upright by the crush and his body moved with the crowd.    By this

time I was directly outside the small open gate. Officers inside the

terracing were passing the injured onto the pitch and giving first aid

if necessary I worked my way across to between the ambulance which

had pulled onto the track and the perimeter fence which had been

forced apart.   I continued to assist in carrying injured onto the

pitch. After a short time I climbed into the terracing through the

hole in the fence and assisted in carrying people to the fence.        I

assisted with approximately 10 people all of whom were already dead.

Eventually the Centre Section of the terrace cleared.     I remember

that soon after this an announcement was broadcast that the match

would not be continued.     Whilst I was in the terracing and on the

pitch helping the injured many Liverpool fans were directing their

anger at the Police.   Calling us murderers and that it was our fault.


                                                                               2979
                                                                            pact :    5
                                                                            S863

         Others thanked me.

         After the terracing had cleared I joined other officers on the

         halfway line.     Eventually we made our way back to the North Stand via

         the Leppings Lane terracing.

         Throughout the incident both outside and inside the ground there

         seemed to be ccmnunication problems.       It seemed that many didn't know

         what was going on or what was the best course of action.      The crush

         outside the ground could possibly have been better controlled with

         more Police Officers and a better regulation of the flow of fans up to

         the turnstiles.     At the time when the crush reached its height our

         particular serial seemed to be down to a quarter strength of what it

         should have been.     I believe that opening the outer gates was a very

         necessary decision as the situation was becoming out of hand and a

         serious risk of injury.       Knowing the Hillsborough Ground as I do and

         how the Leppings Lane end fills up it might possibly have been better

         to direct the fans ccming in through the open gates into the flank

         areas, which I saw were by no means full.




                                                             B.R.HUCKSTEPP SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
^          PLACE:

           TIME:               DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                          2 9 80
Incident     102    260390 OP8064      DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                        STATEMENT NUMBER   S864A

                                                                           Station

^^rna
    lame            TAYLOR

 Forenames          ALISTAIR    JOHN

 Age                 22                   Date of birth

 Address


 Occupation         POL PC607

 Telephone

 IC                 Height                 Build

 Hair colour

 Hair type

                                           Complexion

 Facial hair

 Glasses            Use                    Accent

 Number of Pages 6

 Dated               250589                                                  Signed


           I conmenced duty at 8.30am (0830) at Hackenthorpe Pol Stn.      I was

           instructed at this point that I was to be working in serial 16 under

           Sergeant 1288 Payne (POL PS 1288 PAYNE).     Fran Hackenthorpe we were

           transported to Hillsborough Football Ground by transport provided.



           On my arrival at the football stadium at about 9am (0900) there was no

           evidence of any supporters and once inside generally waited for the

           briefing to be held at 9.55am (0955) in the North Stand.



           As I was sat in the North Stand awaiting the briefing I was instructed

           that in general charge of serial 16 was to be Inspector

           Purdy.



           During the briefing the instructions for serial 16 was to work outside
                                                                 PAGE    2
                                                                 S864A

of the Leppings Ln turnstiles numbered A-G, at the West Stand.



Aftar meal, all of serial 16 which included Police Constable 2980

Wright, 115    Huckstepp, 3066 Huckstepp, 1715 Best, 259 Coney, 963

Evans, 620 Yates, Cerrone and Duffy took up their specific

duties outside of the turnstiles.    The time now was

approximately 11.15am (1115) although the turnstiles weren't

due to be opened until 11.45am (1145) I was working in

company with Police Constable 115 Huckstepp at turnstile 'A'.



At this time there were only a small number of fans in the immediate

vicinity.   Even when the turnstiles were open there were only a

small number of Liverpool fans entering.    Hie mood at this time was

happy with many fans joking with us, at this time it was possible to

search every person entering through our turnstile.     However, as time

went on it was very noticeable to me that although there were an

increasing number of fans arriving, many were choosing to sit outside

the ground or stand away from the ground at Leppings Ln, even at this

point it only appeared to be a 'normal' match.



It was noticeable though that when a prisoner needed escorting to the

gymnasium area, it meant two men leaving the turnstile area.     To

escort fans to our control area, the gymnasium exit gate 'B' had to be

opened to allow us through.



Although, due to the work being carried out, I was unaware of time

throughout, I believe at about 2.15pn (1415) I escorted a Liverpool

fan to the gymnasium he had had his ticket stolen and only possess the

ticket stub.
                                                                PAGE     3
                                                                S864A

We went through exit gate 'B' to get to the gymnasium, at this time

the crowd outside was still growing, although people were still jovial

and it was still in order to search virtually every person entering

the ground.



It had been a surprise to see the number of Liverpool fans who had

tried to get into the Leppings Lane West Stand on Nottingham Forest

tickets, these had turned up without tickets but bought frcm people

around the ground, it was also noticeable that many fans, especially

as numbers grew, smelled of alcohol.   I didn't see any drunken fans

but many smelled heavily of alcohol.



After being instructed to allow the fan I had escorted to the

gymnasium into the stand area, I returned to the same exit gate 'B'.



However, despite it only being seme 15 minutes I had been away, the

steward at the exit gate refused to allow me back through showing me

the number of people outside.   At that time I thought it was quite

astounding the numbers that had arrived in such a short space of time.

Understanding the reason for not being allowed outside the ground via

exit gate 'B', I then went to exit gate 'C' where I managed to get

outside.



Once outside again I managed to get to the railings by turnstiles A-G

but felt quite helpless as there was no possible way of returning to a

turnstile, there appeared to be so many fans to so few policemen.       It

was now that a superior officer, although I'm not sure who, instructed

me to go to the wrought iron perimeter gates facing leppings Ln to

ensure that the gate closest to the river was kept shut.
                                                                  pact :   4
                                                                  S864A

I, along with all but two of my serial, did not possess any personal

radios.    I noticed that there were two members of the Police Mounted

Section trying to stop the crushing that was occurring.    However,

the horses were making little impact, in fact the crowd was getting

very angry at the way they were jumping about.



The crowd at this point was getting very heated as time was getting on

towards three o'clock and movement through the turnstiles appeared to

be very slow.    At this point I don't believe there were any policemen

actually working the turnstiles.    Indeed, with the amount of people

outside it would have been virtually impossible to turn anyone away

who had got through a turnstile.



The perimeter gate I was at shut after a struggle, the idea being that

if all the perimeter gates were shut, the crush by the turnstiles

would be eased, however fans just outside these gates were by now

getting very irate, shouting and some hurling abuse towards us.

Unfortunately, it could be seen that there were a number of young

children in this crowd outside the gates and I feared for their

safety.    Immediately to my right was a wrought iron fence followed by

a further two gates which had been shut by the Mounted Officers.       The

crowd was gradually pushing harder and on numerous occasions I was

having difficulty holding this gate shut.     I was by myself on this

gate.     It was noticeable that large numbers of people although

possessing tickets, did NOT know where that part of the ground was and

many were unable to get out of the crowd to get to that part of the

ground after being instructed on where they should be.



At one point I allowed my perimeter gate to be opened to allow a

father and his young son and a pregnant woman to go through, the crowd
                                                                   pact:   5
                                                                   S864A

at this point held back and allowed them through before pushing again

when the gate was shut.



The time must now have been getting close to three o'clock and I felt

a surge.    I was unable to hold the gate shut, but made sure that I

was pushed behind the fencing to my right.     At this point I was

fearful for rny own safety but there was a greater fear for supporters'

safety as they crushed through the gate.     Somehow I managed to shut

the gate again, but increasingly more and more fans were climbing over

fencing to my left which runs parallel to the river, in order to get

round the perimeter gates.      I also witnessed numerous people

climbing on the wall between turnstiles 1 - 1 6 and turnstiles A - G,

gaining entry by going over this wall.



Soon after the first surge there was a great surge.      I was thrown

behind fencing to my right as the gate was forced open and I saw the

horses at the centre perimeter gates get pushed out of the way as

their gates too were forced open.     People were falling to the floor

as the rush of people pushed them over, now I was exremely aware that

there were going to be some serious injuries or deaths if these people

didn't get up off the ground.



On a couple of occasions I moved across my gateway area to try and

hold the crowd back to give these people chance to get up.     However,

the ones on the ground didn't seem to realise the vast numbers pushing

indeed.    I witnessed one man who had fallen over, lingering to pick

up his loose change which had scattered on falling, from his pocket.

It was at this point I realised another policeman, not frcm my serial,

was present.   We urged people to calm down and to stop pushing but it

was useless, the crowd continued to surge towards the turnstile area.
                                                                 PAGE    6
                                                                 S864A

I was amazed how quickly such a large number of people had cleared

from the area outside the West Stand turnstiles.   Only a few people

remained, looking for shoes and other items of property they had lost

in the surge.



As I looked towards the ground I saw that exit gate 'C' had been

opened.    I felt some relief as I was in no doubt that if this hadn't

opened many people would have died outside.



As I walked round with other officers outside of turnstiles A—G, the

general comments were of how quickly the area had cleared.      It was

now I heard the first tannoy message I had heard all afternoon and

that was for the fans at the Leppings Ln end to stop pushing.

Believing it was a message for those outside I thought that it was a

bit late for that, but it was obviously meant for those inside as

after a few moments, it was heard on personal radios possessed by seme

officers that all officers were required inside the ground.



I made my way into the ground, around the rear of the West Stand onto

the South Stand and then on to the pitch.



I was met with the sight of a large number of policemen stood up

against the fencing of the West Stand terrace obviously yelling and

urging supporters to go backwards.   On the pitch there were numerous

people obviously injured.



Due to the numbers of policemen at the fencing I stayed on the pitch

with injured people many struggling to breathe.    I comforted as many

as I could but it was becoming apparent that as more were being

brought onto the pitch the injuries were getting worse.      The medical
                                                                         PAGE    7
                                                                         S864A

        facilities at the time appeared inadequate, but no organisation could

        envisage what was happening.



        I ramember comforting one supporter and on looking up, seeing a dead

        body pulled onto the pitch, after that it was one after another.



        Liverpool supporters who were injured began to rip advertisement

        boards out to use as makeshift stretchers and I then assisted to

        transfer the dead bodies to the other end of the pitch.    Some fans

        still preferred to shout abuse towards us.    The Nottingham Forest

        fans were still chanting at the Liverpool fans causing some annoyance,

        making it necessary for a police barrier to be placed across the

        pitch.     However, when I joined this cordon, the movement of injured

        and dead was well underway.



        At 5.30pm (1730) I returned to the North Stand to wait further

        instructions, before doing so, I collected names and addresses of some

        people stood on the Leppings Ln terrace and handed them to a

        collecting Sergeant.     At this time the game had been called off and

        most supporters had gone frcm the ground.




                                                             A J TAYLOR SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:        POL PC 607

END OF REPORT




                                                                                     2987
Incident    102   260390 OP8Q64         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                           STATEMENT NUMBER   S1151

                                                                              Station

^Prname            EVANS

Forenames

Age                                         Date of birth

Address            SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                   HACKENTHORPE PSTN

Occupation         POL PC963

Telephone

IC                 Height                   Build

Hair colour

Hair type

fu                                          Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses            Use                      Accent

Number of Pages

Dated              090589                                             D EVANS Signed


           I was appointed a Constable of the Sheffield and Rotherham

           Constabulary on 19 January 1973 (190173) and after initial training I

           was posted to Attercliffe Division.       I remained there until October

           1974 (001074) during which time I worked many times at Hillsborough.

           One of the occasions was a semi final when I worked on Penistone Road

           with the Newcastle supporters.    Even though they had a bad reputation

           it was a family day out and I spent the whole of the match sat with

           the supporters in the North Stand.

           In October 1974 (001074) I was transferred to the Hackenthorpe

           Sub Division of the South Yorkshire Police and I remained there

           until April 1989 (000489).    Throughout this period I have worked

           in uniform at all the football grounds in the South Yorkshire Police

           area, but mainly at Bramall Lane and Hillsborough. I would imagine

           that throughout my service I have performed duties at a 100 plus
                                                                   PAGE    2
                                                                   S1151

football matches.    I have worked about 3 or 4 semi finals at

Hillsborough. The last being in April 1988 (000488) between Liverpool

and Nottingham Forest.     I worked on a static point on Penistone Road

and I did not encounter any trouble.

I worked at Hillsborough on one occasion, which I think was a semi

final a number of years ago when a part of the wall in front of the

Spion Kop collapsed.     I do not know why it did collapse but

together with other officers the situation was contained and the

crowd was moved away from the wall and we then formed a cordon

across the damaged area.    We worked on the Spion Kop side of the

wall sandwiched between the damage and the crowd.    At no time was

there any violence towards me or my fellow officers on this

occasion.   As I've said I think that it was a semi final but it

could have been another major football match.

When I have worked at Hillsborough I have usually worked on the Spion

Kop or the Penistone Road side of the ground, but I have worked on

Leppings Lane and the surrounding area, but not at Leppings

Lana turnstiles.    I think that during my service I have worked

every duty a uniformed police constable would work at a Football

match.I commenced duty at Hackenthorpe Police Station at 8.30am (0830)

on Saturday 11 April 1989 (110489) and I was immediately contacted by

PS PAYNE who informed me that I was to work under him on serial 16

on the Leppings Lane turnstile.    He informed me basically my duties

and we were then conveyed to the ground in a rented double decker

bus.   When I commenced my duties I was not issued with a personal

radio nor was given one later that day.

When we arrived at the ground we went to the North Stand, on the

numbered seats assigned our serial awaiting a briefing which was

conducted on the main by Ch. Supt. DUCKENFIELD, but with

assistance of other officers.
                                                               PAGE      3
                                                               S1151

Aftar this, briefly Insp PURDY spoke to me about the duties while we

consumed breakfast on the North Stand.   We also spoke about our

personal lives as we have known each other for a number of years and

have in fact worked at football matches together.

Aftar this we went to the Leppings Lane side of the ground where all

our duties for the full match were explained to us.   I was present

there when Insp SYKES gave us a brief outline of the overall duties at

that side of the ground.

I knew what my duties were for the full match and prior to my taking

position outside the turnstiles I went into the West Stand to look at

the lay out as I was to go there and perform duties after the kick

off.   Having done this I returned to behind the stand where I joined

my colleagues.

Prior to us taking our duties up, I went together with PC 620 YATES

to the sweet shop situated on Leppings Lane between the entrances

and Vere Road.   After purchasing some sweets I had a very short

conversation with a girl behind the counter who told me that some of

the Liverpool fans had arrived outside the ground about 7.45 am

(0745) that morning and some of them had been consuming cans of

alcohol.   She did say that they had not caused any trouble.

Upon returning to turnstiles A to G, I took up my position outside

turnstiles D and E.

Obviously I was aware that we were searching supporters for offensive

weapons and also enforcing the law relating to alcohol in particular

persons attempting to gain entry with drink or if they were drunk.

There was a dribble of people caning through the turnstiles about 12

noon (1200) and it was possible to search nearly everyone coming

through.   The majority of these early supporters were families,

fathers, sons and the like.

I noticed on one occasion that a Liverpool supporter, a white male
                                                                 PAGE
                                                                 S1151

probably about 18/19 went to one of the other turnstiles A to C.     As

he approached the entrance he was accompanied by a small group of

Liverpool supporters of a similar description as he, but as they got

nearer they stood still and he walked through on his own.   He was

challenged by another Police Officer and consented to be searched.

Because there were very few people coming through he was subjected to

a thorough search.   On completion of this he did not attempt to go

through the turnstiles but returned to his friends and they all then

left the entrance and stood on the bridge over the Don and began

drinking alcohol from cans, which they placed on the bridge wall.     I

informed my fellow officers of what had occurred and to be vigilant

if they all tried to enter again.

Nearly all the supporters who came through in this time were orderly

and did not appear to have been drinking.   Shortly after starting to

search them I sustained 2 cuts to my fingers, which were more of a

result of my hard skin and then I went to the First Aid room below

the North Stand where I obtained some plasters frcm a St Johns

Ambulance nurse and I then returned to my position.   I was away frcm

my post for about 5 minutes.

In body searching the supporters attempting to enter the ground I

realised that to search them correctly I would be able to smell their

breath for alcohol/intoxicants. As a result I performed a thorough

search on them and always smelled their breath.   I believe that I

entered into a friendly attitudue towards the supporters to such a

degree that I would make a fuss over any child who I would perform a

cursory body search to the laughter of the person accompanying them.

In fact in performing this kind of searching I got my right trouser

knee dirty and was light heartedly told to clean it by either Sgt

PAYNE or Insp PURDY.

As the crowds built up it was not possible to search the supporters
                                                                  PAGE     5
                                                                  SI 151

in the same manner, but I did endeavour to search as many as I

could.     In this period I noticed that WPC HUCKSTEPP was advising a

supporter not to enter the ground as he was the worse for drink,

and appeared to have fallen in something wet because his trouser legs

wera wet.    Around this point it appeared to me that the majority of

mala supporters had been drinking intoxicants of some form as not

only could I smell it on their breath but it was in the air as well.

I did not stop anyone entering the ground because they were drunk,

but having said this a lot of them appeared to have been drinking.

About 1.40pm (1340) I was aware that PS PAYNE had detained a man for

attempting to enter the ground with 2 cans of Heineken and I assisted

him to the Police room under the North Stand.     I then returned to my

post.

I continued to body search people entering turnstiles D and E.     I

knew that there had been a problem with the allocation of tickets to

the Liverpool supporters in that some had been given tickets for the

Spion Kop and they were coning to the Leppings Lane to try and get

in.     I was told by a uniformed Inspector (he had a full beard but I

do not know his name) who was behind the turnstiles that a small

amount of them could be let through.    But having said this I did not

personally let anyone through and infact after a short time the

permission had been withdrawn and the supporters were informed to

entar a small enclosure on the Spion Kop specifically for the

Livarpool fans.

I think that at this time I was working with PC 620 and about 2.25pm

(1425) he told me that he was going to leave me as together with

another officer he had detained someone for possession of a

controlled drug and that they were taking the person to the North

Stand Police Roan.    At this time I was aware that PC DUFFY was working

turnstiles F and G on his own, and that there were two other
                                                                 PAGE      6
                                                                 S1151

Officers working turnstiles A to C.   I cannot recall who these officers

wera. Just prior to PC YATES leaving me the crowd had begun to start

building up.   It was a friendly crowd but obviously a lot of them had

been drinking as I could smell it on their breath and in the air.      I

was still able to by this time 'frisk' people entering the ground.I

then became aware of another problem, this of people trying to enter

the ground without a ticket and attempting to pay an entrance fee to

the turnstile operators.   I did not personally see any of the

turnstile operators D and E take any money or let anyone through

without a ticket, they just refused than entry and this caused a

problem in that I had to pull the person back out of the turnstiles

against the queue.   I cannot recall how many times I did this but it

would have 3 or 4.   Because of this I then began asking the fans if

they had tickets and refused those without to actually enter the

entrance of the turnstiles.   On another occasion an old man got stuck

in turnstile D because at first he could not find his ticket and then

he had difficulty getting it out of his clothing.   A lot of the fans

told me that they had tickets but were not showing them to me, they

just produced them to the turnstile operator, and I formed the opinion

that this was because they were frightened of the tickets being

stolen. When PC YATES left me (at this time 4 of the serial were

absent) I was able to move to a position between the two turnstiles

entrances with my back against a piece of wood running frcm ground to

ceiling dividing the two entrances.   I think that it was around this

time that I saw Insp PURDY to my left, stood on something and he asked

me how I was to which I replied I was alright.   Initially I was not

being rushed and I held my arms out across the entrances still

attempting to stop supporters blocking the turnstiles up.   It was at

this time I decided that it was inpossible to search anyone coming

through so I still monitored people entering the turnstiles.
                                                                   PAGE    7
                                                                   S1151

At one stage I was aware that an officer fron behind the turnstiles

told me that a man attempting to enter had in fact been thrown out of

the ground.   My immediate feelings were that he would attanpt to jump

over the turnstile into the ground so I physically pulled him back

away fron the entrance.   I think that this occurred shortly after I

returned fron the Police rocm when I assisted PS PAYNE, but I cannot

be sure.

The next thing that happened was there was a pushing of the crowd

towards the turnstiles and I was crushed against my chest.    I thought

that it was someone at the rear pushing as the crowd, shortly

afterwards, backed away fron me.

I was then aware that a mounted police officer (fron another force)

rode up to me, basically between the queues for turnstiles D and E

and F and G and told me to move out of the way.    I immediately moved

against the wall between turnstile E and F which was a small clear

area.   I was again aware that Insp PURDY asked about my safety.     I

again told him I was alright, in fact I was joking and laughing with

the supporters as by this time I was getting extremely warm and hot

and sweat was pouring down my face.   Obviously I was face to face

with them and I again could smell intoxicants on their breaths, not

everyone but a lot of them.

I could see the same mounted officer who spoke to me, he was about 4

yards (4yds) away fron me and he kept pointing to the crowd that was

adjacent to him telling them to stop pushing.     The crush then became

worse and together with DC DUFFY I decided to try and get out.      I

also think at some stage I was told to get out by Insp Purdy.      We

triad to follow the mounted officer in the 'wake' that he left as he

made his horse go backwards but PC DUFFY fell to the floor.     He was

jeered by the crowd but none attempted to hurt him.     He got to his feet

and I told him that we would have to get out another way.     He



                                                                               2994
                                                                 PAGE         8
                                                                 S1151

suggested trying to go through the queue to turnstile F and G and

undar the metal barrier.   I told him that it was impossible because of

the number of supporters there.   They were all packed in like sardines.

People were shouting becuase they were getting crushed.     (There were

only a few shouting)   PC DUFFY managed to get through turnstile E.       I

could not follow him I was being crushed against the wall between E

and F, I could not move, I could not move my arms.     Then a man in

front of me started shouting, 'My wife's pregnant, stop pushing'.       He

said this a number of times and the crowd appeared to pull back

slightly allowing the couple slight breathing space.     I saw my chance

to help this girl and also get out of this situation, so I pushed

mysalf behind this girl and shouted for the crowd to stop pushing I

held my arms against the entrance to the turnstiles while her husband

pushed his foot against the wall, therefore pushing against the crowd.

In this way the girl got through the turnstile and I followed.    Her

husband got stuck on the outside of the turnstiles.    When I got to the

inside of the turnstile I could not see any of my serial.     I was out

of breath and extremely hot.   Before I could do anything I heard the

sound of raised voices frcm within turnstile E and I immediately went

there where I saw a white male about 35 arguing with the turnstile

operator, basically he was demanding to be let in as he had given his

ticket to the operator and he wasn't being allowed entry.     I spoke

with the turnstile operator and he said the man had not given him a

ticket and he was lying.   I got hold of this man and noticed that his

breath smelt of alcohol and I pulled him frcm the turnstile and

together with another officer I ejected him out of a gate situated on

the G side of the turnstile (the one given entry to lane running

behind the south stand). I then went back to behind the turnstiles.

On looking through them, towards the queues I could see that the

supporters were being crushed against the entrance to the turnstiles.
                                                                     PAGE      9
                                                                     S1151

They were all shouting and screaming and it appeared to me that they

wera only coining through the turnstiles very slowly.    I then saw a

supporter within the turnstile attempt to pay money to enter the

ground.    This was again refused by the operator and I ejected him.      At

this time the supporters outside were screaming that someone was going

to be crushed to death unless something was done.     The next thing I

recall was a man entering one of the turnstiles and he had a child on

his shoulders.     The man was very red in the face and was shouting for

sorrvaone to take his child and I saw a uniformed Sergeant (identity

unknown) take the child frcm the man and then the man came through the

turnstiles.    It was about this time that when the supporters managed

to come through the turnstiles that some of them were falling to their

knees, they were obviously in a distressed condition most were gasping

for air.    Seme of them were shouting at us that something had got to

be done, as they feared someone would be killed.

At this point I decided to find my serial on the outside of the

turnstiles to see if I could help get the people away frcm the

turnstiles.    I went through the large concertina gate adjacent to

turnstile G.     The gate was shut behind me.   Just outside the gate I

saw a group of uniformed officers talking to a group of about 6 men

in civilian clothes.     One of the group of these men were showing the

officers a Merseyside Police Warrant Card.      I am sure that the

officers were telling them that they could not let them in.      I only

heard a small part of this conversation but I formed the opinion that

the group of 6 men were Police Officers frcm Merseyside wanting entry

into the ground.

At this time there were a lot of supporters around this gate, they

wera pleading with the officers that something had got to be done as

people were being crushed and they feared for their lives.      I told

them that I could not let them through the gate.


                                                                                   2996
                                                                    PAGE 10
                                                                    S1151

A faw second later I saw Insp PURDY coining through the crowd of

supporters frcm Leppings Lane.    He was pointing towards the gate I

had just come through and was saying something like, 'Open the gates,

open the gates'. This was not directly said to me but appeared to be

said to the officers in general that were stood outside the gate.      I

can recall saying to the officer, 'Wa can't open the gates we'll

have trouble inside'.    The Inspector said that they had got to be

opened to save life outside the turnstiles.    The gates were opened, I

do not know what time it was they were opened and unlocked frcm within

aftar an officer had shouted frcm the outside.    After a short time

Insp Purdy gave the order to close them.     I cannot say how many

people entered through this gate but it was opened for about 20 to

30 seconds.     It was not opened fully, probably between 6 to 10

feet(6' - 10'). It was impossible to stop the supporters running

through but having said this when the order was given to close the

gatas I could not see any problems and they were irrmediately closed.

In my previous attendances at the football matches I have never known

a gate opened to let supporters enter in this manner.     Frcm my

experiences, when gates have been broken down by fans it is

inpossible in the initial stages to stop the flow into the ground due

to the numbers trying to enter.      I have experienced a gate being

broken down at Bramall Lane and it does allow a lot of people to

enter quickly.

There was only a small crowd of supporters outside the gate when it

was closed but within a matter of seconds they were coining to us,

pleading with us to do something again as the situation had not been

solved directly outside the entrance to the turnstiles.     Seme of them

wera showing me their tickets and saying let me through the gates, I've

got a ticket.    Again I did not want to open this gate and let those

with tickets enter as I felt that because of the numbers of the crowd
                                                                 PAGE 11
                                                                 S1151

that a surge by them would force the gates completely open and we

would not be able to contain the situation.

At some stage shortly after this Insp PURDY told me that he would get

the mounted section to form a barrier against the entry to the gate

and filter through those with tickets.    Within seconds there were a

number of mounted officers outside this gate and the order was again

givan for it to be open frcm inside.     It was opened and there was a

steady stream of supporters moving through.     I personally did not

take any tickets frcm those entering.

All those entering at this time appeared to be orderly and distressed

from being crushed.   A short time after the gates were opened I

noticed that the crowd still appeared to be entering through the

gates of Leppings Lane.   I shouted to Insp PURDY that the gates had

to be shut to stop people coining into the bottleneck.    I am not sure

if the Inspector heard me.   I walked to the gates and it appeared

that there were a number of officers, including mounted officers

allowing supporters to enter by showing their tickets.     I noticed at

this time there was still a crush against the entrance to the

turnstiles, but there was a large area behind the queues that was

free of supporters.   I then noticed that some supporters were

climbing onto a metal dividing wall between our turnstile and those

turnstiles adjacent to ours. I shouted at them to get down.      They

appeared to be climbing onto the wall and over the top of the

turnstiles. These youths were climbing frcm the other side of the wall

from me.   They didn't appear to take any notice of me and then a

Policewoman (identity not known) said to me that there was an

Inspector on top of the turnstiles letting them gain entry into the

ground over the top of the turnstiles.     I looked to the top of the

turnstiles and saw Insp Bennett stood there.     Because of this I

allowed them to continue.    I then saw a supporter walking towards me
                                                                     PAGE 12
                                                                     S1151

with a can of pop and I told him not to take it in and then I heard

the sound of another gate being opened.        I do not know what time this

was.   I think that it was Gate B adjacent to turnstile A.        The crowd

then entered the ground through this gate.        A very short time later I

can recall hearing over a personal radio, that all Police Officers

wera to go to the playing area. I ran through to behind the West Stand,

I did not go through the turnstiles but I cannot for the life of me

ransmber which gate I ran through.     As I ran to the enclosure I

ransmber running behind Insp PURDY.        We ran along the back of the West

Stand underneath the Police Control Box, in front of the south stand

and onto the pitch.     I could see a lot of officers on the pitch and

sore fans climbing over the perimeter fence in front of the West Stand.

My immediate thought were that the fans were invading the pitch.

I then recalled Insp PURDY saying something like 'Form a line across

the pitch' to face the crowd.     Before I could do anything a

uniformed Sergeant     (Unknown but he had a full beard and I think he

works or has worked at Hammerton Police Station) told me to accompany

him with other officers to behind the terraces and pull the fans away

from the standing area.     I could see that there were sufficient

officers on the pitch so I ran with this Sergeant and a group of

other officers.     I did not inform Insp PURDY what I was doing.     I saw

that it was important to get the people away frcm the rear.        I ran

along the same route that I had taken to get to the pitch.        I was the

last officer of this group and I ran along the tunnel giving entry to

the terraces.     This tunnel was empty.     There were no injured persons

at the rear of the stand when I ran into the tunnel.

As I got to the exit of the tunnel (onto the terrace) I saw that the

other officers ran down into the crowd so I stopped at the exit and

began pulling people back off the terraces and telling than to go

along the tunnel to the rear of the stand.        I was doing this for a
                                                                  PAGE 13
                                                                  S1151

matter of minutes.    Some of the youths I spoke to in this manner

smelt of drink.

The next thing I can recall was a supporter backing through the exit

from the terraces shouting 'There's people dead down there'.     I

couldn't believe what I heard so I walked through the crowd stood at

the exit and looked towards the perimeter fence. I could see a

Policewoman on top of the fence trying to pull a lifeless body over

the fence.    I formed the opinion that this person was dead.   I moved

forward to help but in doing this I could see that there was a large

number of Police Officers at the material point so I decided to pull

the crowd away frcm the terraces.    I retained pulling people away from

the centre stand enclosure.    By this time some of the crowd had been

volatile and were swearing at me calling me a murderer.    I continued

to pull people away and some of them had arguments with me about the

dead and dying people. In the most diplomatic terms possible I urged

them to go through the tunnel.    The majority that argued with me face

to face smelt of intoxicants, then Police Officers began to bring

injured people through the terraces and along the tunnel I tried to

keep the entrances and exits free in order that they could get through.

When all the movement began to stop from Police Officers and

supporters bringing injured through the crowd appeared to turn on the

Police.    They personally started accusing me of murder and likening it

to the Heysel Stadium disaster.I still kept the exit free and then I

was told by Insp WALKER to go to the rear of the tunnel and stop the

fans attempting to get back into the terraces.    When I got there there

was a number of officers stopping the supporters frcm re-entering the

terrace.    Some of the youths and men were obviously drunk and were

arguing with officers to be allowed back because they had been parted

from their friends. I stopped in this position for a considerable

period.    I then accompanied doctors through the tunnel to the pitch.


                                                                            30 00
                                                                          PAGE 14
                                                                          S1151

         I think I took two doctors through.   Eventually it appeared that the

         supporters began to leave the stadium and when they did I went back

         onto the playing area where I reported to PS PAYNE.    We were then

         instructed by a Chief Inspector (identity not known) to go onto the

         terraces and the names of supporters still there.     But by this time

         they had all gone and I didn't get any names.

         I did not handle any of the bodies.

         I must say that when the people were being crushed against the

         turnstiles I did fear for the safety of them and I have formed the

         opinion that had the gates not been opened then life would have been

         lost outside the turnstiles.

         I then returned to the North Stand and after being stood down I

         returned to El and went off duty at 7pm. (1900)

         Later that night I examined my body and found that my legs were

         covered in bruises there was a large one on my right knee.     I had

         also got some bruising to my lower half of my body.     I cannot explain

         where or why I sustained these injuries.




                                                                  D EVANS SIGNED

 ^STATEMENT TAKEN
A           PLACE:

            TIME:           DATE:

 WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

 OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT
Incident    102    260390 QP8064      DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                          STATEMENT NUMBER    S868

                                                                             Station

^urr
 surname           DUFFY

Forenames          GRAHAM

Age                 37                    Date of birth

Address            S YORKS POLICE
                   WOODSEATS

Occupation         POL PC1040

Telephone

IC                 Height                 Build

Hair colour

  ir type

« es                                      Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses            Use                    Accent

Number of Pages 3

Dated              070589                                                      Signed


           At 8.45 am (0845), Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I paraded for

           duty at Woodseats Police Station.   Frcm there, together with other

           officers, I was transported to the Sheffield Wednesday FC Ground at

           Hillsborough where, at 9.45 am (0945), we were briefed with regard to

           our duties that day in connection with the FA Cup Semi-Final

           involving Liverpool FC and Nottingham Forrest.

           I was allocated a serial under the corrmand of Sgt 1288 PAYNE taking

           up duties at 11.15 am (1115) which were to police the turnstiles at

           the Leppings Lane end of the ground which gives access to the West

           Stand and also to the standing terrace at the rear of Leppings Lane

           goal.   Our duties were the supervision of persons entering the ground

           including a search of persons for intoxicants and offensive weapons

           at entrance A to G.

           At approximately 1.30 pm (1330), Sgt PAYNE and two other officers, who
                                                                   PAGE      2
                                                                   S868

I believe were frcm Hackenthorpe Police Station, detained a coloured

youth and a white girl and went to the Prisoner Reception Area under

the North Stand.    Together with PC963 EVANS El and one other officer,

I continued my allocated duties.

At 1415 hrs the crowd became more dense with large queues forming at

the turnstiles.    At this stage I formed the impression that large

numbers of persons had arrived without tickets due to enquiries frcm

supporters at the turnstiles.

At 1430 hours the crowd pressure at the turnstiles was becoming

intense and I could see a large build up of supporters backing up

from my position into Leppings Lane.    At this time I could see

children and females becoming distressed due to the crush.

At 1440 hours the crowd pressure was so great that a number of

persons were assisted from the crowd complaining of being crushed.

At this time I was aware only of being accompanied by PC EVANS.       At

this time we were unable to conmunicate with either Ground Control or

any supervisory rank as we were not equipped with a radio and Sgt PAYNE

had not returned to our location.

At 1445 hours we were joined by Inspector PURDY who, seeing the

gravity of the problem we were having at the turnstiles, instructed

PC EVANS and myself to leave the turnstiles and join him at the side

of entrance 'A', alongside which runs an iron barrier.    We assisted

in the removal of distressed persons at this location.    I saw at this

time a police horse and rider trying to assist in pushing the crowd

back from the turnstiles but the pressure was so great that the horse

seemed trapped in the crush.

Large numbers of Liverpool supporters were now becoming extremely

agitated and were screaming for the large exit gates to be opened as

people were being crushed at the entrance to the turnstiles.       At this

time I was concerned that the walls surrounding the turnstiles would


                                                                                 3 0 03
                                                                  PAGE
                                                                  S868

give way, so great was the crowd pressure.

At approximately 1452 hours I saw the exit gates open.    They remained

open for what seemed only seconds and were then closed again.     This

relieved the pressure at the turnstiles to a manageable degree.     I

had noticed that when, on Inspector PURDY'S instruction, I had left

the turnstiles, I had had to climb over the turnstile and into the

ground and then pass out of the exit gate, that the exit gates were

not locked but were opened by operation of a catch which can be

reached frcm the inside of the gate only.    No keys were required to

unlock the gate through which I passed.

After the gates had been again closed persons were still climbing

over the walls into the ground.

I formed a definite opinion that a deliberate effort on the part of a

section of the crowd had been made to cause chaos at the turnstiles

so that persons could gain entry without tickets.   A large majority

of the crowd that I encountered after 1430 hours had been drinking to

various degrees.

At 1505 hours, on the instruction of Ground Control, I attended on

the playing area at the rear of the Leppings Lane goal.

On my arrival at the fenced area behind the goals I could see that a

large number of persons at the front of the crowd were injured and

that a number of these seemed to be dead.

For approximately 40 minutes I assisted with the movement of dead and

injured persons from this area onto the playing area.     I assisted

with the removal of a number of obviously dead persons to the

makeshift mortuary at the Hillsborough gymnasium.

At approximately 1600 hours I was directed back to the turnstile area

at the rear of the West Stand where I was again engaged in assisting

with injured and dead persons.

At 1730 hours I attended a de-briefing in the North Stand and was



                                                                          3004
                                                                       PAGE
                                                                       S868

         eventually returned to Woodseats Police Station where I terminated

         duty at 1900 hours.




                                                       G DUFFY PC1040 SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

           TIME:               DATE:   070589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                               3005
Incident      102   270390 QP8064         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                             STATEMENT NUMBER   S1082

                                                                                Station

Surname             GRANT

Forenames           JAMES     ANDREW

Age                                          Date of birth

Address             B1 DIVISION


Occupation          POL PC2887

Telephone

IC                  Height                   Build

Hair colour

     r type

«    s                                       Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses             Use                      Accent

Number of Pages 7

Dated                180589                                           J A GRANT Signed


           POLICE CONSTABLE 2887 GRANT

           'Bl' DIVISION

           At 9.00 am (0900) on Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), I reported for

           duty at Barnsley Divisional Headquarters and subsequently travelled

           through to Hillsborough Football Ground.       I then attended in the main

           North Stand for the pre-match briefing and after a short meal break I

           attended at the Leppings Lane Terrace, together with Police Sergeant

           1341 CRAWFORD and other officers from the Serial (14).        We had a

           further briefing from Inspector WHITE who instructed all re-searching

           of fans and emergency procedures.

           At approximately 11.30 am (1130), the serial moved to the enclosure

           at the rear of Leppings Lane Terrace directly behind turnstiles A -

           G. Turnstiles A and B were already open at this stage, the remaining

           were soon opened.      All were open by 11.45 am (1145).    I was given
                                                                    PAGE    2
                                                                    S1082

responsibility, together with Police Constable 2819 MCMANUS, for

turnstiles F and G.     Arrangements were made with the turnstile

operators that if they were in difficulty they would bang on the

window at the rear of their turnstile in order to call our attention.

At approximately 12 noon (1200) the first of the Liverpool fans began

to arrive. They were few in number and in good spirits.     I had a clear

view through the turnstiles and could see officers outside searching

them as they arrived.     I did not search these fans as they had

already been searched.     However, we were then instructed by Inspector

WHITE to search everyone regardless whether they had been searched

before or not.

By 1.30 pn (1330), the number of fans increased but was not

excessive.    Most were searched, a few complained about the number of

times they had been searched, but they were still generally good

humoured.     There was still a good view through the turnstiles and it

could be seen that the area outside was still effectively clear.

At approximately 2.00 pn (1400), the turnstile operator knocked on the

window to indicate a problem, he told us that a fan was trying to get

in without a ticket.     He came through the turnstile and was ejected

straight through gate 'C' to our left.

In the process of doing this, Police Constable MCMANUS and I were

surrounded by a number of his friends who were abusing us and

indignantly claiming that he did have a ticket.

This happened approximately a dozen times in the next twenty minutes.

I saw seme fans offering money to the operators in order to gain

entry.   This was refused, however, and they left the turnstile

peacefully.

By 2.30 pm (1430) large numbers of Liverpool supporters had arrived

and were pressed up to the turnstiles.     The view through the turnstile

was no longer possible.     It quickly became apparent that the searching
                                                                PAGE      3
                                                                S1082

of fans was no longer practical or possible.   The priority became

giving entry to as many ticket holding fans as quickly and safely as

possible.    Fans without tickets were still being ejected by Police

Constable 2819 MCMANUS and myself.

Whilst attempting to eject one man through gate 'C', the steward on

the gate refused to open it because he feared that supporters would

rush in.    He was ordered to open the gate and the man was ejected

without significant problems.

Pressure continued to increase outside the turnstiles and fans were

becoming trapped within them, as a result causing more problems.

Large numbers of fans entering the ground were under the influence of

alcohol, seme quite heavily.    It was impossible to eject then though

due to pressure behind both turnstiles and gate 'C'.

By 2.45 pm (1445), it had became apparent that there were serious

problems outside.    Fans entering the ground were near to collapse.

Many did fall down through exhaustion on gaining entry.    Some fans

were crying, nearly all were extremely angry abusing us and shouting

at me to do something.    I was grabbed by one hysterical man in his

late twenties who shook me violently and screamed into my face,

"Listen you fucking bastard, they're dying out there - kids.    Where's

your fucking radio do something - do something."

I was without a radio and continued to assist other fans.    One fan

became trapped in the turnstile with his jeans hooked on the turnstile.

It was necessary to use a knife to cut him free.

By this stage all officers within Serial 14 were being subjected to

abuse, threats, being pushed and jostled around.    No supervisory

officers, with the exception of Police Sergeant 1341 CRAWFORD, could

be seen.    As I looked around I could see only 10 or 12 officers,

mainly Serial 14, attempting to control large numbers of fans inside

the ground in the area immediately next to the turnstiles. We were
                                                                 PAGE        4
                                                                 S1082

heavily out-numbered at the point, I believe, of coming under serious

physical attack from very irate and upset fans.     I have never been

more concerned for my own or my colleagues' safety.

A number of fans had begun climbing over the wall into the ground, but

again we were powerless to stop this.    Turnstile 'D' collapsed and

appeared inoperative.

After a period of what can only be described as chaos, a Senior

Officer shouted for the gate 'C' to be opened.

I assisted other officers to open the gate.    No objections were voiced

by stewards on the gate.    The crowd surged through and people at the

front fell down.   They were trampled on by the crowd who flooded

through the gates, screaming abuse at Police, striking out at officers

as they charged in.     I could see many fans carrying cans of beer as

they forced their way through but it was inpossible to do anything

about this.

After the main body of supporters had come through the gate, I helped

force the gate shut.    During the surge I had been forced back against

the wall of turnstile 'G'. I stayed there for my own safety.      Fans

who had fallen were helped to their feet.     I would estimate that

around 2,000 people had entered through the gate.     Within a mcment the

gate was opened for a second time and about 200-300 more fans ran in.

The numbers entering dwindled to a trickle and the gate was left ajar

to act as an additional turnstile.     However, there was no-one left

outside.

The scene inside could only then have been described as a 'sea of

fans' all congregating on the area behind the turnstiles A to G.        It

was as though they were all taking their breath to try and recover.          A

large cheer went up inside the ground and I watched as within a

matter of 1-2 minutes the area emptied entirely, the majority of fans

running down the tunnel to the central terrace.
                                                                          PAGE     5
                                                                          S1082

I   look around to see the other officers from ray serial more or less

in tact and thought 'thank god that's over.' I stood up for a moment

to recover but looked up to see a large number of Police officers,

about 30, running around the foot of the West Stand and Leppings Lane

Terrace.    We ran as a serial and joined them and made our way through

the South Stand onto the pitch.       As I stepped onto the pitch an

announcement came over the ground 'Tannoy' requesting that Liverpool

fans left the     pitch. I could see a number of fans wandering up and

down in front     of the fence and more climbing over.     I    ran up to the

front of the terrace - the centre south enclosure and was met with a

scene of carnage.       Fans were crushed tight up against the fence, same

were already blue faced.

Other officers present were stood on the fence shouting for the crowd

to move back, to no avail.      The gate at the front of the enclosure

No 3 had been     openedbut this did little to help the situation.         There

is a three foot (3') step up to escape the terrace.            The man who was

directly behind the gate when it was opened fell forward due to

pressure behind him.      His legs were trapped below the level of the

pitch and people were packed tighter than sardines behind him.            Gate 3

became blocked.     I   struggled with other officers to free people.       One

or two were rescued.      The gate then became cluttered with Police, a

senior officer ran up with a loud hailer and began shouting at

officers at gate three to move back to        let peopleout. Some

officers moved away but the problem of the trapped man remained.            He

effectively blocked the gate completely.       I   helped a supporter out and

escorted him to the penalty area of the pitch.        He appeared to be

recovering so I placed him in the recovery position.           I   looked up and

saw officers trying to pull down the fence in front of CS enclosure.

I   ran to assist, but this exercise proved futile. I helped sane fans

over the top of the fence and returned        to Gate 3.
                                                                      PAGE      6
                                                                      S1082

Throughout this period the officers at the front of the fence had been

subjected to a hail of missiles from the crowd.      The blue crash

barrier that had collapsed was thrown from the crowd and landed on

officers at the front.    I   was hit by a shoe and I believe coins,

although I cannot be certain of what the missiles were.       I   assisted at

Gate 3 and carried, with other officers, eight bodies from the terrace.

I   attempted to resuscitate four of these to no avail.

The crowd up against the fence were still being crushed, unable to

help themselves due to being weak through lack of air.      Another

problem was that people had died in the cxrush and were lying as 'dead

weight' on people who were still alive.      The ninth body I removed was

placed on a make shift stretcher - a piece of advertising board and I

carried him to the gymnasium.      I wrote my number on   his hand and

returned to the pitch where I attended to the injured.       I carried a

young lad of about 12 years of age to the gymnasium for transport to

hospital.    I then remained with my body.

The body was subsequently numbered No 31.      He was a male, white, about

50 years, brown greying hair and moustache, 5'11" (5'11) tall, wearing

a blue shirt, white tee shirt, grey trousers and socks, black shoes

and wearing a gold coloured Rotary wrist watch on his left wrist.         He

had no identifiable property - (#36.00 cash, a cigarette lighter and

packets of cigs).    I remained with the body carrying out duties as

instructed, ie, Gen 18 preparation for photograph etc.

At 8.30 pn (2030), I handed the body over to a CID Officer and

completed a CJA statement to that effect.

I want off duty at 9.00 pm (2100).

I am aware that it is inevitable that there will be criticism of

various aspiects of the incident at Hillsborough.     I feel, however,

that given the circumstances, the decisions taken, particularly in

relation to opening gates, were correct.      I fully support them and
                                                                           PAGE      7
                                                                           S1082

         feel it was the only course of action to take.

         There is little point in 'iffing' and 'butting' about Police action.

         The circumstances were something that could never have been prepared

         for and I am sure if it happened tomorrow, most officers would behave

         in the same manner.     Very little, if anything, could have been done to

         prevent the tragedy.




                                                        J A GRANT PC2887 SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

           TIME:               DATE:   180589

^BrNESS TO SIGNATURE:

 OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




#




*
                                                                                         3 0 12
Incident     102   270390 OP8064        DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                         STATEMENT NUMBER   S1923

                                                                            Station

 Surname           LONG

 Forenames         ANTHONY     MARK

 Age                                        Date of birth

 Address            HACKENTHORPE PSTN


 Occupation        POL PC142

 Telephone

 IC                Height                   Build

 Hair colour

^toir type

'Eyes                                       Complexion

 Facial hair

 Glasses           Use                      Accent

 Number of Pages 8

 Dated                                                                        Signed


           HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - SATURDAY 15TH APRIL 1989.

           ANTHONY MARK LONG

           POLICE CONSTABLE 142

           HACKENTHORPE POLICE STATION (El)

           At 8.30am (0830) on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I commenced

           duty at Hackenthorpe Police Station in Sheffield. Together with other

           Officers I was then transported to the Hillsborough Football Stadium

           in Sheffield, where a briefing for all Officers working the football

           match was held in the North Stand of the stadium.    I was attached to

           serial number 6 under the carmtand of police sergeant 729 NORBURN.

           We were assigned to protect the area between the Leppings

           Lane or West Stand and the South Stand. This area was known as the

             'sterile area' and was occupied by the BBC and television crews. At

           approximately 11.15am (1115) that same date, we erected a barrier at
                                                                 PAGE    2
                                                                 S1923

the Leppings Lane side of the ground between the perimeter wall next

to the turnstiles numbered A to G and the low wall running parallel

with the River Don. We were stood behind the moveable barrier and

facing towards Lepings Lane itself. Directly in front of the barrier

was a concertina gate (c) which was manned by two official ground

stewards.

Throughout the remainder of the morning and early afternoon,

a steady flow of fans arrived at the stadium. Many of these fans were

Nottingham Forest supporters who held tickets for the South Stand.

Many requested that they be allowed to pass the barrier in order to

gain access to the South Stand. These supporters were informed that

the area was 'sterile' and were directed to walk around to the

Fenistone Road side of the stadium in order to gain access to the

ground. The only people allowed entry past this barrier were press

officials and others who held an official pass.

Throughout the afternoon the amount of supporters arriving at the

Leppings Lane turnstiles began to steadily increase. At approximately

2 .40pm (1440) that same date there was a large crowd of Liverpool

supporters who had gathered at the tumsiles. Many had already started

pushing and were shouting quite loudly. They appeared to be very

excited and wanting to get into the ground to see the match as quickly

as possible. I saw a number of Officers who were engaged on turnstile

duties, having to tell members of the crowd to calm down and be

patient. Some of the fans appeared to be the worst for drink and were

balancing on the tops of each others shoulders. By this time the

turnstiles were beginning to be cranmed with supporters, all of whem

were pushing to try to get into the ground quicker. There were so many

people trying to get into a small space and they were too excited to

form orderly queues. At one stage a number of Police horses had to be

called in to try to restore order by attempting the crowds pushing
                                                                  PAGE    3
                                                                  S1923

forwards. The efforts by the horses and their riders were met by the

supporters climbing through the legs of the horses.

As the time passed, the crowd had swelled to such an extent that they

filled the entire areaat   the entrance to the Leppings Lane main

wrought iron gates and were spilling onto Leppings Lane itself. The

crowds had moved beyond the turnstiles and were now stood in front of

the barriers to avoid the swell of people directly in front of the

turnstiles themselves. I saw supporters stood on top of the wall

adjacent to the turnstiles and many were actually climbing over the

tops of the turnstiles. I saw the concertina gate open several times

as Officers behind the turnstiles were ejecting drunken and

disorderly supporters.

At one stage I saw a small child being passed over the heads of

the crowd and being assisted by a Police Officer. He was crying because

he had lost his fatherin   the crowd and had been trampled on by members

of the crowd. I banged on the concertina gate, which was pulled open by

a Steward and the child was allowed access in an attempt to locate

his father and seek medical treatment. The gate was then closed to

prevent the mass of supporters from gaining entry (Gate 'C').

The fans were screaming at me and other Officers, shouting, "OPEN THE

GATES BEFORE SOMEONE GETS KILLED OUT THERE." I could see a mass of

people all of whom were pushing, trying to get into the ground and

many appeared to be suffering from being crushed by the crowd.

Several moments later the gates opened and the people started to flood

into the ground. I moved in front of the barrier again and tried to

slow the people who were pushing and trying to run into the ground.

Due to the surge of people I was forced into the ground and to the

other side of the gates behind the perimeter wall. Somehow, with the

assistance of two Stewards, I was able to force the gates closed and

prevent further supporters from entering the ground in this manner. I
                                                                PAGE     4
                                                                S1923

do not know whether or not these gates had been forced open or if they

had been opened to relieve the pressure of the crowd. I would

estimate that a crowd of about 150 supporters had managed to gain

access in this manner.

Whilst at the other side of the gate and behind the turnstiles I saw

many, many supporters climbing over the top® of the turnstiles and

running towards the rear of the West Stand. I turned to an Inspector

who was stood beside the turnstiles and listening intently to radio

transmissions being passed via his personal radio. I told him of the

mass crowd at the other side of the gate and we saw faces pressed

against the small perspex window in the gate who were obviously being

crushed by other supporters. I was then instructed after several

moments, to open the gates. The gates were not locked in any manner

and did not require keys. With the assistance of a ground Steward, we

unbolted the concertina gate and pulled it across. A mass rush of

people flooded into the ground as if a pressure valve had just been

released. I thought at the time, what a wise decision it had been to

open the gates to prevent serious injuries at the other side.

I could still see people climbing over the tops of the turnstiles as

the other supporters flooded through the gates. They all ran in the

same direction to the control tunnel leading to the terraces on the

West Stand ('Leppings Lane'). The pitch was immediately visible at the

end of the tunnel and they all ran forwards like following sheep.

Almost simultaneously I heard a cheering roar from the supporters in

the stadium and I realised that the match had obviously started and

an exciting part of the game had just taken place. This had the effect

of causing the people to run even faster and push forward in an

attempt to see the already started football match.

It took only a matter of several minutes for the crowd to enter

through the gate and rush towards the rear of the West Stand. I was
                                                                 PAGE    5
                                                                 S1923

then able to pass through the gate and rejoin the rest of my serial.

Together with other Officers in serial 6, I moved the barrier forwards

so that it was now positioned several yards ahead and the concertina

gate was now behind us. We were now able to check the tickets of the

supporters who were still arriving in a steady flow. After checking

that these people were in fact ticket holders, we allowed them to pass

through the barrier and gain entry to the West Stand via the now open

concertina gate 'C'.

We were just beginning to give a sigh of relief at the serious

disorder and injury we had prevented, when we heard the message for

all available Police Officers to go onto the pitch. I imagined that

there had been a pitch invasion and together with other members from

serial 6, I ran towards the South Stand. I entered the area between

the West and South Stands which is behind 'Police Control'. I then

moved to the front of the South Stand and onto the pitch. There

appeared to be chaos on the pitch and I saw several supporters running

about on the pitch whilst others laid on it. I saw many Officers on

the pitch dealing with the supporters and the whole scene still

appeared to be a pitch invasion.

As I approached supporters lying on the pitch I realised that they

wera injured. I assisted them by loosening their clothing and placing

them into the recovery position, whilst I moved on to assist other

injured people. Many were holding their arms across their chest and

seemed to have trouble in breathing. I continued tending to the

injured in this manner before walking towards the perimeter fence in

front of the terraces of the West Stand ('Leppings Lane'). I had been

helping injured supporters for approximately 10 minutes and now wanted

to discover why they had climbed onto the pitch. It appeared that they

had been injured whilst trying to invade the pitch. However, on

reaching the perimeter fencing, for the first time I realised the
                                                                PAGE     6
                                                                S1923

horror that faced me.

I stood directly in front of the perimeter fencing between the sectors

marked '3' and '4'. I saw a young female approximately 25 years of age

with her body pressed against the front of the fencing. Her head was

slumped to one side, her mouth and eyes were gaping wide open and her

face was a sickening blue/purple colour. I turned to an Officer on my

left and said; " M GOD SHE'S BLUE."

He replied, "SHE'S DEAD. THERE'S AT LEAST SIX   OF 'EM.”At that point I

iranediately felt nauseous and became extremely hot and could feel

my face reddening.

Without hesitation I climbed onto the perimeter fencing and laid

across the top spikes. I looked down onto the   terracesand saw dead

people lying on top of each other and scattered like litter. I saw

sane supporters tossing the bodies around, as if they were piles of

clothes, in an attempt to locate friends and relatives.

A Police Officer gripped my feet and I hung over the perimeter fencing

in an attempt to pull people free. In among the motionless bodies I

saw the arms of living people and could hear them screaming: "PLEASE

GOD HELP ME." I gripped someone's wrists and tried to pull them free.

I saw the face of a young man, he was beginning to turn a frightening

blue colour. I tried with all my strength to pull him free, but the

sheer weight of bodies on top of him made it impossible. I watched him

die in my arms and felt helpless. My eyes filled with tears and I

thought: "PLEASE GOD, THIS CAN'T BE HAPPENING." I gritted my teeth and

triad to pull another man free frcm the mass of bodies. Somehow,

he managed to wriggle through the bodies and grip the fence. I then

assisted him to climb the fence, over the top and onto the pitch. I

continued to attempt to save further lives but could do nothing and I

saw others die, right before my very eyes. It was a physical

impossibility to lift people from the terraces, since they were
                                                                       PAGE    7
                                                                       S1923

       entwined and trapped beneath other bodies.

       I later climbed down frcm the fence feeling exhausted and tried to

       help the survivors. I saw a man being carried by two men and a police

       officer. His left arm hung lifeless and trailed along the grass pitch

       as he was carried. I grasped his arm and helped to place him on the

       ground. His face was blue in colour and there were no signs of life.

       Together with the other officer I administered cardiac massage and

       mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. The man's nose and mouth were covered in

       mucus. A doctor approached us and watched as we tried to revive the

       man. Several minutes later the doctor said: "HE'S GONE, TRY AND HELP

       PEOPLE WHO CAN BE HELPED." The other officer placed a police anorak

       over the dead man and we tried to console his friend who had watched

       us trying to save his life.

       I walked across the pitch and saw many officers and ambulance

       personnel crouched over bodies and trying to revive them. Many of the

       supporters were spitting at us and shouting "MURDERING BASTARDS."

       Many of the rival fans had started fighting and had to be separated by

       the police. Chief Superintendent NESBIT instructed us to form a police

       cordon across the pitch between the North and South stand sides of the

       pitch in order to prevent the rival supporters from clashing.

       The cordon was later stood down and we returned to the North Stand for

       a de-briefing before being allowed to leave the stadium and retire

        from duty at 7.30pm (1930).




                                                      A M LONG PC142 SIOJED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

         TIME              DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

  TCERS SIGNATURE:
Incident    102     270390 QP8064       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                          STATEMENT NUMBER   S1816

                                                                             Station

Surname             CRAIGHILL

Forenames           MICHAEL   JOHN

Age                                          Date of birth

Address             SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                    AITERCLIFFE, SHEFFIELD

Occupation          POL PC1790

Telephone

IC                  Height                   Build

Hair colour

  ir type

« es                                         Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses             Use                      Accent

Number of Pages

Dated               280489                                      M J CRAIGHILL Signed


           At 8.00am (0800) on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I commenced duty

           at Attercliffe Police Station for the semi-final between Liverpool

           Football Club and Nottingham Forest Football Club, to be held at

           Hillsborough, Sheffield.

           From Attercliffe Police Station we went to West Bar Police Station for

           briefing at 9.00am (0900).

           At 10.00am (1000) I commenced duties at the Midland Railway Station

           supervising Liverpool supporters arriving by train onto awaiting

           PSV's.   At 1.30pm (1330) in company with Police Constable 492 TRANTER,

           I escorted Liverpool fans on a PSV to the ground disembarking

           at the Leppings Lane end, to go into the ground.      From there I went to

           the rear of the North Stand within the ground to stand by and await

           the arrival of irty supervisor, Police Sergeant 840 WRIGHT.    There we

           were on standby until approximately 2.40pm (1440) when a radio message
                                                                  PAGE        2
                                                                  S1816

was received frcm Ground Control informing us that there was trouble

outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles.   We were directed to attend

there.

We approached the Leppings Lane area via the rear North Stand

passageway.   Having exited from the passageway into the area of gate

'A' I could see that there was a large crowd outside the turnstiles

and the gate, causing the gate to buckle and bend under the pressure

of the people outside.   It was decided not to open this gate, because

it was thought the people at the front would be trampled on.    We then

went to the rear of the West Stand to the turnstiles numbers 1-16.

We could see several people climbing over the turnstile roofing from

outside the ground, gaining access into the ground, assisted by a

Police Inspector, who was standing on top of the turnstile roof.     The

area behind the turnstile was not very busy and it was obvious that

people were having difficulty in getting through the turnstiles.      I

could see through the turnstiles and realised that there were several

hundred outside the ground trying to get in.   Each turnstile was

blocked, people were being pushed up against the turnstile gate,

making it inoperative.   Seme people got through and were obviously

injured and in a great deal of pain.    I helped them to one side and

tried to free one of the turnstiles, which was jammed.   People were

screaming and shouting for help, requesting the gates to be opened.

In an effort to get outside the ground, I followed Police Sergeant

WRIGHT towards gate 'C', which was open.    I lost sight of him and my

other colleagues and returned to the rear of gate 'B' which was

closed.   There I helped a man who had sane abdominal injury, moving

him to a safe place where he was left sat down.    I looked towards the

centre tunnel, which gives access to the Leppings Lane terracing.         I

could see there was a large crowd in an arc around the entrance trying

to get through the tunnel.   I never saw any police officers or
                                                                       PAGE         3
                                                                       S1816

stewards in that area.

I looked towards gate 'C' and saw a steady stream of people entering

the ground, moving into the area behind the West Stand.      Most walked

straight forward towards the tunnel.        AnInspector, who was stood near

gate 'C' and the turnstiles adjacentto the gate,       indicated and

shouted an order to open gate 'B', which I was next to.      A steward was

on the gate and refused to open it.       Another man, I believe to be a

steward came up, was given the keys to the gate and unlocked it.         With

the assistance of Police Constable 2236 BROWN and Police Constable

1632 SMITH, I pulled one side of the gate open, allowing fans through

into the ground.    The gate had been buckling under the pressure of the

people outside and I realised there were a lot of people about to cane

through.     I therefore pushed against    thecrowd to slow the entry

down, preventing anyone from falling down and being pushed.      Several

people lost their footwear, which was placed to one side and left.             In

the region of 100 people entered the ground through this gate which

was open for between 30 seconds and one minute, to the best of my

recollection.    Most of the people who entered the ground either went

to the programme seller's van nearby or towards the entrance to the

Leppings Lane terracing by the North Stand.      Access could not be

gained to the central terracing this way unless people climbed over

the barriers and the walls.     Once the gate was closed I went to find

Police Sergeant WRIGHT who was outside the turnstiles.

At approximately 3 .05pm (1505) a radio message was received from the

Ground Control directing all personnel onto the pitch in front of the

Leppings Lane terracing.     I was unsure as to why they directed us

there.     Our serial regrouped and followed Police Sergeant WRIGHT to

the right of the Leppings Lane terracing towards the South Stand.         We

went through a gate under the Police Control box and went through a

passageway in the West Stand.     From there we went onto the perimeter
                                                                 PAGE      4
                                                                 S1816

track towards the front of the Leppings Lane terrace.     As we did, our

passage was blocked by Liverpool supporters, who were angry and trying

to prevent me from getting onto the pitch.    I pushed them aside and

followed Police Sergeant WRIGHT.

Ones on the pitch I saw several people climbing over the perimeter

fencing at the centre of the Leppings Lane terracing and I could see a

lot of people being crushed up against the fence within the centre

pen.

Due to this I followed Police Sergeant WRIGHT through gate 2 of the

perimeter fencing, entering into the lappings Lane terraces, South

pen.    As we did, our access was again blocked by fans desperate to get

out.    Once inside I made my way to the back of the terracing, where

there is a gate in the fencing which divided the two pens.

There were several suppporters stood there blocking the pen making no

attempt to leave the Centre South pen into the South pen, which was

nowhere near as congested as the centre pens.    I shouted to than to

move into the South pen, most of the supporters refused point blank,

others moved in slowly either by me pushing them or of their own free

will.    Whilst I was there several fans came up to me.   They were

obviously drunk and shouting obscenities regarding the Police and

criticising the Police for putting them in the smaller end of the

ground.    A drunken youth came towards me shouting, "IT'S YOUR FAULT

YOU BASTARDS". He then hit me with his fist on the right side of my

face.     He was above me and I was being pushed by other supporters.     I

therefore hit him on his left arm with my police truncheon.     At this

he stumbled into the crowd and I lost sight of him.

My attention was drawn to a young girl who was crying.      She had

obviously cone from the centre of the Centre South pen and was very

distressed.     I escorted her through the gate and left her in the South

pen.    The supporters around me did not help at all and would not move
                                                                   PAGE    5
                                                                   S1816

through the gate.   By this time the gate had once again been blocked

and the supporters would not listen to me.    I could see several people

climbing into the West Stand seating area above.    I tried to stop them

because they were falling and injuring people below.    I was pushed

away and had no option but to leave them.    A man came up to me, stated

he was a Merseyside Police Officer.   He took over from me trying to

tell the crowd to pass through the gate into the South pen.   The fans

were still insistent on stopping in the Centre pen, ignoring both the

requests of myself and this other man.   I noticed numerous persons

within the crowd were drunk, some had difficulty standing, either

through intoxicants or because of the fact they had been involved in

the crush below.

I then went down the terracing towards the centre of the Centre South

pen.   I stopped when I reached a number of bodies on the floor.     I saw

that within the pile of bodies a barrier had fallen over and had been

uprooted from the concrete.   There was a large number of bodies,

mostly lying on top of each other.    I saw people climbing on top of

bodies trying to climb over the perimeter fence.    I looked down

towards the fence and saw several officers assisting injured people by

the fence.    I saw three or four officers stood at the front of the

bodies and realised that there were a large number of bodies on top of

each other.    I therefore concentrated on the people immediately at my

feet. The crowd behind me were shouting abuse at me and the Police in

general, complaining about being in the small end of the ground.       I

told them to be quiet and help me, but several just stood and watched.

I saw one person lying on the floor who was aged about 15/16 years.

He wasn't breathing at all so I tried to revive him using mouth to

mouth resuscitation and heart massage.    I was constantly being pushed

by people who were in a panic, trying to get to the front.    Several

fans were assisting with the injured and the dead by taking them
                                                                  PAGE        6
                                                                  S1816

towards the side fence and the front perimeter fence.     Three fans

assisted me and took the youth who I had been trying to revive to a

break in the fence.     I returned to the bodies and saw one youth lying

in amongst them who had a lot of colour to his face and looked as

though he was still alive.     I pulled him free and checked for a pulse.

I then gave mouth to mouth resuscitation.

turned him onto his side and asked people to assist me to carry him

out. I did not get an immediate response and whilst waiting for

someone to help me the youth lapsed into unconsciousness and stopped

breathing.    There was nowhere to put him down so, with the help of two

men, I carried him out to a break in the fence. I returned to the

bodies to find one lying on his side.     He was not breathing and I

turned him onto his back

                      attempted to get a clear airway.   I then gave mouth

to mouth resuscitation and heart massage.

                   I turned him over onto his front and together with

two fans, I carried him to the front.     As I did a fan who was blind

drunk grabbed hold of me, causing me to lose my balance.     He then

began pushing me and swearing at me, shouting various obscenities.        I

triad to ignore him and continued to the fence with the injured youth.

Once at the fence I carried him through the fence and onto the pitch,

where I again cleared his airway.     He never regained consciousness and

aftar 5 minutes of no response, no heart beat, no pulse, he was

covered up.    A man who stated he was a doctor pulled me away and said, "

"Give it up."    He agreed that he was dead.   I left him covered up with

my Police anorak and then returned to the fence, which I had entered

onto the pitch by.     With the assistance of officers and fans, I kicked

a hole in the fencing, making a large gap of about six feet (6'0),

enabling us to receive bodies from inside the terracing.      There I

stood on the wall, taking hold of the bodies being brought to me by
                                                                 PAGE      7
                                                                 S1816

the fans and passed the bodies to people behind, mainly Police

personnel and Ambulancemen.    About 20 or so were passed out, of which

only two were definitely alive.    Another officer, who I recognised as

a Wast Bar Officer stood on the wall with me and helped me to carry

the bodies over the wall.     The flow of bodies began to slow down, a

youth who looked alive, was passed to me.     I stayed with him going

onto the pitch, where I gave mouth to mouth resuscitation and heart

massage. There was no response whatsoever. An ambulanceman took him

away towards an ambulance with the assistance of two Liverpool fans.

He was obviously dead.   I then remained on the pitch assisting with

the removal of bodies from the Leppings Lane end to the Spion Kop and

North Stand comer.    During this period, I was abused and pushed by

several supporters, even when I was helping injured people.    This

mostly took place whilst I was on the terraces.     I do not remember of

any particular incident which occurred on the pitch whilst I was

assiting with the injured.

Whilst on the terracing it was clearly obvious that a large

proportion of the Liverpool supporters were either drunk or had been

drinking.   There was a heavy smell of vomit, both at the top of the

terracing and in the centre where the people had died.     I would not be

abla to recognise any of the deceased who I tried to help.     I can only

remember one of them being 15/16 years with dark hair, the others were

what I would describe as 'youths'.

On the pitch there were several incidents where Liverpool supporters

triad to argue with Police Officers about the allocation of tickets,

putting them in the smaller end of the ground.

At approximately 5.00pm (1700) or when the fans were let out of the

ground, we received an order to go to Penistone Road North and

supervise the Liverpool supporters.     I had to find articles of my

uniform, therefore I was delayed and made my way up Penistone Road
                                                                          PAGE     8
                                                                          S1816

        North myself.    As I did I stopped a fight involving several Liverpool

        fans and two Sheffield boys who were simply walking through the crowd

        asking the score.    Once on Penistone Road North I met up with Police

        Sergeant Wright at the PSV's where we waited to escort the Liverpool

        fans back to the Midland Station.     I was not required, so I returned

        to the ground, where I saw Police Sergeant Gutcher, the other serial

        Sergeant.     I reported to him the events which I had seen and been

        involved with.    Frcm there I returned to West Bar to eventually go off

        duty at Attercliffe Police Station at 7.15pm (1915) that day.

        Throughout the day I did not have possession of a Police issue radio.

       Also, I cannot comment on the actions of any stewards, since I did not

        pay any particular attention to them, except the one involved in the

        incident at gate 'B'.




                                                          M J CRAIGHILL SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

   OF REPORT




                                                                                       3 0 27
Incident    102      270390 QP8064        DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                              STATEMENT NUMBER   S3276

                                                                                 Station

Surname              BROWN

Forenames            STEPHEN   PAUL

Age                                           Date of birth

Address


Occupation           POL PC2236

Telephone

 IC                  Height                   Build

Hair colour

      ir type

«     es                                      Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses              Use                      Accent

Number of Pages

 Dated                190489                                                       Signed


            STEPHEN PAUL BROWN PC2236

            Cl DIV E GROUP

            INFO GAINED

            On duty Serial 13 conveying fans from Midlands Station to ground.

            Approx. 2.50 pn (1450) with PC 1632 SMITH.        To gate A at Leppings Lane

            end, looked through glass window in gate A, saw numerous fans crushed

            against gate.      Obviously in great distress.    States PS 840 WRIGHT

            requested steward at that gate to open it to relieve pressure.

            Steward refused.

            He then went to gate B where Insp. BENNETT was stood on turnstile roof

            assisting distressed fans over wall into ground and away from the

            crush.

            Told by either Ch Insp. or Insp. to open gate B.        Steward refused then

            a further steward came and unlocked gate and it was opened for

                                                                                            3028
                                                                        PAGE    2
                                                                        S3276

         approx. 1 minute in which fans were left in to relieve the crush.

         After an initial surge of fans the volume of supporters decreased to

         nothing.

         He also states that when Insp. BENNETT was assisting fans over the

        wall large numbers of than had lost shoes or clothing.

        After gate was closed he continued duty on the pitch assisting with

        dead and injured.

         Details passed to DC 458 HALLAM.


                                                                       SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

           TIME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                    3 0 29
Incident    102     270390 OP8Q64         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                             STATEMENT NUMBER    S3276A

                                                                                Station

Surname             BROWN

Forenames           STEPHEN    PAUL

Age                                          Date of birth

Address             ATTERCLIFFE POL STN     'E' GROUP
                    TINSLEY AREA

Occupation          POL PC2236

Telephone

IC                  Height                   Build

Hair colour

  ir type

« 3S                                         Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses             Use                      Accent

Number of Pages 9

Dated               290489                                           S P BROWN Signed


           At 8am (0800) on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I paraded at

           Attercliffe Police Station.

           At 9am (0900) I attended a briefing at West Bar Police Station where

           we were informed of our duties to the forthcoming day.       With other

           officers I was in Serial 13, the serial Sgt. was PS840 WRIGHT and

           INSP DEWS was in charge of Serial 13 and others.

           At 9.40am (0940) we arrived at Midland Station, our duties was to

           escort Liverpool fans from the Midland Station and place them on buses

           provided by the S.Y.P.T.E. and      from there they were taken to

           Hillsborough.     The fans were escorted on the buses by two police

           officers.

           The first train arrived at 10.20am (1020) and the fans were put on the

           buses.   Some of the fans protested at this asking what they would do

           on arrival at the ground at such an early time.
                                                                  PAGE   2
                                                                  S3276A

Later trains arrived and still fans were protesting about being put on

the buses.     Several of the fans had a large amount of canned beer

with them, this was being taken frcm them by the officers searching

fans prior to getting on the buses.

Latar on in the morning with PC 1632 SMITH I went onto the platform of

the Midland Station to prevent Liverpool fans wandering about inside

the station.    A lot of the fans were attempting to leave by other

exits to avoid the compulsory bus trip.     I continued these duties

until about 1.10pm (1310).

At this time with PC 1632 SMITH and PS 2235 GUTCHER, I accompanied a

bus full of Liverpool fans from the Midland Station to Hillsborough.

The Liverpool fans were all dropped off at the Leppings Lane end of

the ground, although I remember a couple of fans wanted to get off

prior to this saying they had arranged to meet friends.      These

requests were denied.

On arrival at Leppings Lane I was surprised by the large amount of

people who milling about outside the ground, they were just hanging

arcand and it did not appear as though they were being policed.

A large number of these fans, I would say the majority were drinking

beer frcm cans.

After the fans had got frcm bus, with 1632 and 2235, I made my way

from Leppings Lane to the police rocm.     We vrent down Vere Road and

into Penistone Road.     As I walked along Penistone Road towards the

police rocm I can remember the perimeter walls of the houses in

Penistone were littered with empty beer cans and bottles.     Again fans

wera wandering about but not as many as at the lappings Lane end of

the ground.

When we got to the police rocm I got a drink and sat down outside the

police rocm.

Whilst I was sat having a drink there was a constant stream of
                                                                  PAGE   3
                                                                  S3276A

prisoners being brought into the police rocm.     I do not know which

team these supporters had come to see but most of the prisoners were

the worse for drink.    Sgt. WRIGHT arrived a short time later, I saw

him go into the gym and then into the police rocm, when he came out of

the police room he informed us we had a job to do.

With PC 1632 and others I went from the area of the police room and

out under the North Stand along the passageway.

Ones in the passageway there was a lot of smoke and I thought this was

the reason why we had been called out.    As a Serial we made a search

of the toilets to the right of the passageway and also the bar areas

and food selling premises on the left of the passageway.    About half

way along the passageway on the left hand side I came to a room where

pies were being prepared, saw smoke was coining from this room.    I saw

a card board tray on which pies were stacked that had been scorched.

After this with PC 1632 and other officers, I was only aware of PC

1632 at this time but know other officers were with us, I went to area

NW and then through to the area rear to gate 'A'. Once at this

location I saw that there was a large number of fans still outside the

ground.     I saw through a glass panel to the right of the gate that

people on the other side were being crushed and they appeared to be in

a vary distressed and frightened state.

I then remember Sgt. WRIGHT going to the steward who was manning this

gate, Sgt. WRIGHT appeared to know this man, Sgt. WRIOfT asked the

steward to open the gate but he refused stating if we opened the gate

we would all be crushed in the rush.     I did not hear anything over

the radio system as I was not in possession of a radio.

After this I went again with PC SMITH to the area behind turnstiles

 1-16.    I there saw Inspector BENNETT standing on the roof of the

building which houses the turnstiles, he was pulling people from in

 front of the turnstiles up over the wall over into the ground.
                                                                 PAGE   4
                                                                 S3276A

I saw that seme of the people who were being pulled over the wall had

shoes missing and appeared to be in a very distressed state.    I could

see through the turnstiles that there were thousands of people still

waiting to get into the ground.

Whilst I was at this location I was verbally abused by a great number

of people who were mentioning the crush outside the ground.

I cannot remember what time it was but at one stage I looked at my

watch and it was exactly 3pn (1500).

From this location, again with PC SMITH   I made my way to the area in

Leppings Lane where the tunnel and toilets are.     As I made my way

into this area there was a stream of liquid running down along the

edge of the wall.   I looked up towards the toilets and saw a number of

men urinating up against the wall.

I have performed duties in this location on a number of previous

football matches and I have never seen this behaviour before.    Also

when I have performed duties at this location, the main task is to

search in-coming supporters.   These supporters were not being searched

and I cannot remember seeing any police in this area.    Again both PC

SMITH and myself suffered verbal abuse about the crushing outside the

ground.

I can also remember whilst I was in this area, a man and woman ccming

to us, I think they had either one or two children with them.    They

asked us how they could get to the front to watch the game.     PC SMITH

indicated to the tunnel and said words to the effect that "All those

are trying to get to the front."

I then made my way to the blue gate 'C' again with 1632, it was then an

Inspector or Chief Inspector stated words to the effect 'Open that

gate', indicating towards gate 'B' with PC SMITH.     I went to gate 'B'

the steward refused to open the gate saying he would not take

reponsibility.   Another steward then turned up and opened the padlock



                                                                            3033
                                                                 PAGE   5
                                                                 S3276A

which secured the gate.   I then pulled at one half of the gate with

PCs 1632 SMITH and I think 1790 CRAIGHILL. I think two stewards were

pulling at the other half of the gate.    Due to the pressure on the

gate they were difficult to open.

The gate was not fully open, I would estimate they were open approx

6-8 feet.   There was an initial surge when the gates were first

opened and I can remember telling supporters to slow down.     The gates

were only open for at the most a minute and after the initial surge

the flow of supporters stopped and so the gate was closed again.

As the gates were closed I saw a number of officers running towards

area 'S' again with PC SMITH I ran on with the officers.     I expected

crowd trouble.

I want into the South Stand via a gate.    I can remember I had no

trouble getting to this location, there were no more fans at this

location than on a normal match day.

Once in the South Stand I made my way down an isle towards the pitch,

it was then I saw a number of fans on the pitch and I thought there

had been a pitch invasion.

I carried on and made my way onto the pitch and saw people jumping

over the perimeter fence onto the pitch, I also saw fans frcm the

terracing being pulled up into the seated area.

I made my way to the area on the pitch in front of the Leppings Lane

end goal.   As I looked at the crowd I saw people crushed against the

perimeter fence I saw one female who's face was side on to the fence

and her hand was near her face, her face was tinted blue and it was

apparent she was dead.

At this stage I felt confused and shocked and I didn't know what to

do.   When I came to my senses I went to a gate in the perimeter fence

near to area 'CS'.    I assisted with other officers to pull fans frcm

the terracing.    At first the injured were being pulled out via this


                                                                            3 0 34
                                                                  PAGE   6
                                                                  S3276A

gate, I also assisted fans who had clambered over the fence.      The

majority of these people appeared to have minor injuries seme of the

people were obviously in a very deep state of shock.

Aftar these people had been removed, other officers in the terracing

started to carry people to the gate.     These people were obviously

dead, I carried 12-15 people who were dead out of the terracing, I was

shocked to see how many people were in fact dead.    After they had

been lifted frcm the terracing the dead people were laid out on

advertising hoarding and then carried away frcm the scene.

Out of all the dead people I carried out of the terracing, I can only

remember one, he was an old well built man with grey hair, he was

wearing brown coloured trousers.      I can remember him because I was

with another unknown officer and we were having trouble carrying him.

Due to this a young lad, I believe a Liverpool supporter, came and

helped us carry him.

The time appeared to fly by and I can remember someone telling me we

had been on the pitch about two hours.     All the bodies had been taken

away by this time and I remember hearing over the P.A. that the match

had been abandoned, fans started to leave the ground.      I can remember

there were still a lot of fans on the pitch.

Serial 13 was reformed and Insp DEWS told us to leave the ground and go

onto Penistone Road.    We left the ground via exit 'O' and went onto

Penistone Road.     Once on Penistone Road I supervised Liverpool fans

onto a bus and then travelled with them to the Midland Station.

Two fans requested to leave the bus in the area of Park Square, this

request was denied and all the fans were dropped off at Midland

Station.   Once there I performed duties supervising Liverpool fans

into the station.

With regards to the stewards in the ground, I have worked numerous

football matches at both Hillsborough and Bramhall Lane.     It appears



                                                                             3 035
                                                                        PAGE   7
                                                                        S3276A

        the only thing they are interested in is seeing the match.   It was no

        different on this day, stewards appeared to be standing or milling

        about aimlessly.




                                                    S P BROWN   PC2236 SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:   290189

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

.OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

EW OF REPORT




                                                                                   3036
Incident    102   270390 OP8Q64       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                         STATEMENT NUMBER   S3275B

                                                                            Station

Surname            SMITH

Forenames          KEITH    RAYMOND

Age                31                     Date of birth

Address            ATTERCLIFFE PSTN


Occupation         POL PC1632

Telephone

IC                 Height                 Build

Hair colour

Hair type

ft.                                       Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses            Use                    Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                                                                        Signed


           At 0800 (0800) Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), I began iry tour of

           duty at Attercliffe Police Station, Sheffield.    Frcm there I proceeded

           to West Bar Police Station for a 9 o'clock (0900) briefing in relation

           to duties for the FA cup semi final.

           At 10.00 am (1000) as a member of serial 13 supervised by PS 840

           WRIGHT, I attended at the Midland Railway Station and escorted

           Liverpool supporters frcm the platform exit to waiting South Yorkshire

           Transport double deck buses.

           At about 1.30 pn (1330) together with PC 2236 BROWN and PS 2235

           GUTCHER I boarded a PSV full of Liverpool supporters and proceeded to

           the Hillsborough football ground.   As we approached the junction of

           Leppings Lane and Middlewood Road I noticed a lot of fans stood

           outside public houses drinking alcohol.     At the junction a couple of

           men came down frcm the topdeck of the bus and asked if they could get
                                                                  PAGE   2
                                                                  S3275B

off because they had arranged to meet some friends on the comer.      PS

GUTCHER refused and informed than they would have to wait until they

got to the ground.    I think believing there would be an escort at the

ground to take the supporters straight to the turnstiles.    As we

proceeded along Leppings Lane in slow moving traffic, the men again

askad to get off the bus.    PS GOTCHER again refused.   As we arrived

opposite the Leppings Lane gates of the ground I heard PS GOTCHER ask

someone what we were doing with the supporters.    I didn't see who he

was talking too because I was making sure the supporters didn't get

off the bus, however, PS GUTCHER then said, "right let them off."

The supporters alighted frcm the bus and dispersed into Leppings Lane,

several went to the shop next to the ground, otters walked away up

Leppings Lane.    I noticed that fans were everywhere in Leppings Lane,

sat on walls and generally milling about in groups, many were drinking

lager and beer.    I saw many of them carrying four packs of lager and

guiness.   I made comment to my colleagues regarding the situation.

We then proceeded along Vere Road and left into North Penistone Road

and back along to the police room.   Again I was aware of many

supporters hanging about and drinking beer and lager.    Many were

leaning on cars in the car sales pitch on the other side of the road.

I noticed many empty beer cans and bottles on people's garden walls.

Wte arrived at the police rocm and awaited further instructions, we had

a hot drink and had been there quite some time when PS WRIGHT directed

us to go to Leppings Lane.   There didn't appear to be any urgency.

Hie serial proceeded along the back of the North Stand where there was

a lot of smoke.   We began to investigate the cause of the smoke,

checking toilets etc.   After a couple of minutes I saw smoke coming

from the open door of a small room on my left.     I looked inside and

saw a civilian man stood next to a smoking area.    On the floor was a

burnt cardboard pie tray and burnt pies.    I established that the
                                                                    PAGE   3
                                                                    S3275B

situation was in hand and that there was no danger and then

proceeded towards Leppings Lane.

On arrival we approached gate 'A'. I was aware of screaming and

shouting outside and the gates were under considerable pressure. PS

WRIGHT asked a man (I think a steward) to open the gate, the man

advised against it.    I also commented that if he opened the gate we

would all be crushed on an iron railing a short distance behind us.

PS WRIGHT started to walk along behind the first row of turnstiles No

1 - 1 6 where I saw PC John FRIEND assisting someone inside a

turnstile.    I looked through the turnstiles and saw people pushed up

hard against them obviously in great distress.    I saw Inspector John

BENNETT on the roof of the turnstiles with two PC's helping people up

the outside wall and over the roof into the ground.

I walked through the gate in the dividing wall and was approached by a

man, woman and child, a boy about 12 years.    The wranan asked if there

was any way they could get to the front.    I directed her to look

towards the tunnel behind her and said something to the effect

'everyone wants to get to the front.'

The tunnel appeared to be three quarters full of supporters.        I

advised her to go over to the far side of the right hand pen and go

down the side fence under the Police Control Box.     I think at that

time I looked at my watch and it was 2.45 pm (1445).    My attention was

also drawn to several men stood to either side of the tunnel entrance

urinating against the wall.   A stream of urine was running down the

concrete close to where we stood.    I felt slightly embarrassed because

I was stood talking to a wanan and it was     a disgusting sight.       At

that point I remember thinking where are all the Police.     I saw three

or four stewards stood at the bottom of the stairwell but did not see

any police.    I then became aware that the rest of the serial had gone

apart from PC BROWN.
                                                                  PAGE   4
                                                                  S3275B

People seemed to be caning in much faster than normal and from all

directions.   Many people had injuries, they were limping and hopping,

sons had shoes missing and t o m clothing, they were very abusive

towards myself and PC BROWN.   I spoke to some of them, it was obvious

that many of them had had quite a lot to drink.    Wte went back through

the wall where it was much quieter, our serial was not there, many

people were asking directions and showing their tickets, asking how to

get to various sections.   I kept directing them to see a steward after

a couple of minutes we went back through the wall.

The gate directly in front of us (Gate C) was open and people were

catling through it but it seemed to be a controlled flow.    At that

point we were approached by an officer in a flat cap, possibly an

Inspector or Chief Inspector, I think he had came from outside.       He

told me to go and open the other gate and suggested that if I didn't

someone was going to get killed.   I ran around to the middle gate

(gate B) and saw two stewards and two older policemen.      I told the

stewards to open the gate, one of the stewards replied, "If you open

this gate we'll all get crushed in the stampede.     I can't take that

responsibility."   I said, "you don't have to it's already been taken."

I then proceeded to undo the large bolts on the gates and try to open

them.   I then became aware of PC CRAIGHILL pulling the right hand

gate.   At first the gate wouldn't open due to the pressure on them.

Eventually they opened about three feet, people were getting hurt as

they got forced through.   The gate then opened about seven feet, there

was an initial burst of about 70 or 80 people, perhaps 100 then they

stopped altogether. The crowd appeared to have been held back.        I saw

people still queuing to go through the turnstiles.     Someone then

shouted from behind us to shut the gate.   We then moved back from the

gate, as we did a youth spoke to PC BROWN who looked at his watch and

made connent.   Then a group of policemen came running past from the
                                                                     PAGE   5
                                                                     S3275B

direction of the North Stand.     I asked one what was happening, he

replied, 'fighting'. We all made our way through the gate into the

South Stand and onto the pitch in front of the Leppings Lane terrace.

The players were on the pitch, I heard an announcement over the PA

system "Would all spectators please leave the playing area."        I saw no

fighting.     I saw that some supporters were laying on the grass, some

were shouting abuse at us. I then noticed a policeman just inside the

gate at the front right hand side of the left pen as viewed frcm the

pitch.    He was knelt over someone on the floor.   I presumed someone

had been arrested and that whatever the incident was it was all over.

I then looked at the fence at the front of the middle pen.     I saw a

teenage girl with her face pressed hard up against the fence, her hand

close to her face.     I said to PC BROWN, "she's dead, she's dead

Steve."     I looked at people next to her, they were blue, some ashen

and appeared unconscious or dead.     I went to the gate to my left and

started to help lifting people out onto the pitch.     In between

carrying people out I carried out mouth to mouth whilst other people

carried out cardiac massage.    The only person I can remember being

with me whilst carrying out first aid was PC 272 FOERS who did cardiac

massage whilst I did mouth to mouth.     I can remember a civilian also

assisting with cardiac massage and a police wcman.     I think we tried

this on about four people close to the terrace.     I then assisted in

pulling a teenage girl onto a make shift stretcher.     She was dead.     I

carried her with supporters half way across the field and then went

back.    I helped carry a young man about 23 to the other side of the

pitch also on a make shift stretcher.     When I got there it was

apparent that he had stopped breathing.     A young man with him was

screaming for me to do something, I started mouth to mouth, someone

was doing cardiac massage, I noticed his chest was very bruised
                                                                         PAGE   6
                                                                         S3275B

        was obviously dead.

        When I got back to the terrace all the victims appeared to have been

        removed from the terrace.     I joined the cordon across the pitch until

        relieved.


                                                           SMITH PC1632 SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:               DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

   OF REPORT




                                                                                    3042
Incident       102   280790 QP4909           DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                                STATEMENT NUMBER    S1346

                                                                                   Station

ft-                  DELANEY

Forenames            GRAHAM

Age                                             Date of birth

Address              SOOTH YORKS POLICE, HAMMERTON ROAD POLICE STATION.


Occupation           POL INS

Telephone

IC                   Height                     Build

Hair colour

r
Eyes
        type
                                                Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses              Use                        Accent

Number of Pages 4

Dated                290489                                                         Signed


           Call Sign 1.9.A.      Serial 20



           0700 hours         On duty Claywheels Ln with my Unit consisting of:

                              PS1066 HIGGINS

                              PC567   SALWAY

                              PC684   NORTON

                              PC722   GEE

                              PC1398 GOOCWILL

                              PC2000 BRAYFORD

                              PC2281 BARKER

                              PC2493 WEBSTER

                              PC2551 BILLINGS

                              PC2773 WHITELAM

           To Firth Park and load van with PSU equipment.
                                                                     PAGE    2
                                                                     S1346



0800 hours      Sheffield Wednesday ground briefing by Insp SEWELL.

Mobile patrol used as early warning system.     Apart from the odd

Transit and supervising Hot Dog Vendors, nothing very much to report.



1115 hours      S/B Gymnasium.



1400 hours      Stood at Spion Kop - North Stand with Sgt HIGGINS.

Noticed Spion Rep two thirds full.     West Stand and North Stand

virtually empty in comparison.     My attention at this time was drawn to

the North Stand end of the Spion Kop which was occupied by numerous

Liverpool fans.

I remained in this location (my Unit still being on S/B) when I

received a message to attend at the turnstiles Leppings Ln with full

Unit.

On arrival at 'A' gate there were a lot of people milling about who

had cone through the turnstiles.    Inspector BENNETT was on top of the

wall assisting supporters who were climbing over it.    I was approached

several times by fans who physically (by poking me, etc) and verbally

abused me.   Sane were saying, "You'll have to do something outside,

people are getting crushed or someone will be killed."

Others screamed, "Open the bloody gates before you kill somebody."

The majority smelt strongly of intoxicants and the smell seemed to

fill the air.

Although I did not receive any requests for ambulances or medical

treatment, I noticed that several of these fans were holding their

chests and sides and were physially hurting.    I realised there were

obvious problems outside.   There was no access from 'A' or 'B' gates

because of the build up of fans outside.    I therefore started to make

my way to 'C' gate being continually abused on the way.    While en
                                                                  PAGE      3
                                                                  S1346

m i t e I heard a message over the radio, "Open the gates at the rear of

lappings Ln Terraces."

 I hurried towards C gate and once outside my attention was immediately

drawn to the crowds attempting to get through the turnstiles,

lappings Ln at this time was just a sea of people.    The fans were

shouting and screaming as they were being crushed against the

barriers.   Other Officers were trying to pull sente of the fans under

the barriers who had tickets in their hands.    I immediately went to

their assistance.    The fans we pulled out were fed through 'C' gate

via the horses who were outside the gate.   At this time I noticed that

there were several hundred fans on the bridge at Leppings Ln and

Superintendent MARSHALL was stood on the bridge parapet.     I don't know

how many fans went through 'C' gate at his time because I was too busy

pulling fans out of the queue.   I wasn't aware of any sudden surge.

I then looked across the queues and saw 'B' gate open.     The crush

seemed to subside quite a lot when the fans went through but the gate

was only open for a short space of time.

I then heard a message via the radio requesting all personnel to come

inside the ground.   I immediately went and joined my serial who were

at 'A' gate.   We ran down the back of the North Stand through the

first aisle and down the steps of the stand leading to the pitch.

On entering the ground I saw a cordon of Police Offricers on the field

near to the lappings Ln goal and a lot of fans milling about on the

perimeter track and field.   I immediately thought there had been a

pitch invasion.   With my Serial, we were to strengthen the cordon.

It was not until a short time later a Police Officer came to me and

said people are dying in there, we'll have to do something.

I immediately went to the fence and saw people crushed up against it.

Seme appeared to be in a bad way.   No. Four safety gate was open and I

immediately went to assist Police Officers who were trying to drag
                                                                                 PAGE    4
                                                                                 S1346
         fans through it.

         The fans I helped through ware badly shaken apart from one who needed

         resuscitation and looked in a bad way, but this man was carried out by

         a St Johns Officer.     I   am unable to say if he died as I left him in

         the care of that Officer and another Police Officer.       I   cannot

         describe him.

         I have policed football matches at Hillsborough on and off for twenty

         years.     I have never seen Leppings Ln so congested near to kick off

         time.

         I am familiar with the layout of the ground.

         I am unable to say what time the turnstiles were opened.

         The radio communications were intermittent but I hadn't got an ear

         piece so I am unable to comment on the overall reception but the noise

         from the crowd was deafening and I had to put my radio to my w r

         to hear.

         I have never been to a match where we have been so overwhelmed by

         thousands of fans at the last minute.      They were determined to get in

         the ground at all costs.




                                                                 G Delaney SIGNED

^^TEM ENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:               DATE:     290489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:         G Delaney

END OF REPORT




                                                                                             3042 D
                                                                          STATION

                  GRAHAM
                  DELANEY

ADDRESS:          ECCLESFIELD POLICE STATION
                  SOtrm YORKSHIRE POLICE

AGE / DATE OF BIR3H: 21 100

OCCUPATION:       POL INSP


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.




•
DATED: 180790                                             G DELANEY INSP (SIGNED)



           Further to my recollections/statement I made on the 29th April 1989

           (290489) concerning my duties at the Cup Semi-Final held at

       Hillsborough Football Ground on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I

       wish to say as follows.

           I attended a briefing held at Hillsborough at 10 am (1000) on Friday

           14th April 1989 (140489) which was given by Chief Supt DUCKENFIELD.

       The officers in attendance were Inspectors and above who would be on

       duty at the match.       C/Supt DUCKENFIELD went through the Operational

           Order picking out the salient points.   He asked for any ccmnents or

           questions on the Operational Order or anything concerned with the

       match, and although some were made I cannot remember any details.         At

           the conclusion of his briefing we then went with our respective

           Section Commanders, mine being Supt GREENWOOD, for a more detailed

           briefing on our respective "Serials" duties.

           During the course of his briefing to us Supt GREENWOOD made reference

           to the Semi-Fined between Wolves and Tottenham in 1981 (000081) when

           large numbers of fans were transferred from the Kop to Leppings Lane

           End.    He said that this had resulted in overcrowding and therefore on




                                                                                      3042E
        DELANEY                GRAHAM                                              2


       this occasion no fans would be transferred.    They were to be kept in

       the sterile area of the Kop which is a triangle section of the Kop.

       This was confirmed by Inspector Gordon SYKES who had also been at the

        1981 (000081) match.

        Supt GREENWOOD explained his reasons for the non transfer of Liverpool

        supporters because of the crushing that occurred in 1981 (000081).

        I did not attend the briefing given by Chief Supt DUCKENFIELD on the

       morning of Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) because of outside public

       order duties commencing at 8.0 am (0800).

       Prior to going out at 8.0 am (0800) I had briefed my Serial on their

       duties for that day.     I informed the Serial of the contents of the

       previous days 'Briefings' but did not mention the transfer of Liverpool

        supporters from the Spion Kop because it would not concern them.     The

       briefings that I attended on the Friday were very clear and concise and

        I fully understood them.

       G Delaney Insp

                                                        G DELANEY INSP SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE     S BEECHEY D/SUPT360

OFFICERS SIGNATURE       S BEECHEY
Incident       102   270390 QP8064       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                          STATEMENT NUMBER   S1913

                                                                             Station

Surname              HIGGINS

Forenames

Age                                          Date of birth

Address


Occupation           POL PS1066

Telephone

IC                   Height                  Build

Hair colour

     Lr type

     3S                                      Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses              Use                     Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                290489                                      E.S.HIGGINS Signed


           POLICE SERGEANT 1066 HIGGINS

           'F' CRIME S> VANDAL - SERIAL 20

           1115

           On stand-by Gymnasium, full unit.

           1400

           With Inspector DELANEY to the c o me r entrance Spion Kop and North

           Stand.    At this time I could see that the majority of Notts Forest

           fans were in the ground but the West Stand was virtually empty.       The

           West Stand Terrace middle section was half full of Liverpool fans,

           there was still plenty of room.     In the North Stand there were about

           four to five hundred.     With Inspector DELANEY I remained at this

           location till about 1420.     By this time the Kop end was full and the

           North Stand filling up.     The West Stand and Terraces were still half

           empty.

                                                                                       3 0 43
                                                                  PAGE     2
                                                                  S1913

1420

Message from match control to attend Lappings Lane end, trouble at the

turnstiles.     I went over the air to see if my full unit was required.

The reply was 'full unit'.

With Inspecter DELANEY, I gathered the Unit and want via the rear of

the North Stand to Gate A.

At this time the Liverpool fans were shouting and swearing and same

physically ranonstrating with officers of my unit to get more horses

and officers outside the turnstiles.

I could see fans climbing over the gate walls to my left and then

helping others up.     These then jumped downinto the open area at the

rear of the West Stand and Terrace.

People were lifting children through the turnstile to the North Stand

and many were complaining of chest injuries.

Children, men and women were crying and shouting.    Nearly all verbally

attacked ourselves saying someone if goingto get killed outside if

nothing is done.     A small woman dressed in     bright red aged about50

plus years started screaming and shouting physically having a go at

officers present inside and myself.    She was pulled away by three men

similar ages.

A short time later she returned and started again.

I went over the air to request the assistance of Mounted Officers to

easa the crush outside.    We were trapped inside and could not get

through to assist.

The Gate had to be held by two stewards, they were having to push up

the top bolts as continuing pressure and shaking of it loosened them.

It was similar for the bottom bolts.

This continued for some time and at one stage I thought the gate was

going to be forced open.

I went over the air and requested the Gate A be opened to save life
                                                                   PA($    3
                                                                   S1913

and liinb, stating that if not someone would be killed.

A reply came back over the air to open gate "A".     (Not sure Supt

MARSHALL?)

Prior to opening the gate, I gathered my unit and made a single file

on the wall side, myself being nearest the gate.     I then told another

unit to do likewise on the turnstile side of the gate.

I then ordered this gate to be opened, the Steward at first refused.

I explained my actions to him.     The Steward then shouted through the

glass spy panels to the fans telling them he was opening the gate.

I shouted to them to stop trying to force the gate as we were going to

open it.     The steward then showed them the key demonstrating he was

going to use it to open up.

The lock part was opened first then the top and bottom bolts.

Seconds before the opening I shouted to the two lines to steady them

down and try to stop any stampede.

Two men - Kids outside!!!

On opening the gates there were shouts of relief and to the effect it

should have been done earlier as they all had tickets which they were

waving in the air.

Together with one of my unit, I think Police Constable BILLINS (2551)

I forced my way through this crowd shouting at them to stop pushing

and take their time.

After a few minutes I saw Inspector SYKES.     I informed him why I had

opened the gate.     By now there was only about 50-70 waiting to enter

through this gate.

Inspector SYKES then shut this gate.     I remember talking to a fan and

he said its past three have they kicked off.     I did not know.

I could see hundreds of fans on the bridge obviously without tickets.

A message was sent over the air to the effect all officers on to the

ground or pitch.     I cannot remember the actual words.
                                                                  PAGE      4
                                                                  S1913

On arrival I thought it was a pitch invasion and with my unit were

telling fans to leave the pitch and enter the north side terrace

through the open gate.    It was not for some time that it was realised

what had taken place and people were seriously injured.

At some stage I remember going down to the Spion Kop end and assisting

officers in bringing back Liverpool fans who had ran towards the

Forest fans who were shouting and singing.     Several officers had their

staffs out.   I ordered   them to put them away and grab      a Liverpool fan

and push him back away    from the Spion Kop end.

I don't think at this stage the Forest fans knew what had taken place.

Whilst outside I saw that two men who had spoke to me inside were re­

united with their children.

One of the men had approached me inside stating I think that he was

something to do with the match/sponsors and showed my red

identification card of    some sort.   He had arranged to     meet hisson

outside gate A.    I told him   what my intention was and     toldhimto wait

near the wall.

Left the message with other officers, I ran down the rear of the North

Stand and up the first gangway and onto the pitch, no players were on

the pitch at this time.

I could see people running about on the pitch near to the Leppings

Lane end goal.

Officers had formed a loose cordon and I joined them.

I could not see a reason for this but then saw several people

wandering about in a daze.

I started to assist the injured people.    As to time scale I had no

idea.   Officers were lifting people over the fencing and dragging

people through the escape gate.     The wire meshing was being forced by

Police and fans.

It was at this stage I realised that people were seriously injured.        I
                                                                 PAGE           5
                                                                 S1913

could see that a cordon had been set up about the half way line.       I

went up to the line and saw some of my unit.    Boardings were being

used to take dead and injured fans from the West side down to the

corner past North Stand, Spion Kop.

I told my unit to leave the cordon and assist in airy way they could.

I rsmanber assisting carrying out a male fan obviously dead on a

boarding.

All over the pitch people were doing mouth to mouth and otter life

saving methods.     I took the body end we put it down on the floor near

to the gymnasium.     I could see bodies all over some with jumpers over

their faces.

I then gave assistance to the seriously injured in this area to the

rear of the North Stand.

Two of my unit utilised the Freight Rover to ferry the injured to the

Northern General Hospital.     I continued giving assistance to the

injured and placing them in the waiting ambulances.

Later I requested all my unit to re-group in Penistone Road near to D

C Cooks.    Once re-grouped apart from Police Constable 1398, we went on

mobile patrol as numerous reports of supporters fighting.

After attending at Hillsborough Park where fans had been fighting we

were called to the Burgoyne Arms where trouble had been reported.          On

arrival all was quiet and it would appear that some fans had thrown

bottles at people walking at the side of the road.

The unit then went on stand-by in Hawks ley Avenue, until directed to

Niagara Sports Ground for stand-by duties, where we remained until

0700.

Prior to going on stand-by duties at Niagara the unit, with myself,

did a fingertip search of the terracing at the West Stand.     Several

items including a watch were recovered.
                                            ppm      6
                                            S1913


                                E.S.HIGGINS SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

           TIME:        DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                         3048
Incident     102     270390 QP8064        DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                              STATEMENT NUMBER   S2169

                                                                                 Station

Surname               GOODWILL

Forenames            M     A

Age                                           Date of birth

Address               SOOTH YORKSHIRE POL
                      HAMMERTON RD, SHEFFIELD

Occupation            POL PC1398

Telephone

IC                   Height                   Build

Hair colour

  lir type

                                              Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses              Use                      Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                110589                                        M A GOOEWILL Signed


           About 2.40pn (1440) with complete unit (Serial 20) to rear of Leppings

           Lana turnstiles I went to turnstiles adjacent to B gate.        On roof of

           these turnstiles was Inspector BENNETT, he was assisting Liverpool

           supporters climbing into the ground from Leppings Lane.        PC GEE

           climbed onto a bunker and helped supporters from the roof into the

           ground.       I looked through one of these turnstiles and saw the area

           outside was 'solid' with people.

           I then went to 'A' gate, the sliding concertina gates providing access

           from Leppings Lane to the rear of the North Stand.        Again through the

           turnstiles I saw the area in Leppings Lane, outside the North Stand

           turnstiles was 'solid' with people.         Supporters entering the ground

           through these turnstiles were conplaining of being crushed whilst

           queuing.      Typical ccrrments to me and other officers were "It's

           ridiculous #14 for this".       "Someone's going to get killed out there”.
                                                                 PAGE      2
                                                                 S2169

I was approached by a portly middle aged woman in a red coat who had

just entered through one of the North Stand turnstiles.     She was angry

and demanded that gates be opened allowing supporters into the ground

to prevent them being injured.    She approached other Officers and made

similar contents.

Some supporters were openly abusive to myself and other officers.

The smell of intoxicants pervaded the area around the turnstiles,

which bustled with supporters, having just passed through the

turnstiles.

Many supporters passing through the turnstiles appeared to be

suffering from the effects of being crushed.   They were out of breath,

some were doubled over, holding their ribs and pausing before moving

on to the stand itself.

It appeared to me there was a real risk of serious or even fatal

injury being caused to someone particularly a child, in the crush

outside the turnstiles.

Supporters outside the turnstiles appeared to be pushing against the

concertina gate it appeared to be being kicked from the other side and

people appeared to be banging on it with their fists.     I recall seeing

the bottom of the gate moving slightly backwards and forwards.     I

approached PS 1066 HIGGINS and spoke with him about opening the gate

to relieve crowd pressure.   He told me he was trying to get permission

from control to do so.    Most of my serial and another serial were

arranged in two lines bordering the path from the gates into the stand

area.   I was on the turnstile side nearest the gate.

PS HIGGINS told the gateman, who I knew to be Jack STONE, to open the

gate.   He appeared hesitant and seemed to take his time.    Realising

the potential situation outside, I moved forward to open the gate

mysalf. As I did so STONE began to open the right side of the gates.

As viewed with ones back to the Penistone Road, the crowd pressure
                                                                  PAGE    3
                                                                  S2169

seemed to make the gate difficult to move but I saw hands from outside

pull it open and supporters began to surge through.    The left side of

the gate was opened fully by supporters within a few seconds.     About

500 supporters passed through the gates into the ground and towards

the North Stand in a very short time after which the pressure abated

and the gates were closed.     I went outside with PS HIGGINS and the

rest of my serial.   Outside this gate were now about 15-20 supporters

standing close together.     I saw a middle aged man who was leaning

against the back of this group and was pushing.     I went to him and

told him to stop pushing.    He said, "I'm not pushing".   I pushed my

arm between his chest and the person in front of him and physically

moved him back away from the group and said, "You are pushing".

He said, "Yeah, I know, I'm sorry".

I directed him to one of the turnstile queues.    At this time I could

only see a few hundred people at the Leppings Lane turnstiles and all

seemed quiet and orderly.

I had been outside the ground for only a minute or so when I heard a

radio message instructing all available serials to go to the perimeter

track.

With my serial I went into the ground through 'A' gate and ran to the

North Stand and made my way onto the pitch via the first gangway frcm

the Leppings Lane end of that stand.

I saw a number of Liverpool supporters were on the perimeter track in

front of the West Stand terraces.     I formed part of a line of Police

Officers on the pitch facing towards the West Stand, at this stage I

had no reason to believe this was any other than a pitch invasion or a

Public Order situation.     I directed seme of the Liverpool supporters

to the north pen of the West Stand terraces which had space available.

Some of these fans complained of being crushed and were holding their

ribs.    Supporters appeared to be still coming onto the pitch frcm the
                                                                 PAGE      4
                                                                 S2169

West Stand in the area of the goal.

I went to the track to the right of the goal and saw a man laid

motionless on his back, his face was purple with colour.     2 or 3

officers were in the terrace making their way to this man.

Supporters on that terrace appeared angry, were shouting and seemed

aggressive to the officers.   There were many other officers in the

immediate area and I returned to my serial.    Since the radio message

directing serials onto the track, I had not received any other radio

messages, although there was a high level of crowd noise.

After a short while I recall seeing several people laid out near the

goal, Police Officers and supporters were with them.     About this time

an ambulance arrived along the perimeter track.    I heard the sound of

objects, probably coins hitting the ambulance.

Still unaware of the serious nature of what was taking place I

rejoined my serial which had fallen back towards the halfway line. I

saw there was still intense activity around the goal area.     It now

became apparent to me that there was a serious problem at the West

Stand.    PS HIGGINS instructed our serial to make out over there to

assist.

Near to the goal I saw about 9 persons laid out, most on their backs,

seme had jumpers pulled up over their heads. Mouth to mouth and heart

massage was being given to some by police officers and supporters.

I went to one person who was laid out, a man was sat near to him/her

the person was breathing and had a strong pulse. Seme supporters

appeared with a trackside advert board.    We placed the person on it

and they were carried away by the supporters.     I recall PC BILLINGS

and I helped put several apparently dead bodies on advert boards who

were then carried away by supporters.     I also recall helping sane

injured, though conscious supporters away frcm the perimeter fence on

the pitch.    Again the smell of intoxicants pervaded.
                                                                     PAGE    5
                                                                     S2169

About 3.30pm (1530) I saw Superintendent GREENWOOD who instructed me

to stay with him as Radio Operator.    At his instruction I asked

Sergeants to regroup their men.    At this stage all or most of the

casualties had been removed frcm the pitch area.

We went to the players tunnel area and escorted DALGLEISH from the

pitch.   Supt. GREENWOOD went to the boardroom and I escorted DALGLEISH

to Police Control.

From Police Control I saw a photographer attacked b y supporters.

Police moved in to protect him and the situation seemed to calm.

Went on to the pitch with Supt. GREENWOOD attempt to calm things down

and SOC officers told to wait until ground cleared before taking

further photographs.

KELLY escorted from pitch.

Possibility of trouble re a Liverpool supporter in South Stand.       A few

officers go into Stand to escort him out.

Supt. GREENWOOD begins to broadcast by loud hailer from Penistone Road

end of South Stand asking for co-operation of fans.    Broadcast

continues along Kop. North Stand 3/4 of way from Penistone Road.

Abandonment of game announced.

On pitch spoke with Supt. PRATT re Casualty Bureau.

To South Stand access road near to 'C gate.     See about ten bodies

screen off on one side.    Ambulances queuing to remove them.

Police Control

North Stand briefing area Supt. GREENWOOD addresses Police Officers

standing by.

Gymnasium, which was being used as a temporary mortuary.     Supt.

GREENWOOD speaks to and comforts officers engaged on duties there.

North Stand.     Part company from Supt. GREENWOOD and return to serial.

Search of West Stand Centre Pen saw beer can crushed and empty with

pull ring intact.
                                             PAGE    6
                                             S2169

        Claywheels Lane meal.

        Standby Niagara.

        0130 Off Duty.

        End of Report.




                                            SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:   110589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

   ]
  ^ICERS SIGNATURE:

«  OF
   C REPORT




                                                         3054
Incident       102   270390 QP8064      DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                         STATEMENT NUMBER    S3785

                                                                            Station

Surname              LEVICK

Forenames            KEITH

Age                                         Date of birth

Address              WEST BAR POLICE STATION


Occupation           POL PC223

Telephone

IC                   Height                 Build

Hair colour

     ir type

«    es                                     Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses              Use                    Accent

Number of Pages 5

Dated                 170489                                 K LEVICK PC223 Signed


           I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police, currently

           stationed at West Bar Police Station.

           At 9am (0900) Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I attended a briefing at

           West Bar Police Station, in connection with the Football league Cup

           Semi -Final which was to take place between Nottingham Forest and

           Liverpool at the Sheffield Wednesday football ground later that day.

           I was to work on Serial 7, searching and checking Nottingham

           supporters arriving at the Midland Station.

           At 9.55am (0955) that same day I attended at the Midland Station and

           commenced search duties on supporters before they boarded buses for

           the football ground.      That duty was performed in a friendly mood even

           though a large number of supporters had intoxicating drink with them.

           The drink being confiscated before they boarded the buses.

           At 2.25pm (1425) that same day, I left the Midland Station aboard a
                                                                   PAGE    2
                                                                   S3785

bus carrying the last stragglers of Nottingham supporters to the

ground, arriving at the ground at 2.45pm (1445) that same day.         I

disembarked from the bus on Penistone Road North and after seeing to

the Nottingham supporters, I made my way through the Sheffield

Wednesday Football Ground where at 2.50pm (1450) that same day I

arrived on the ground side of Gate 'A' at the Leppings Lane end.

At this point there was a serial of Police Officers and I saw that the

gate was being forcibly moved from the outside of the ground.        The

gats which was of a folding/sliding type was being forced side to side

and inwards towards me at the same time, and looked to be in the

process of breaking down.    An official gateman was holding on to the

bolts which kept the gate secure at the top.      He was having to told

and push the bolts upwards to keep them secure.      I then looked

through a glass observation hole in the gate and saw a mass of

supporters all pushing towards the gate.     They appeared to be out of

control and in an angry mood.      Those in direct contact with the gate

were the culprits attempting to force the gate open.      From the looks

on their faces it was obvious they were in a violent mood.      As a

result I contacted Ground Control and asked that mounted officers be

directed to this position to ease the melee outside.      I then kept my

position with the gateman.      Whilst all this was taking place

supporters were climbing over the wall into the ground at this point.

Supporters coming into the ground via the turnstiles were arguing with

officers behind me re the trouble outside and all were saying that

someone was going to be killed in the crush outside.     I continued to

assist the gateman at Gate 'A' and at this time a Police Sergeant (not

known) stated that Ground Control had ordered the gate to be opened.

The gateman argued that he had no such order and at first refused to

open the gate.   He was overruled by the Sergeant and myself and at

this time I advised him to stand near to the wall and that I would
                                                                    PAGE    3
                                                                    S3785

open the gate as I feared he would be crushed by the crowd entering.

The gateman then pulled down the bolts securing the gate and then

moved away near to the wall.     I then opened the right hand gate and

saneone else opened the left side.

The crowd outside then surged in a solid mass into the ground.       All I

could do was to assist them in keeping on their feet as they were

carried forward in the crush.     I stayed in this position until it had

all cleared.

I then heard a radio message for all Officers to go immediately onto

the pitch at the Lepping Lane end of the ground.      This I did.

Supporters were still pouring onto the pitch from the lappings Lane

terrace and I could see supporters being pulled frcm the terrace into

the Leppings Lane stand by supporters in the stand.

I then moved around the injured supporters assisting where I could.

Anyone I saw that I thought could be moved I obtained assistance frcm

people milling around and took them away towards the Pemstone Road

end of the ground as the air in the irmediate area of the terrace

seemed oppressive.      I continued to do this until three Liverpool

supporters asked me to assist them with their friend.      His head was

covered by a coat and on removing it I could see he was dead and had

been for some time.      There was no pulse and I told them their friend

was beyond help.      We then carried the body to the side of the

gymnasium where we placed the body on the ground.      I told one of the

men to stay with the body and an Officer would come as soon as

possible to assist.      I then returned into the ground and again

assisted with the injured.

I continued to do this until we were ordered to leave the ground for

the evacuation I then assisted in the dispersal of Nottingham

supporters to the city centre.

At 8.30pm (2030) that same day I went off duty.
                                               PAGE     4
                                               S3785




                                K LEVICK PC233 SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                            3058
Incident       102   260390 OP8Q64       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                         STATEMENT NUMBER    S2657

                                                                            Station

Surname              WOOEWARD

Forenames            PHILIP    ANTHONY

Age                                         Date of birth

Address              ECCLESFIELD PSTN


Occupation           POL INS

Telephone

IC                   Height                 Build

Hair colour

     ir type

«    9S                                     Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses              Use                    Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                                                                         Signed


           At 9.00a.m. (0900) on Saturday, 15 April 1989 (150489), I paraded for

           duty at Ecclesfield Police Station for duties in connection with the

           F.A. Cup Semi-Final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest to be

           played at Hillsborough.

           At 9.30 a.m. (0930) the same day I arrived at Hillsborough. I was in

           charge of sub-sector 5, North Stand, serials 11 and 12.    I made

           contact with the Sergeants in charge of these serials and issued them

           with their serial orders and papers regarding intelligence matters.

           Both Sergeants reported their serials up to strength.

           At 10.00 a.m. (1000) a main briefing was given to all officers in

           the North Stand by Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD.    Further

           briefings were given by Superintendent MURRAY, Detective Sergeant

           CHARLESWORTH and Inspector SEWELL.

           At 10.30 a.m. (1030) I briefed my- serial Sergeants and they informed
                                                                  PAGE    2
                                                                  S2657

me of the deployment of their officers in relation to their serial

duties.   Chief Inspector CREASER was my sector camiander and

Superintendent GREENWOOD was the ground camiander.

At 11.15 a.m. (1115) in the North Stand I briefed approximately two

dozen stewards who would be on duty in the North Stand on the

emergency evacuation procedure, their responsbility in relation to

tickets and seating and the exit of supporters at the end of the game.

I also told them to notify the nearest Policeman should they encounter

any problems.   Approximately six of the stewards said this was their

first time as stewards.   The Chief Steward, whose name I can't

recall, then gave them another briefing, whereupon I left to carry out

other duties.

During the time between 11.30 a.m. (1130) and 2.40 p.m. (1440) I

initially visited the officers on the inside of the turnstiles and

then back and through both levels of the North Stand. It was a

circular route. Between 2.00 p.m. (1400) and 2.40 p.m. (1440) I was

on that circular route checking both levels of the North Stand back

towards the turnstiles at Leppings Lane.     Some Liverpool supporters

whom I saw had been drinking, the majority were well behaved. They

were not drunk but had had some alcohol and smelled strongly of it.

It was not until later that events and people turned sour.      These

people entered the ground via turnstiles at Leppings Lane and entered

the North Stand.

At about 2.40 p.m. (1440) I joined officers under my camiand and were

engaged on duties at the rear of turnstiles 1 - 8 at the leppings Lane

end which gives access to the North Stand.     I had heard over the radio

of some problems at the Leppings Lane end involving crushing, so I

decided to go and see what was happening.     I could see through the

turnstiles a very, very large crowd massed from the turnstiles back

across the road completely covering that area.     People at the front,
                                                                  PAGE     3
                                                                  S2657

before they could get through the turnstiles, were being pushed and

crushed against each other, against the wall between the turnstiles

and against gate 'A', a concertina gate.     As I saw this the officers

on duty there told me of the problem and that it had been going on

for some time.   As people entered through the turnstiles into the

ground they approached me, nearly everyone shouting abuse about the

situation outside and saying that if something isn't done then people

will be crushed and killed outside.    I told these people I was aware

of the problem and tried to reassure them.     Sane replied with abusive

remarks such as, 'YOU BASTARDS COULDN'T POLICE A PISS UP,' and 'YOU

CUNTS WILL KILL SOMEONE OUT THERE.'    Some of the younger males had

been drinking, some worse for drink were using obscene language

towards me and other officers such as 'BASTARD BISSIES,' and

'BLACK GETS.' I warned several about their conduct and language.

They were dragged away by other youths and disappeared into the crowd.

No further action was taken against than, it would have caused

more problems than it would have solved.

As the Liverpool supporters were entering I saw that some of the women

and children were white faced, visibly shaking and crying.     Police

Officers who were on turnstile duty outside (F2 'D' Group officers,

Police Constables 43, 602, 3027) had to climb over the turnstiles to

avoid being crushed themselves. These officers were also visibly

shaken/shocked, white faced and they said the situation outside was

unbearable and people were being crushed.     I saw people climbing over

the wall onto the roof of the turnstiles gaining access to the rear of

the West Stand/Leppings Lane terracing.     I could hear only part radio

messages about the situation and about a gate to be opened.

I heard gates 'A' and 'C' mentioned.    When the radio was free I

radioed into the control roam, telling them what the situation was

like as I saw it and asked for clarification if any gates should be
                                                                  PAGE      4
                                                                  S2657

opened.   The reply was broken and interrupted.     I again asked for

clarification and the reply was no gates to be opened.     The situation

continued and two to three minutes later it appeared to be getting

worse and gate 'A' was being pushed against from outside and visibly

bowing under the pressure.    I heard over the radio instructions for

the gate, including gate 'A', to be opened.    Officers at gate 'A'

opened it and a Police cordon was placed at the side of the gate to

the fencing to funnel people into the ground towards the North Stand.

No one was allowed to enter or attempt to enter the area to the rear

of the West Stand/Leppings Lane terrace.    This influx of people lasted

two to three minutes and pressure outside was relieved.     As the people

entered some were abusive, blaming the Police for the problems outside

(swearing and cursing).    Tickets as far as I'm aware were not taken or

people checked for tickets.    As the situation became calm I left the

area and returned to the North Stand.

Shortly after kick off I entered the North Stand and saw a number of

people and Police Officers on the track and field behind the goal and

in front of the West Stand/Leppings Lane terrace.      I made my way down

and as I did I could see people climbing over the perimeter fence to

go onto the pitch.   At first I thought fighting had broken out but as

I arrived behind the goal by the centre pen, I could see there was no

fight but people trying to escape the crush.      Others were scrambling

over the side fences to the side pens and others climbing and being

lifted into the West Stand by people already in the stand.     The

emergency gate was opened and people were escaping, being pulled

through the gate by Police Officers.     I could see people on the ground

inside the centre pen by the emergency gate being trampled on by

people trying to escape.     Some people were alive but trapped by their

legs under other people.     Police Officers were pulling people through

the gate and helping others over the fence.     I could see people
                                                                  PAGE      5
                                                                  S2657

crushed against the fence, they were blue/purple in colour, others

were screaming for help.   People to the rear of the pen wouldn't or

couldn't move back, despite numerous shouts and arm waving requests to

move back and out through the tunnel.      I saw it was necessary to gain

access to the pen to help people and organise things, so I and a small

group of officers managed to gain access to the pen.

I could see, once inside the pen, the bodies of a large number of

people piled on top of each other, one of the bodies was a child aged

about 10 years and no bigger than my own son.     Their faces were blue-

ish/purple in colour with legs and arms twisted, tucked under them and

other bodies.   They were obviously dead.     I continued to shout at

people in the pen to move back and out through the tunnel and waved my

arms to this effect.   They didn't move.    Some of than shouted abuse, I

heard someone shout, 'MURDERING BASTARDS,' spat and seme coins and a

gobstopper (sweet) hit me as we tried to help.     People in the West

Stand and side pens also shouted abuse, spat and threw seme objects.

The throwing of objects and coins didn't last long, a few seconds, but

the abuse and spitting continued from the West Stand and pens.

Remarks like, 'FUCKING BISSIES,' were used.      There were a number of

people in the pen on the ground who were alive and I directed and

assisted officers to get them out through the emergency gate onto the

pitch.   They were passed to officers on the track.     As more and more

officers gained access to the pen people were eventually moved back

and out through the tunnel.   Bodies were ranoved out onto the track to

waiting officers.   I assisted in removal of the bodies from the pen.

I do not know the identity of the officers who received the bodies.

There were such a large number of bodies, I don't know the exact

number I assisted/directed in moving.      I could see a crush barrier had

given away and was bent almost to the ground on the left hand side

of it as you look from the track.   When all the bodies had been
                                                                 PAGE       6
                                                                 S2657

removed, the pen with people still inside was preserved on

Superintendent Greenwood's instructions and left as it was for the

tine being.   A short time later, two Scenes of Crime Officers in

civilian clothes entered the pen and started to take photographs.     The

small group of people still in the pen made hostile approaches to them

and they had to quickly leave the pen, assisted by Uniform officers.

I saw people, including Policemen and Policewomen, in various stages

of shock, they were walking about in a daze, others crying and one

even shouting at other Police Officers for no apparent reason.     They

wera all directed to the Police Roam for treatment.    Some, including

sotre Police Officers, refused.    I then stood by at the Leppings Lane

end, then stood by in the North Stand.    I located ray serial

Sergeants and they eventually reported the position of their serials.

One officer from serial 11, Police Constable 2409 had been taken to

hospital with concussion.   They were then stood down. After a short

briefing by Chief Superintendent MOLE, I stood down, going off duty

at Ecclesfield Police Station at 8.00 p.m. (2000).

I have been policing football matches since I joined the Police

Service as a Police Constable in 1971 (000071), at Hillsborough and

outside the ground as a Police Constable and Police Sergeant and now

as an Inspector.   I am thoroughly conversant and experienced at

working football matches at Hillsborough.

Radio coranunication was not good.    I found messages fading or broken.

Maybe it was ray radio, I don't know.    I didn't get chance to change it.

When I was in the pen searching for injured people amongst the large

number of bodies, I was obviously feeling down, but when we found

sonaone alive I felt elated and everyone worked as quickly as possible

to get them out to first aiders.     This elation lasted only a few

seconds and then I was down again until I found someone else alive.

A few people were found alive but there were more dead than alive.
                                                                    PAGE    7
                                                                    S2657

There were a small number of Liverpool supporters, mainly young males,

who had been drinking alcohol and were worse for drink who were

abusive and offensive. Liverpool, like all football clubs, have a

small group of idiots who drink and cause problems and did so on the

day.    The majority of Liverpool supporters are decent, football

loving people.

Afterwards I felt angry because we were being spat on and abused as we

tried to help people.




Officers in the serials under ray command as follows:

Serial 11                       Serial 12

PS 2279                         PS 655

PC 1074                         PC 1054

PC 2857                         PC

PC 873                          PC 69

PC 1529                         PC 1615

PC 2571                         PC 414

PC 2409                         PC

PC 2209                         PC 2683

PC 1847                         PC 384

PC 1479                         PC 3292

PC 1506                         PC 688

PC 3116

The stewards in the North Stand prior to the incident were doing their

jobs.     I don't know what they or other Stewards were doing when the

incident occurred.




                                               P A WOODWARD INSP SIGNED

                                                                                30 65
Incident    102   260390 OP8064       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                            STATEMENT NUMBER   S1845

                                                                               Station

 surname           EDWARDS

Forenames          NEVILLE   JAMES

Age                46                       Date of birth

Address           S. YORKSHIRE POLICE
                  HACKENTHORPE SHEFFIELD.

Occupation        POL PS2279

Telephone

IC                Height                    Build

Hair colour

Hair type

ft.                                         Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses           Use                       Accent

Number of Pages 3

Dated              020589                                N.J. EDWARDS PS2279 Signed


           On Saturday, 15 April 1989 (150489) I came on duty at Hackenthorpe

           Police Station at 0830 and shortly afterwards along with several other

           officers was transported to Hillsborough football ground. I was in

           charge of Serial 11 which comprised of 11 members of E2 Sub Division

           and all with the exception of 1, were not familiar to me.       I was

           responsible to Inspector Woodward of F Division.

           The first six officers on the serial list were allocated in the area

           at the rear of turnstiles 1-8 at the Leppings Lane end before the kick

           off to ensure that fans entering the ground were not in possession

           of items prohibited by the ground rules.      (Banners, weapons, missiles

           or alcohol).

           The last five officers and myself patrolled on the upper level

           concourse of the North Stand to maintain order, paying attention to

           the refreshment bars and the betting booth there.
                                                                 PAGE      2
                                                                 S1845

Up to just before kick off time there was a steady stream of Liverpool

fans to the North Stand.

Prior to kick off there was an influx of hundreds of fans to the upper

level concourse many of which had obviously had a fair amount of

alcohol to drink, but there were too few of us to take any positive

action.   A number of the supporters complained about the lack of

turnstiles open and said that there were many people still outside the

Leppings Lane end waiting to get in.

Myself and three other officers went down the ramp from the upper

level in the direction of Leppings Lane and saw dozens of Liverpool

fans urinating openly on the fencings on either side of the route to

Leppings Lane.   The most we could do was strongly advise and move them

on.   It was obvious the majority had consumed a fair share of alcohol

throughout this, the radio reception was poor to say the least.     Many

of the fans showed aggression either to us or towards the staff

operating the gates in their frustration of being allowed entry at

such a late time.

I cannot catiment on the actions of the stewards as such was the

density of people on the upper level prior to kick off that I had no

chance of gaining entry to the North Stand.

As stated before, radio reception was poor.

At 1503 myself and PC 3116 ELLIS arrested a youth

          for drunk and incapable on the upper level concourse and

took him to the police room. Whilst there a radio message was

received requesting officers to the pitch area.     I left PC 3116 with

the prisoner and went up to the upper concourse and managed to find

two members of my serial and took them down to the ramp between the

North stand and the Kop but were prevented from going onto the pitch.

After several minutes, Inspector WALLACE from El led several officers

on to the pitch and it was only then that I saw hundreds of supporters
                                                                          pact ;   3
                                                                          S1845

        on it.    I gave assitance to carry one injured party off the pitch but

        apart from that stayed with other officers on the halfway line.

         I must admit it was unnerving being on the upper concourse amongst

        hundreds of Liverpool fans hyped up at the possibility of them missing

        the kick off and annoyance at not getting into the ground earlier and

        the fear of the chance of being set upon.    I feel that, especially

        when a serial like mine was split up, then more than one radio, mine,

        should have been made available, and that more than one serial should

        have been on the upper level concourse.




                                                    N.J. EDWARDS PS2279 SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

          TIME              DATE

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE

END OF REPORT




                                                                                       3068
Incident      102   260390 QP8064         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                            STATEMENT NUMBER   S1821

                                                                               Station

      lame          THICKEST

Forenames           PETER

Age                                           Date of birth

Address             S YORKSHIRE POLICE
                    WOODSEATS SHEFFIELD

Occupation          POL PC1074

Telephone

IC                  Height                    Build

Hair colour

Hair type

^^s                                           Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses             Use                       Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                020589                                                      Signed


             0830     Parade for duty E2

                      To Hillsborough on bus.      Briefing Ch. Supt. DUCKENFIELD.

             1115      Serial 11 duties gates 1 to 8 North Stand.

                       PS EDWARDS.     Serial divided into two.   Myself DC TURNER DC

                       FRIEND, DC OAKES, PC LARKIN on turnstiles 1 to 9 PS EEWARDS

                       to North Stand with rest.

             1200      Turnstile opened not many fans all quiet in good humour and

                       sober.    Gate separating North,Stand turnstiles and West

                       Stand turnstiles opened by Stewards.       Small grey barrier put

                       in its place.     This made extra turnstile to North Stand and

                       one less to West Stand.

             1300      Still quiet fans still sober and in good humour.

             1400      More fans getting busy some trying to enter without tickets

                       prevented from entering.
                                                                   pact;     2
                                                                   S1821

1430       One youth entered without ticket chased and caught taken to

           Police room and evicted into Penistone Road at 2.47 pm

           (1447). Name                  form completed re eviction.

1450       Returned to turnstile area it was obvious that there was a

           crush outside as children were lifted over turnstiles.

           People were climbing over walls to enter. People were

           coining through turnstiles two at a time.   Some smelling of

           drink and carrying cans.    PC's outside of turnstiles had to

           come through turnstiles and people were shouting to be let

           in.

Other officers told us that we were wanted on track as there was

trouble.   On arrival on pitch did not know what was happening.

Thought it was pitch invasion.     Saw officers pulling people over fence

went to assist pulled one youth with green track suit over fence.

Then saw what appeared to be dead people on floor behind fence.        Saw

they were being pulled out onto grass.     Dragged one fat man frcm rear

of net with help from DC TITTERTON. Man put in recovery position

talking appeared alive and well.

Assisted with other bodies re mouth to mouth.     Cannot give

descriptions.

When bodies moved went to centre of pitch, shocked at the scenes saw

other officers.

Left ground and went to Penistone Road and waited to be put off duty.

Returned to ground for De-brief.      Return to E2 Off Duty 7 pm (1900).

Over the period at the match the fans were in good humour and sober

until about 2.30 pm (1430) when there was a big rush of fans at

the turnstiles and many appeared drunk.

I had little contact with stewards except when the gate separating the

West Stand and the North Stand was opened.      They said they had been

told to open it.   I had no radio and was not in contact with an
                                                                         PAGE      3
                                                                         S1821

        officer with a radio.

        To rrty knowledge I did not handle a dead person.   However I cannot say

         if the persons helped are dead or alive.




                                                             P. THICKETT SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:             DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

m   ICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                       3071
Incident    102   260390 QP8064        DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                        STATEMENT NUMBER    S800A

                                                                           Station

ffcname           TURNER

Forenames         MALCOLM

Age                                        Date of birth

Address           S YORKSHIRE POLICE
                  WOODSEATS, SHEFFIELD

Occupation        POL PC2857

Telephone

IC                Height                   Build

Hair colour

Hair type

                                           Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses            Use                     Accent

Number of Pages

Dated              090589                                                    Signed


           I am a Detective Constable in the South Yorkshire Police Force and I

           am presently stationed at Woodseats Police Station, Sheffield.

           At 8.30 a.m.(0830) on Saturday, 15th April 1989 (150489), I commenced

           duty in full uniform at Woodseats Police Station, Sheffield, in

           relation to a football special duty at Hillsborough Football Ground

           for the semi- final match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.

           I was transported together with other Police Officers, by a PSV double

           decker bus, to Hillsborough Football Ground.    A briefing then took

           place in the North Stand area and the officers were given some packed

           refreshments.    My duties were that of serial 11.

           At approximately 11.15 a.m. (1115) that day, together with Detective

           Constables FRIEND, OAKES, TITTERTON, Police Constable THICKETT and

           Police Sergeant EDWARDS, I went to the inside of the leppings Lane

           turnstiles to patrol the inside of the turnstiles numbered 1 to 8.


                                                                                      3 0 72
                                                                   PAGE      2
                                                                   S800A

The supporters could be seen through the turnstiles and Mounted

Officers were on duty at that location outside the ground.      Police

Officers were also positioned on the outside of the turnstiles to

carry out 'selective searching' for prohibited articles.

I positioned myself on the inside of turnstile number 1 after a high

hinged fencing had been opened.       This prevented supporters entering

the West Stand area and a portable barrier fence was placed there by

the ground staff.     This enabled two more turnstiles to be brought into

use to allow the supporters into the North Stand area of the ground.

At 12 noon (1200), the turnstiles were opened and a number of

supporters came through to get themselves a good position in the

ground.    A number of Sheffield Wednesday supporters came to the

turnstiles asking if a prograirme could be purchased and passed out to

them.     Those requests were made.

As the time passed, the turnstiles became much busier and problems

were being caused by the supporters.       As the tickets were being handed

into the turnstile operators, fans from behind were snatching the

tickets and trying to use them again to get into the ground.       Otter

fans were jumping over the barriers and claiming that they had handed

their tickets in but that was not so.

Due to these problems, I stood inside the turnstile areas and

supervised both booths at that entrance numbers F and G.       I could see

the crowd outside and at approximately 2.30 p.m. (1430) I could see

that the crowd outside had swollen considerably.       The Police Officers

outside were experiencing difficulty in searching due to the numbers

and an obvious pressure was being caused in the surge forward to the

turnstile entrances.

At approximately 2.40 p.m. (1440) the turnstile entrances wre jaimed

and a number of youths entered with tickets to the West Stand area.

It was impossible to direct them back and to the correct turnstiles,
                                                                  PAGE    3
                                                                  S800A

due to the supporters that had moved forward and filled their space

as they entered the turnstile.   They were allowed through and

directed through the portable barrier fencing to the appropriate area

of the ground.   At that point, numerous fans were scrambling over the

walls and into the ground and it was impossible to stop them.      I

detained two and attempted to eject them from the ground, but it was

not possible to send them back through the turnstile areas.      It was

not possible to put them through the large gates to Leppings Lane as

the supporters were pushing against it.   Had it been opened they

would have spilled inside.

It was not practical to take these two to the Police Room as the

depletion of Police Officers would have caused more problems than

could have been bene fitted and the two were allowed to enter as paying

supporters.   Further youths entered with tickets and it was quite

obvious that they had been in an intoxicated state but it was not

possible to arrest or eject these from the ground either.     looking

through the turnstiles I could see that the Mounted Officers were

stuck solid in a compacted crowd which was surging forwards and

stretching for seme considerable distance.    The Policewoman on the

outside of the turnstile had been pinned to the wall by force of the

crowd and she was pulled into the turnstile and into the ground.

As the supjporters continued to come through the turnstiles, I could

see that seme of them were clearly injured.    Seme had obvious Imps,

others were clutching parts of their own bodies and showing signs of

pain on their faces.   As they came through the gates they expressed

relief due to having escaped from the pressure on the outside of the

ground.

I could see that the people on the outside of the ground were clearly

distressed and a great deal of suffering was being experienced. Being

inside the turnstile area, I started to pull people through the
                                                                   PAGE      4
                                                                   S800A

turnstiles to attempt to alleviate the outside pressure.      As sane came

through they were in poor condition and were taking their first full

gasp of air as they entered the turnstile space.       A number went to an

internal fence in the turnstile and stood for a while to recover

before making their way to the North Stand part of the ground.      The

stream of supporters continued to cane over the wall and into the West

Stand entrance to the ground and I continued to pull supporters

through the turnstiles.    A number of these did not have tickets, but

there was no way they could be sent back, ejected or arrested.      There

was no other course of action but to let them through and into the

ground.   As I pulled sane of the spectators through, the turnstile

staff were unable to take the stubs off the tickets fast enough and

some went through without handing them in.    The turnstiles would have

registered the numbers going through.

Throughout all this, children as young as seven or eight years old

were jumping over the turnstiles, claiming to be with parents and

running through into the ground.    It was impossible to stop them, due

to their numbers and the circumstances surrounding their entrance and

the duties that I was completing.    Elderly people were complaining of

the intense pressure outside and sane of the injuries they had

sustained.   They wre directed towards the Police Room and as none were

particularly serious, they were directed, rather than escorted to the

Police Room and first aid area.

As the time neared three o'clock (1500), the pressure behind the

outside crowd was at its worst.     People were screaming and fighting
                                                   %

was taking place, although limited, and being nothing more than the

swinging of fists and pushing to get into the turnstile area and

through into the ground.    The atmosphere was very tense and aggressive

and virtually everyone that entered stated that someone was going to

be killed in the crush outside.



                                                                                 3075
                                                                  PAGE      5
                                                                  S800A

I did not have a radio issued to me for this duty but I was aware that

a message had already been passed to the Ground Control Room to that

effect.   I could hear the crowd shouting outside and it was apparent

that the teams had gone onto the pitch.   The time would be

approximately 3.00 p.m. (1500) and the pushing and aggression was

accelerated by the fact that the game had started.

Whilst helping the supporters through the turnstiles, I noticed that

the pressure had suddenly dropped.   I was unaware of the reason why as

I was pre-occupied with helping the supporters through the turnstiles.

As I looked through I could see that the crowd had virtually gone and

that seme supporters had moved to the sides.   Only a few continued to

queue to hand in their tickets and the turnstiles slowed down almost

to a halt.

Wondering at the reason for the drop in crowd pressure, I came out

from the turnstile area to see the tail end of a crowd of supporters

running into the crowd.   I soon realised that the gates had been

opened and on looking at them I could see that they were badly dented

and distorted where they had been either pushed against or banged on.

At approximately 3.06 p.m. (1506) I was informed that there had been a

pitch invasion and as my attendance was no longer required at the

turnstiles, I attended with other officers from serial 11, making my

way to the pitch,   together with Detective Constables Friend,

Titterton and Oakes, I went round the right side of the West Stand and

to the rear of the goalposts in front of the West Stand.      As I did, I

saw that the crowd was surging and that people were pinned to the

perimeter wire fencing.   The place where it was the most serious was

to the left side of the goalposts where I could see that people were

disfigured as their faces were pinned to the wire meshing.      An officer

pointed to one stating that he was dead and on looking, it was clear

that a number were already dead and others were dying.
                                                                PAGE      6
                                                                S800A

Some of the people pinned to the fence had vomit on them and they were

unable to move.    Their skins had turned to a blue/purple colour and

their eyes were lifeless.    A small entrance gate had already been

opened sane ten feet (10') away and Police Officers were pulling

supporters out through that gate in order to relieve the pressure

inside the area.    Being unable to enter the gate due to the number of

Police already there, I positioned myself in front of the fence where

the majority were being crushed.

Together with around twenty other Police Officers, I tried to pull the

fencing forwards onto the pitch.    Despite the substantial force

that was used, it could not be moved at all.    I then climbed onto the

wira fencing, perched on the top section and bent the forward spikes

back that protruded into the crowd.    Reaching down into the crowd, I

managed to pull sane youngsters up from the heaving mass.   As I pulled

them up by their arms, they laid on top of the fence and I threw them

down to two Police Officers who caught them as they fell.

Superintendent GREENWOOD and Chief Superintendent NESBIT were at that

location and a number of supporters had been pulled through the small

gate from the West Stand and pushed onto the pitch.    It appeared that

these were unaware of the reason for them being brought out of the

crowd.   They were hostile and a number of blows were made towards

Police Officers before they realised that they were being brought out

to get to the dead and dying.

A chain was made of Police to the gates and as bodies were dragged to

the gate, the dead were passed down the line and placed on the pitch

adjacent to the goalposts.    Those that had a normal colour but were

not breathing, were carried out irttnediately and either placed in an

ambulance or laid on the pitch for treatment.

At approximately 3.15 p.m. (1515) I carried a youth I now knew to be

the deceased Martin Kevin TRAYNOR (20.05.72 (20051972), apprentice
                                                                  PAGE         7
                                                                  S800A

joiner of                                 Birkenhead.                   from

the West Stand.     With another Police Officer, I dragged him to the

pitch and laid him down.

His body was discoloured a blue/purple colour

             His eyes were motionless and I was unable to find a pulse.

I checked both his wrist and his neck and opened his eyes to check for

dilating, but they never changed.     He was obviously dead and this was

confirmed by a doctor who approached, informed me that he was a

doctor and checked the same as I had already done before saying that

he "had gone and to leave him."

I covered his face with a red/blue/green jumper and returned to where

the gate was to assist in the removal of further bodies.     As they came

out I checked them for pulses and for dilation of the eyes before

covering their faces, whilst they laid on the pitch awaiting their

removal in due course.     All around Police Officers, ambulance and

supporters were attempting to breathe life back into the victims and

massaged their chests.

The Police presence had increased at this time and after assisting to

remove a number of dead bodies from the stand, I continued to check

the bodies that appeared to have a normal or near to normal skin

colouring.    I was aware that at least three doctors were among the

victims, confirming which bodies were too far gone and selecting

others to attempt to resuscitate.     As the ambulances attended they

were filled particularly with small children and left within mcments

of their arrival.

Bodies had been pulled from what can only be described as a mass of

dead people who had previously remained     standing due to the pressure

that was holding them upright. As that      pressure wasrelieved, they

fell into a tangled mess and the Police     Officers insidethe stand had

some considerable difficulty in separating them.
                                                                 PAGE      8
                                                                 S800A

The arrival of other Police Officers enabled me to return to the

bodies, comfort grieving fans and relatives and at that point, I

started to carry the advertising boards up to the grassed pitch area.

One piece was placed at the side of one of the bodies I had previously

removed, Martin TRAYNOR.    I then took notice of the clothing that he

was wearing which consisted one black Adidas trainer, a pair of white

socks,        inderpants, black tracksuit bottoms, grey "The Jam" 'T'

shirt and the previously described jumper.    He had an apparent age of

25 years, approximately 14 stone in weight.    He had short ginger hair,

blue eyes and a freckled complexion.

With assistance frcm other people, I placed him on the board and he

was picked up and with the assistance of Police and supporters, he

was carried at seme speed across the pitch, towards the Police Roan

which I had already established was the point where the dead were to

be taken.    As I approached the Police Room I was directed into the

gymnasium where the deceased were carried into.

On entering I was approached by Detective Superintendent MCKAY who

informed me that I was being allocated to that body and that it was my

responsibility until identification had been completed.     I took notice

of the time at that stage and realised that it was now 3.40 p.m

(1540).     The body was removed frcm the board and positioned beside

other bodies. At that point the face was covered over again, due to

further supporters entering the gymnasium whilst assisting in the

carriage of other dead and preventing anyone identifying him as being

a member of their family.     At 4.08 p.m. (1608) I was approached by

Doctor CURPEN who examined the body and certified it as dead.

The bodies continued to come into the gymnasium and as time passed I

was given the number 57, which was to relate to my dead youth.     I

searched him to establish his identity but had he had no personal

property on him at all.     His pockets wre corpletely empty and he had
                                                                  PAGE         9
                                                                  S800A

no wristwatch or other form of jewellery on him at all.

                                                on the rear of his left

hand/wrist.   It did not seem unusual for him not to have any property

                            as he was pulled from the dead.   It was also

possible for his coat to have been discarded or even used to cover

someone else's face after death.

I tagged his body with a sudden death label marked with my details and

the bare details that were known at that time of the deceased.       A

OK/18 form was also completed with those details including a

description and I cleaned the face and head up for the purpose of

photographing him.    Some time later the deceased was photographed and

the Polaroid snap was marked with the body number before being taken

for displaying to families for identification purposes.

The body was cleaned, wrapped and placed into a plastic body bag after

it had been clearly marked with the known details.     I waited for an

identification frcm the photograph frcm persons that had attended at

the football match, friends and relatives that had been brought to

Sheffield by coach.

At 2.45 a.m. (1445) on Sunday 16th April, 1989 (160489), I was

informed that the photograph had been picked out by a relative.          The

body was cleaned and prepared for identification purposes and then

wheeled to a viewing area for a proper identification.     I saw John

TRAYNOR, (28.07.59 (28071959), address as above) who positively

identified the body to be that of his brother Martin Kevin TRAYNOR of

the same address.     The body was removed and I obtained personal

details for the O K / 18 form.   On completion the body was conveyed by

the Ambulance Service to the tfedico Legal Centre on Watery Street,

Sheffield, arriving at 3.30 a.m. (0330) Documentation procedures were

completed and after the body had been clearly marked, I left it in the

care of the mortuary staff.      I had obtained a disclaimer form to allow
                                                                 PAGE 10
                                                                 S800A

disposal of the clothing of the deceased.   There was nothing of value

amongst then.   I then returned to the gymnasium before being returned

to vfoodseats Police Station to sign off duty.

From my duties at the ground and position at the turnstiles, I can

state that the pressure on the outside of the turnstiles was building

up considerably, particularly after 2.40 p.m. (1440) that day.   As the

time approached 3.00 p.m. (1500) it was clear that the crowd surge

would increase and that injuries, and most definitely fatalities by

suffocation were possible at the Leppings Lane turnstile entrance.

That possibility was accelerated by the roar of the crowd as either

the teams coining onto the pitch or a near goal, which encouraged them

to surge forward in fear of missing something on the field.

If the gates had not been opened, I feel certain that fatalities would

have been found on the outside of the ground at this location.    The

opening of the gates was essential to alleviate that possibility, but

unfortunately, no one could foresee the problem that would be caused

inside.

From my opinion I believe that numerous people were already dead at

3.06 p.m. (1506) when I made my way in front of them to see them     •

crushed against the fence.   Seme had already discoloured bodies and

were lifeless, clearly dead by that time.   As time progressed, I could

see people changing colour in front of me in that crowd.   It was

obvious that they were dying due to lack of oxygen and it was

frustrating to see them and being unable to do anything about it in

time to save them.   I am convinced that if the fence could have been

opened at 3.06 p.m. (1506) then at least a third or even half of them

could have been saved.

The delay in being able to get to them and being unable to tear down

the fence was most definitely a contributory factor which led to the

unnecessary death of people who had entered the ground early in order
                                                                            PAGE 11
                                                                            S800A

        to obtain a prime position to see the football match.    They did not do

        anything themselves to cause their own deaths, but suffered, in my

        belief, due to the late arrival of supporters who crushed them by

        overfilling the West Stand areas.

        In my belief I am certain that seme of the people were dead prior to

        the rush of supporters entering the area after the gates had been

        opened, due to the colouration of the bodies.     They appeared to have

        been dead for seme time by     3.06 p.m (1506).   One observation whichis

        clear in hindsight is that the fences should have emergency wire

        cutters in prominent positions to eliminate this happening again.      The

        delay in getting to the people crushed against the fence has caused a

        considerable unnecessary loss of life.

        Such wire cutters could be     placed out before every match and returned

        to a place of safety on completion.    Failingthis, every alternate

        section of fencing should be adapted to enable it to be opened

        outwards in any anergency situation.     Fencing is unfortunately

        essential with today's football supporters, but death through

        suffocation can be prevented with a little thought.




                                                                M TURNER SIGNED

   sTEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE

          TIME             DATE:     090589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE

END OF REPORT
Incident    102   260390 OP8Q64       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                         STATEMENT NUMBER   S2824

                                                                            Station

Surname           OAKES

Forenames             JAMES    JOHN

Age                   31                 Date of birth

Address


Occupation            POL PC873

Telephone

IC                Height                  Build

Hair colour

Hair type

                                          Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses           Use                    Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                 170489                                                  Signed


           I am a Detective Constable of the South Yorkshire Police presently

           working from the Criminal Investigation Department of Woodseats Police

           Station.

           I was rostered to work a football duty in uniform at the Liverpool/

           Notts. Forest match on 15 April 1989 (150489).

           I commenced duty at 8.30 am (0830) on that date at Woodseats Police

           Station where I joined numerous other officers who were subsequently

           conveyed in a PSV to Hillsborough Football Ground.

           Shortly after arrival all the officers on my serial (Serial 11) joined

           me on the North stand for the pre-match briefing by senior officers,

           at this briefing I recall a briefing officer state    that the        kickoff

           time would be 3 pm (1500) no later.

           Together with the following officers I went    to the Leppings        Lanearea

           behind the West stand and positioned myself    behind turnstiles 1 and 2
                                                                PAGE     2
                                                                S2824

on the inside of the ground at approximately 11.20 am (1120), PS2279

EDWARDS, DC1529 FRIEND, DC2857 TURNER, DC2571 TITTERTON, PC1074

THICKET and PC2409 LARKIN.

The only officer in possession of a personal radio was PS2279 ECWARDS.

Our duties at this location was as outlined in the duty order for

serial 11, at this time we had commenced Phase 1 of the serials duties

that is covering turnstiles 1 to 8 and at approximately 12 noon (1200)

the turnstiles opened to allow fans to enter.   At this time I could

see two male uniformed officers carrying out searches of fans entering

through turnstiles 1 and 2 in front of me.   Shortly before

the turnstiles opened several stewards in reflective jackets were

joined by someone who appeared to be an official with a UHF type radio

and together they unlocked an internal perimeter fence which divided

the access from the North stand and the West stand.   I questioned the

man with the radio as I was concerned that fans entering later when

it would be busy would have access to either side.    I was told that

they had wrongly positioned two markers outside turnstiles 9 to 12 and

fans entering for the North stand would be entering the ground on

the West stand end.   I was also told that it was too late to take

them down as they had been screwed in position.   A small portable

type aluminium barrier had been positioned to the left of turnstiles 9

to 12 and manned by further stewards who have been requested by the

man with the radio.

By this time I was aware that the Serial Sergeant, Sgt EDWARDS was not

in the vicinity.   I returned to my position and at that time the

turnstiles opened and fans began to enter.

At around 2 pm (1400) I was aware that two fans had been brought in

through the gate leading to the North stand immediately to my right.

They were in possession of several hundred pounds in cash and a number

of tickets for the match that were suspected to be forgeries. They
                                                                 PAGE     3
                                                                 S2824

were conveyed to the Police rocm.

A short time after this as I was searching a fan entering the

turnstile at 1.    I heard one of the ticket collectors shout from the

direction of turnstile 4 or 5 "He's got no ticket."    I turned and saw

a young lad in a blue tracksuit running from that direction and on

seeing me attempting to run away from me.

I detained the youth who was in possession of a ticket stub which he

agreed was not his and after obtaining his details he was ejected via

the North stand gate which was by this time beginning to be blocked by

large numbers of fans.

The youth was ejected as opposed to being arrested or taken to the

Police rocm as it was becoming much busier and I was aware that

numerous other fans were causing problems in the area of the

turnstiles by jumping over than or attempting to enter two at a time.

Had I taken any other action it would have left less of a Police

presence at the turnstiles.    Youth ejected;




It was getting progressively more and more busier at all the

turnstile.   I had to intervene several times between turnstile 1 and

6 where more than one fan was attempting to enter through the

turnstiles together.     One fat fan, 30 years, pushed out of turnstile -

no ticket.   He had tried to get in with three others who had tickets

and had entered.    He was extremely drunk and his three friends were

also intoxicated. Incidents involved fans attempting to pull tickets

and stubs from the turnstile attendants.

At around 2.30 pm (1430) I detained a further person who had junped

over the barrier without a ticket,

                                                     Due to the ever
                                                                 PAGE     4
                                                                 S2824

growing numbers outside the turnstiles between 1 and 12 I took this

fan around through the West stand (then I remained at this point) area

behind the turnstiles to the large Gate C immediately alongside the

South stand road entrance beside turnstile G where he was ejected

along with about three other fans who had been escorted to this point

by other officers, 1847 Bungy, 1506 Marsh - E2, by this time it was

approximately 2.35 pm (1435).

As I had approached the area behind turnstiles A to G at the rear of

the West stand I observed about 10 persons climbing along the top of

the gate between turnstile 16 and turnstile A.

These fans were progressively making their way towards the roofs of

turnstiles A to G.    After ejecting      [ was concerned for the few

officers working at these turnstiles, a large number of fans who were

in an aggressive and noisy wood were congregating around turnstiles A

to G and the fans who had been on top of the gate earlier were by

this time on the roof of turnstiles A to G and were increasing in

numbers.

The fans on the roof were waving what appeared to be complete tickets

with attached stubs, they began to jump from the turnstile roofs in

increasing numbers.    I was by this time on my own.   I decided to

remain at this point as it was appearing to be having greater control

problems that at turnstiles 1 to 12 where I had been earlier.     I was

being approached by larger groups of fans some of whcm had climbed the

outer gate and gained access from the turnstile roof at turnstiles A

to 3.

I can only recollect seeing two or three uniform officers standing

beside the closed main gates on the South stand road side of the West

stand entrance, a further one or two officers, one I think was a

Sergeant were immediately in front of turnstiles A to G.

Numerous fans some of whom were intoxicated were screaming abuse at
                                                                   PAGE       5
                                                                   S2824

me, stating that people were being crushed to death outside on

Leppings Lane by the crowd.    At this time I was frightened for rny own

safety.

Several stated that it was going to be another Heysal Stadium

outside the turnstiles and pleaded that the main gates should be

opened to save lives.   I genuinely believed at this time that people

outside on Leppings Lane were in danger of dying.    I tried to position

myself nearer the gate and turnstiles.    A large number of fans

continually hurled abuse and threats towards me.    I observed through

one of the turnstiles, I believe turnstile B on the West stand

entrance, an unconscious young lad approximately 11 years of age.        He

was dressed in red and was being passed over the heads of fans outside

the turnstiles towards the South stand road entrance.    I was by this

time being pushed physically back away from the gates and other fans

were approaching pleading that the gates should be opened.    Mature,

sober men were in tears pleading that children and wcroen were being

crushed to death outside.     Some fans who were more sympathetic stated

that they had heard other fans state outside that if they pushed

before kick off and caused a crush the Police would have to let them

in, this was mentioned by one fan and another with him agreed, all the

fans were by this time entering through turnstiles A to G in a

distressed state.

I saw one man, male, white, approximately 30 years, 5'8", slim build,

dark hair, black moustache, thin facial features, he entered through

turnstile E and was in a collapsed state and appeared to be suffering

from chest crush injuries.     As I attempted to assist him I saw an old

man enter through these same turnstiles and lean on the wall gasping

for air.

I offered to take the injured man to a first aid post but he refused

stating that he would be alright and wanted to watch the match.      A
                                                                 PAGE     6
                                                                 S2824

number of fans who were milling around behind the West stand again

started shouting at me on seeing the apparently injured screaming for

the gates to open.

I believe that it was sometime around 2.50 pn (1450) that I was

standing opposite turnstile A in line with the main gate C immediately

alongside turnstile G.    (Leading onto the South stand access road). I

was not aware of any orders or instructions as I had no radio or

access to one.   No tannoy messages were heard but the gates mentioned

above opened.    I believe that they were opened by Police officers wham

I had seen standing near them a short time before.   As soon as the

gates opened a flood of fans came into the ground, approximately 6' to

8 ' wide, they rushed towards me causing me to run to my left and back

towards the main gate above.

Although it seemed like a long time the gates were only opened about 1

minute then closed.    I assumed that all the fans who entered I would

guess 100 or 200 perhaps more went in the direction of the West stand

tunnel.   I do not recall seeing any Police officers at the mouth of

the tunnel prior to the gates being opened.    I do however recall after

the gates had closed looking towards the tunnel entrance and one blue

wooden door was pulled partly across and the other opened, there were

no fans milling about or crowded into the mouth of the tunnel.     I do

not recall whether at that time I could see the grassed area of the

pitch which is normally visible from where I was standing.

Although most of the fans entered in a rush, some walked in, several

were obviously distressed and appeared to be suffering fron breathing

difficulties.    Again I was subjected to a torrent of abuse and pleas

to have the gates opened again by the fans who had just entered.      They

stated that although we had let a large number in the problem was just

as bad and again reference was made to it being 'another Heysal

Stadium outside'.
                                                                  PAGE     7
                                                                  S2824

Again more sympathetic fans were arguing on my behalf that they

shouldn't blame me.    I was asked for the name of the officer in charge

and the name of my Chief Constable.    The fans were extremely

distressed and from what I could see I feared that scmeone would

surely die outside.    I could see fans continuing to climb the gates

and falling through the turnstiles at A to G, seme in injured states.

Mention was made by one of these fans, of a public house where fans

had been drinking shortly before the game called The Bee Hive.     This

public house was not known to me prior to being mentioned by this fan.

To date I do not know its location although I presume it must be

reasonably near the stadium at Hillsborough.

I was busy dealing with these fans and trying to console and appease

them, when again about 3 or 4 minutes later, the same gate opened

again, and although further fans entered it was not in as many

numbers.   At this point I recall a uniformed PC calling to me frcm the

gate and asking me to help push the gate closed, which I did.     I have

considered this matter and am unsure whether I assisted this PC to

close the gate on the first or second occasion.

During this time I was aware of two stewards to my left wearing the

flourescent waistcoats, one of them mentioned to me that he did not

know where all the fans would go as the West stand must be full.     Also

whilst the crowd entered on the first occasion I believe that I saw

the juvenile          tfhom I had ejected from the North stand gate at

around 2 pn (1400), he was in the centre of the crowd with other

youths who were running hard.     I formed the impression that this group

did not have tickets.    A large number obviously did and on entering

several attempted to give me their tickets to remove the stub.      Due to

the circumstances several injured persons staggering around and

few officers I did not attempt to take tickets from them.     Had I done

so I would most certainly have been pushed out of the way by the bulk
                                                                 PAGE      8
                                                                 S2824

of the crowd and would have impaired their entry which would

have defeated the object of the exercise that is relieving the

pressure outside.

GROUND INCIDENT

After the gates had closed on the second occasion it seemed strangely

quiet in the vicinity of the turnstiles.     I was relieved to find that

most of the more aggressive fans had gone and I looked around to see

if I could see any of my colleagues or other officers.    There were few

officers around.    After about 5 minutes I saw approximately 10 to 15

uniformed constables run past me from the direction of the North

stand.   Amongst them I saw DC TURNER, EC FRIEND, DC TITTERTON and

other officers frcm my serial (Serial 11).    They were running in the

direction of the Police control room at the side of the West stand.

At this time I was unaware of what the incident was and on joining

these officers running towards the Police control room I was informed

that it was a pitch invasion.

I was not aware of the time and I did not realise that the game was in

fact underway.     On arrival at the side of the West stand an internal

dividing gate at the rear of the Police roam was opened and we all had

access to the side of the South stand.     On entering the first aisle

leading onto the pitch, I was aware that no players were on the pitch.

I could hear fans state that the teams had just left the pitch.

On looking across towards the front of the West stand to my left I

could see Police officers in front of the security fencing in the area

behind the goal post, numerous fans were scaling the perimeter fence

and dropping over onto the pitch.     It became obvious that it was not a

pitch invasion, people were staggering from the perimeter fence being

assisted by Police officers and other fans.     They were falling onto

the grassed playing area in the vicinity of the goals.     Wcmen, old

men, young children were sitting crying, some having difficulty
                                                                  PAGE      9
                                                                  S2824

breathing.

Together with my colleagues, I went directly to the area at the rear

of the goal posts.    To my left a perimeter fence gate seme 4' wide was

open, between this area and the area to the right of the goal posts I

could see a number of obviously dead bodies, young wcmen and mainly

teenage male fans.    They were pressed firmly against the perimeter

fence in a standing position.    I estimated initially about 20

obviously dead persons.    At this time officers were climbing the

perimeter fence and assisting in pulling bodies and injured out.       I

immediately went to the open gate to my left and joined a Police

Sergeant (ID 1111).    He was attempting to pull a large unconscious

male person out of the gate.    This person was trapped by his legs.       He

was wearing a white/light t shirt, heavy build, blue jeans and short

fair hair, despite attempts he was jammed tight.    Alongside him was a

conscious young woman with long brown hair, slim build, approximately

20 to 30 years.    She was screaming in pain and trapped by her waist

like the unconscious man by her side.    She could not be pulled free at

this time.    I then became aware that at least another 8 or 10 bodies

were enmeshed and piled up behind them directly behind the gate most

were blue and appeared dead. The crowd were still surging forward and

despite shouting at them to move back, they obviously could not hear

from the noise being made mostly from the rear by angry and aggressive

fans.     I could see DC 1177 Davis, he was inside this area behind the

bodies.    He had lost his helmet.   His tunic was opened.

I could see what appeared to be a Police officer directly behind DC

DAVIS.    He had been lifted physically and dropped head first over the

crowd and disappeared amongst them seme 10 yards (10yds) frcm the

front of the perimeter fence directly behind the goal area.

Other uniformed officers ran in that direction.     Officers entering

through this gate to attempt a rescue were forced to stand on bodies.
                                                                 PAGE 10
                                                                 S2824

I could not bring myself to stand on the bodies and remained on the

fencing directing obviously uninjured fans to move back.     For the

first 10 minutes or so the fans were behaving hysterically, some

were throwing objects, one of which was a coin which I saw strike the

fencing near to the gate.    This behaviour seemed to cease relatively

quickly and officers formed a line inside and outside the gate

entrance and began to pass bodies through.

A large number of injured and distressed persons outside the West

stand area on the pitch were being received and assisted by Police

officers and St John Ambulance brigade.

I was passed the body of an unconscious female with long brown hair.

She was not the one trapped at the gate.     I with others

(unknown) carried her to a stretcher nearby.     I believe that she was

still alive.   I returned and was passed an unconsicous male, he was

slightly blue and with others I placed him in front to the left of the

goal post and immediately began cardiac and artificial resuscitation

and was quickly joined by others, one I believe a medical student and

a young female St John Ambulance first aider (approximately 15

years). She assisted and at ray request went to get an airway to

assist me, on her return I was informed that all the airways had gone.

They didn't have any more.

This apparently dead fan was male, white 30 to 35 years, black

thinning short hair, brown eyes, 5'9", stocky build, wearing jeans.

He had a thick moustache on upper lip only.

I continued attempts to resuscitate for some 15 to 20 minutes.     He was

                                                             throughout

this time I was aware only of movements within a close proximity.      I

recall some more abusive fans swearing and blaming the Police for the

situation and at that time I was aware of being struck by scmeone s

foot into my right hip whilst I was resuscitating the above fan.       I
                                                                   PAGE 11
                                                                   S2824

continued what I was doing but was aware of a fan walking away from me

wearing blue jeans and white trainers.   I could not tell whether I was

kicked intentionally but it occurred whilst the abusive remarks were

being made.

Through exhaustion I was unable to continue the resuscitation and I

was relieved by scmeone else who took over.

During this time I was observing a young Policewoman (shoulder length

black hair busy at bottom). She had been resuscitating a young man,

male, white, 20's green t shirt (tennis style), blue jeans, 6' tall,

slim build.   At one point he seemed to have recovered and started

breathing.    I recall thinking that she was doing a great job bringing

him around.   She had placed him on his side in the recovery position.

As a result of my attempted resuscitation I had been left dizzy and

after a few moments I turned to see that the above described fan had

stopped breathing again.    I then went over to her and with her

assistance I again turned him onto his back, cleared his airway and

together we administered cardiac and artificial resuscitation.     After

a few minutes we were joined by a Doctor and a nurse who took over

with the aid of an ambulance resuscitation mask and oxygen tank.      By

this time the first fan that I had attended to on the pitch, the fan

with the moustache, he had been removed by scmeone and presumably

taken to the Sports Hall where ambulances had by then arrived.

I was also aware whilst resuscitating the first fan that a reporter

(TV) with a cameraman were walking onto the pitch from the direction

of the South stand.    The behaviour of the reporter in particular

(male, white, black hair, ? blue suit, dark eyebrows, 25 - 30 years)

was instantly offensive.    He was casually walking past myself and

other officers and fans who were struggling to resuscitate

casualties.    He was adjusting his tie as if to prepare to be filmed

and appeared to be looking for any or a certain senior police officer.
                                                                PAGE 12
                                                                S2824

As a result roars of anger could be heard from fans who were likewise

angared and disgusted by his behaviour.    I was aware that several

police officers removed them from the pitch.

Aftar this I looked around to see if I could assist anyone else

but by this time everything was under control.

I made my way towards where the bodies had been recovered, at this

time a number of Liverpool fans were standing around mainly at the

rear of all the bodies had been removed and Police officers were

beginning to collect clothing and personal items dropped by the

injured and deceased.   As they were doing so I saw a young Liverpool

fan approximately 16 years walk through the area where a barrier had

collapsed behind and to the left of the goal post he looked around and

then quickly snatched up a programme which had obviously been dropped

by one of the injured or dead.   He quickly put it in his back pocket

and ran back up to the left hand side of the West stand to join other

young Liverpool fans.   I went after him and asked him if he wanted to

steal anything else from the dead.   He took the programme from his

pocket and put it back down at ray request, left the stand area.

As instructed together with other officers I attended at a de-brief in

the North stand a short time later before returning to Woodseats

Police Station via a PSV from Claywheels Lane.

The bodies had all been removed and I walked with another officer to

the Sports Hall where I was approached by the elderly parents of a

Doctor who had been assisting with the injured.    They asked if I could

locate him.   I enquired at the Sports Hall/Police rocm/First aid roan

and was told he was believed to have gone to the Royal Hal lamshire

Hospital - I told them how to get there.

In my opinion there appeared to be a lack of first aid equipment/

airways, oxygen etc. The atmosphere on the pitch could only be

described as totally uncontrollable chaos due to the incredible
                                                                         PAGE 13
                                                                         S2824

        numbers of dead and injured, the situation was not helped by the

        continual interference of press photographers and camera crew and the

       mors aggressive fans.

        In respect of the perimeter fencing, I had great difficulty in

        assisting the evacuation of persons from the West stand due to a wall

        some 3' high before you reach the bottom of the gate.    It had a ditch

        like effect in which people collapsed and could not be seen through

       the fence.

       NOTE; one male Liverpool supporter on my arrival at the perimeter gate

       who was screaming to be pulled out, claimed to be a Liverpool police

       officer, he did not appear injured and came from the vicinity of the

       West stand to the left of the perimeter gate.     Description; male

       white, heavy build (14st), round face, short mid brown wavy hair, 30

       years???

        I recall seeing some 3 - 4 stewards near to 'A' gate behind turnstiles

        10 - 12 where a temporary barrier had been positioned by a senior

        steward.

        I recall a further two stewards next to gate C they were initially

        standing chatting from around 2.30 (1430) up until 2.40 (1440) - 2.45

        (1445) when injured fans started coming through the turnstile.       I

        recall one of them trying to help an injured fan shortly before 'C'

       gate opened for the first time.      I did not see any stewards at any

        time directing any fans.




                                                              J J OAKES SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:   170489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:
Incident    102   260390 QP8064         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                         STATEMENT NUMBER   S1468A

                                                                            Station

^rname             FRIEND

Forenames          JOHN    EDWARD

Age                31                       Date of birth

Address           S. YORKSHIRE POLICE
                  WOODSEATS, SHEFFIELD

Occupation         POL PC1529

Telephone

IC                Height                    Build

Hair colour

Hair type

^^s                                         Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses           Use                       Accent

Number of Pages

Dated              020589                                        J E FRIEND Signed


           I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police Force and I am

           presently stationed at Woodseats Police Station, Sheffield.

           At 8.30am (0830) Saturday, 15 April, 1989 (150489) I ccmnenced duty in

           full Police uniform at Woodseats Police Station, Sheffield, in

           relation to a football 'Special' duty at Hillsborough Football Ground

           for the Semi Final Cup Match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest

           Football Clubs.

           I was transported with other officers by a PSV bus to Hillsborough

           Football Ground.     A briefing then took place in the North Stand area

           of the ground and together with the officers there, received packed

           refreshments before commencing my duties with serial 11.

           At approximately 11.15am (1115) that date together with DC 2857

           TURNER, DC 873 OAKES, DC 2571 TITTERTON, PC THICKETT, PC LARKIN and PS

           2279 EDWARDS.     I commenced patrolling an area inside the ground behind
                                                                 PAGE   2
                                                                 S1468A

the Leppings Lane turnstiles (1-8).

I was aware that other officers were outside the ground directly

outside the turnstiles where I was positioned.

At approximately 12 noon (1200), the turnstiles were opened and

supporters started to come through the turnstiles.     I saw that there

were two officers outside in front of each of the turnstiles and that

a number of Mounted officers were also in position in leppings Lane.

Other uniform and CID officers could be seen patrolling this area.

At this time a large metal gate was opened.    This formed part of a

fence which divided the supporters with tickets for the North stand

and West stand.   A portable metal barrier fence was then placed across

the gate allowing a number of other turnstiles to be used to allow

supporters with tickets for the North stand to enter the ground.     This

barrier was manned by four yellow jacketed stewards.    As the number of

supporters entering the ground increased a number of fans attempted to

enter the ground without tickets.     A fan attanpted to snatch tickets

from a turnstile operator.   The operator called for help and I went to

his assistance.   Ticket stubs were all over the floor of the

turnstile.    The operator had hold of the fan by the hand however I

could not see the fan as he was being shielded by persons already in

the turnstile.    The operator let go of the fan and he disappeared into

the crowd which had now developed outside.     At this time I noted that

we were without any form of supervisory support.

At 2.25pm (1425) whilst working on the turnstiles I saw a man who I

now know to be                                         Liverpool, enter

the ground without a ticket by going through the turnstile with

another fan who had a ticket.    I immediately detained him and informed

him of what I had seen and that it was my intention to eject him frcm

the ground.

Together with DC TITTERTON I took         to the Police room at the rear



                                                                            3097
                                                                  PAGE   3
                                                                  S1468A

of the North stand, where following documentary procedures he was

ejected from the ground via a gate at the Penistone Road side of the

stand.

Together with DC TITTERTON I returned to the turnstiles at the

Leppings Lane.     It was hectic and it was apparent that a large crowd

had built up outside the turnstiles and that a large amount of pushing

was going on.     Persons were entering the ground without tickets,

however, it was not possible to detain these persons as there were

just six officers including myself working this area, to leave the

area would have put extra pressure on my colleagues who were already

struggling with the volume of persons entering the ground.     There was

an obvious crush developing outside the ground and persons entering

the ground via the turnstiles designated North stand had tickets for

the West stand.     It was not possible to redirect them and they were

allowed to enter the ground and were redirected through the portable

barrier to the West stand area of the ground.

The pressure outside the turnstiles was by now a crush and officers

outside the turnstiles were forced to retreat over the barrier in the

turnstile to avoid injury.     Persons entering the ground were hyped up

and in a state of distress and anger, shouting and screaming that

persons would be seriously injured if the situation outside the ground

wasn't sorted out.     It should also be stated that some of the persons

entering the ground were under the influence of alcohol and

some were drunk.     Heated arguments broke out and the situation behind

the turnstiles became very tense.     The crush continued and persons

entering the ground were making complaints of injury due to the

condition outside.

At this time I saw an Inspector (name not known) who was stood by the

metal fence.     I went to him and informed him that extra officers were

required and that persons would be seriously injured if the situation
                                                                 PAGE   4
                                                                 S1468A

outside wasn't relieved.     I was informed that the matter was inhand

and that other officers were attending.

It was now apparent that the situation was critical.    I could see

gates A and B were being shaken violently and were obviously near to

being forced open.     I saw that a number of Police officers had taken

up station by gate A.    Fans had started to climb the outer wall and a

number were on the roof of the turnstiles.

At this time I saw Police Sergeant WRIGHT walk past with several other

officers apparently attempting to get outside.

By 3pm (1500) the pressure outside was at its worst.    People were

screaming and shouting for something to be done.    The turnstiles areas

wera choked solid with people and I was assisting in pulling persons

through them.

A loud roar was heard from the inside of the ground and the crush

seemed to get worse.    This was obviously the teams entering the pitch.

At approximately 3.05pm (1505) that date the two gates A and B were

opened and a flood of persons entered the ground.     At this time there

was a further loud roar frcm the crowd in the ground and the persons

pouring into the ground accelerated their pace.     There was no way of

checking tickets or directing any of the crowd.     It was a stampede of

people it was total chaos they had but one thing on their minds and

that was to get into the ground and watch the match.

At approximately 3.06pm (1506) that date I was informed that there

was a pitch invasion and that officers had been requested to attend on

the pitch.   Together with DC TURNER, DC TITTERTON and OAKES I made my

way round across the back of the West stand under the Police control

into the South stand and down onto the field of play.

I saw that there were a number of supporters on the field, it was

immediately apparent that this was not a pitch invasion and that

persons were injured.     I made my way to an area of fencing to the rear
                                                                     PAGE   5
                                                  ;                  S1468A

of the goal posts, where I saw DS MORTON.   There were a large number

of dead/dying and injured persons in the crowd.       People were crushed

hard against the fence.    I could see what can only be described as a

blob of humanity crush behind them not moving.    Some persons crushed

against the fence were blue violet in colour others had glazed eyes,

apparently dead, others were covered in vomit.

Supporters from the rear were still pushing forward at this stage onto

the persons trapped against the fence.    I could see that there were a

number of persons who had been forced up into the air by the pressure.
                                               •e
They were in great distress their faces were distorted as though about

to explode, they appeared to be moving in slow motion.       I could see

that a great disaster was happening and I felt so helpless to prevent

it.   I saw DS MORTON again and said to him something like "There must

be about twenty or thirty dead."

I then saw Supt. GREENWOOD who was by the gate to pen number three.

On the pitch at this time were a small but increasing number of

persons injured who were receiving treatment from officers, St. John's

Ambulance personnel and football supporters.     I was asked by Supt.

GREENWOOD to clear the press from the field as they were taking

pictures of the dead and dying at the fence and on the pitch.        I

attempted to move them away but they returned like vultures to a

rotting carcase of meat.    They were disgusting in their attitude

towards life they did not help, give any form of aid or assistance to

the dead dying and injured people on the pitch.       They just kept on

snapping their cameras sometimes in front of persons giving mouth to

mouth resuscitation.   I enlisted the assistance of other officers and

then returned to the fence.

It was total chaos, I climbed the fence and leant over the top to

assist fans in climbing over to escape the crush.       I remember

assisting a number of persons over the fence, the exact number I
                                                                   PAGE   6
                                                                   S1468A

cannot remember nor I am unable to describe them.     I remember

screaming at the fans at the rear to move back away frcm the persons

crushed at the fence.   The mood of the fans was one of anger and

frustration at the apparent lack of assistance of the Police and this

angar was then directed towards the Police, in the form of verbal

abuse and a very high state of agitation.    Persons frcm the rear of

the crowd in pen 3 started running at the fence in panic and were

climbing over the dead dying and injured to get to me on the fence.      I

realised that further injury to these persons was being caused so I

climbed down from the fence and I saw Chief Superintendent NESBIT who

was by the gate to pen 3 which was open.    I saw that there were a

number of persons blocking the entrance.    They appeared dead.    Mr.

NESBIT informed myself and other officers to enter the pen via the

gate.   I was the second person to enter the pen via the gate I

remember that PC FAIRCLOUGH was directly behind me.     Entry to the pen

was gaumed only by climbing over and onto the bodies in order to get

to behind the spaghetti of bodies.

There were a number of fans milling around and obviously were in a

state of extreme agitation.   I was met with a torrent of verbal abuse,

I turned my back on these persons, however a number of fans were

starting to assist the injured fans.

There was directly behind the fence what can only be described as a

huge blob of human beings, all were intertwined and I would estimate

that there were approximately 50 or so bodies there.     I could see that

a large number of them were/appeared dead.    They were lifeless their

eyes were glazed some covered in vomit and mucus, others were moaning,

others who were trapped by their limbs were screaming for help.

The crowd had moved back by now and the pressure at the front of the

fence was such that the persons at the front had fallen/flopped back

onto the blob of bodies behind.   Bodies appeared to be about six or
                                                                    PAGE   7
                                                                    S1468A

seven deep.

I immediately set about getting these persons out of the pen and with

other officers started to move them through the gate.    One of the

first I pulled out was a small woman/girl, she had been pressed

against the fence, she appeared dead, she was trapped by the legs and

it took some nonents to extract her frcm the pile of bodies.       She was

wearing a red football type shirt, longish mousey hair, I handed the

body to PC FAIRCLOUGH who was slightly behind me to my left near to

the gate.

A man, alive, was trapped frcm the waist down.    He was shouting for

help, together with others I attempted to pull him free.    I couldn't

do this because of the spaghetti of other bodies so I started pulling

bodies frcm around him.   I cannot say how many I personally moved but

I remember that a chain of officers was by now working and I passed

the bodies I recovered to them and then passed out through the gate

onto the pitch.

Fans were now helping to pull bodies frcm the 'blob' and I remsriber

that I found a man/youth 18 years still alive he was breathing however

he was trapped frcm the neck down.   He was pushed hard against the

concrete wall below the metal barrier fence.     The youth was

unconscious.   I shouted at him and remember slapping his face and

telling him to hold on.   We removed the bodies that were around him

and he was subsequently passed through the gate.     I saw officers and

fans pulling the perimeter fence down with their bare hands.

I left the pen carrying a body of a man apparently dead with a number

of fans the body was placed onto the pitch where I checked for signs

of life.    There were none, a number of fans then turned up carrying an

advertising board and the man was then placed onto the board.        There

appeared to be hundreds of people on the pitch at this time I could

see people giving mouth to mouth to persons on the pitch.        Seine were
                                                                  PAGE   8
                                                                  SX468A

working very hard, others were milling around obviously in a state of

shock.   There was an ambulance on the pitch.    I saw numbers of fans

moving bodies on boards.

I went with the body I had recovered towards the Kop on an area near

to the comer of the North stand and the Kop there were a number of

people receiving treatment for their injuries.     I saw a man dead on

the floor who I now know to be Peter TOOTLE.     He was lying face up,

his face covered only by his tracksuit top which he was still wearing

at the time.   I checked the man's pulse and pulled the tracksuit frcm

his face.   It was obvious he was dead.   I removed my anorak and placed

it over the body and waited till fans arrived with a further board and

I went with the body to the gym situated at the rear of the North

stand arriving there at 3.40pm (1540).

On entering the gym it was like a battle field, bodies were

everywhere. I was asked by someone if Tootle was alive or dead, and I

was told to find a space in the first section and stay with the body.

I cannot say who informed me.    The body was placed on the floor

towards the centre of the floor area.

There were a large number of fans Police and relatives of dead there.

I kept the body covered thanked the fans for their help and set about

making a detailed description of the body.      I checked for

identification there was none.

However there was a number of items of jewellery.

At 3.54pm (1554) Doctor BULL from the Royal Hallamshire Hospital came

to me and examined the body and certificated TOOTLE as life extinct.

I then made a note of the man's property which was as follows -

1.   Puma Belgium tracksuit top blue green colour with zip up front.

2.   Black tracksuit bottoms with blue and green pockets.

3.   Boxer shorts.

4.   White socks with red and blue stripe.
                                                                     PAGE   9
                                                                     S1468A

5.   Black training boots diadira type.

6.   Sovereign ring.

7.   Krugerrand ring.

8.   Belcher type chain with safety chain attached.

9.   Fob watch type chain.

10. One hundred and one pound fifty-two pence cash.

Property numbers 6-10 retained by me and placed into plastic bag.        The

property was checked b   y   w   h   o    narked the bag accordingly.

I tagged the body with a body label narked with my details and the

brief details known about the deceased.       A form GEN/18 was part

completed with details known at this time.       The deceased was

subsequently photographed and the photo marked with the body number

that had been allocated that being number 39.

At 11.30pm (2330) that same date I was informed that a friend of

TOOTLE had identified the photograph taken earlier.       The body was

wheeled to a viewing area for a property identification.       I there saw

Paul Raymond FRODSHAW,                        Liverpool who positively

identified the body as being his friend Peter TOOTLE.

The body was removed and I obtained personal details for the form

Gen 18.

On completion of documentary procedures the body was conveyed to the

Medico Legal Centre by ambulance.        On arrival, documentation

procedures were completed and the body left with the mortuary staff.

The items retained by me were handed to DC VAUGH who recorded them in

a property book.   On completion I returned to the gym at the ground

before being returned to Woodseats Police Station where I went off

duty at 2am (0200).

I can state that frcm my return frcm the Police rocm after ejecting

Wall the pressure outside the turnstiles was such that if the pressure

had not been relieved at the time then fatalities would have occurred
                                                                            PAGE 10
                                                                            S1468A

            outside the ground.    There is little doubt that when the crowd inside
w
            the ground roared then this caused extra pressure outside the ground

            and would in my opinion have caused fatalities by the turnstiles.

            There is little doubt in my mind that had we the Police been able to

            get at the fans at the front of the fence when I arrived on the pitch

            at approximately 3.06pn (1506) then a number of persons could have

            been saved who subsequently died.

            This delay was caused by the fence and it is my belief that this delay

            caused a considerable loss of life.    Further if there had been wire

            cutters available death was still inevitable as the low wall would

if)         have pinned those at the front and those at the rear would have simply

            run over the dead dying and injured.




                                                                 J E FRIEND SIGNED

    STATEMENT TAKEN
              PLACE:

              TIME:               DATE:   020589

 WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:
W
   TICERS SIGNATURE:

    END OF REPORT
Incident    102     260390 OP8064       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                         STATEMENT NUMBER   S2212

                                                                            Station

^^name              TITTERTON

Forenames           STEPHEN   MICHAEL

Age                                         Date of birth

Address


Occupation          POL DC2571

Telephone

 IC                 Height                  Build

Hair colour

Hair type

^l^s                                        Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses             Use                     Accent

Number of Pages

 Dated              300489                                      S M TITTERTON Signed


           With reference to the incident at Hillsborough Football Ground on

           Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I have to report the following:

           1.

           I comnenced duty at Wdodseats Police Station at 8.30am (0830) that day

           in full uniform and along with all otter E2 officers was transported

           to the football ground where a full and comprehensive briefing was

           given.

           2.

           I was deployed on Serial 11 under the supervision of PS EDWARDS.      The

           sector canmander was Inspector WOODWARD.

           3.

           Myself, DC 1529 FRIEND, DC 2857 TURNER, DC 873 OAKES, PC 1074 THICKETT

           and PC 2409 LARKIN were deployed to the turnstiles at the leppings

           Lana end of the ground which give access to the North Stand.      These
                                                                 PAGE      2
                                                                 S2212

turnstiles are numbered 1-8.   The remainder of Serial 11 were deployed

to the Upper Concourse of the North Stand to pay attention

to refreshment bars, etc.

4.

At 12 noon (1200) the turnstiles were opened by Club Stewards.     A gate

inside the ground adjacent to turnstile 8 was opened by stewards and

a temporary barrier placed in a similar position adjacent to

turnstile 12.   The explanation given for this was that signs for the

North Stand had been wrongly fixed in place on the outside wall.        This

effectively increased the turnstile capacity for the North Stand by

two and reduced the West Stand turnstile capacity by two.

During the first hour together with PC LARKIN I assisted PS MORGAN 'F'

Division and two officers on his serial outside the turnstiles to

escort two 'Ticket Touts' to the Police Room.   These two men had

several hundred pounds in cash and a large quantity of tickets in

their possession.    Having assisted to escort these two men to the

Police Room myself and PC LARKIN resumed to our original position.

During the first hour, relatively few fans entered the ground.      I

overheard one of the turnstile operators, a young man (possibly

turnstile 3) call to the operator in the adjoining turnstile that 74

fans had entered his turnstile in the first hours.    This man had

worked out the rate per minute that fans would have to enter that

turnstile over the next two hours in order to reach his quota.      During

the next hour (1pm x 2pm) (1300 x 1400) the rate of fans entering the

ground did not increase significantly. All entering the ground were

sober, good humoured, complying fully and willingly with Police

directions, requests and searches, etc.

From about 2pm (1400) the rate of fans entering the ground began to

increase steadily.    A number of fans also began attempting to enter

the ground without tickets and were prevented from doing so by Police,
                                                                  PAGE     3
                                                                  S2212

Stewards and turnstile operators working together.

At 2.25pm (1425) I assisted DC FRIEND with the detention of

                                                  Liverpool, who had

entered the ground without a ticket.    He was taken to the Police Rocm,

where we completed an 'Ejection slip' and ejected         from the ground

into Penistone Road, at the direction of the Police Room staff.

Having done this, myself and DC FRIEND returned to our original

positions.   On our return it was apparent that there were problems

outside the turnstiles, with large numbers of people pushing to enter

the turnstiles.     The orderliness that had existed prior to our going

to the Police Rocm had disappeared and it seemed that further officers

may be required outside the ground in Leppings Lane.    Before we could

pass any radio message to that effect (PC LARKIN having the only

radio), Inspector DELANEY attended at our location with a number of

Officers.    I informed him that his contingent were required outside,

not inside the turnstiles, but they were unable to leave the ground by

any of the exit gates due to the volume of people pushing against them

from the outside.

The problems outside were rapidly becoming worse.     The weight of the

crowd pushing was forcing people through the turnstiles in two's and

thrae's, with each move of the turnstile.     People coming through the

turnstiles were screaming at us that we were needed outside and not

inside.

Many fans entering the ground at this stage were showing signs of

drink and a large number of empty beer cans and bottles began to

gather on the floor inside the turnstiles.

At this stage it seoned more important to assist fans to get through

the turnstiles as quickly as possible rather than search them for

drink, etc. and it was necessary to pull a number of people physically

through the turnstiles.
                                                                   PAGE    4
                                                                   S2212

A number of fans were climbing over the walls in an attempt to enter

the ground and escape the crush outside.    I witnessed two Police

Officers whose details I do not know but were presumably part of PS

MORGAN'S serial, be pushed backwards through the turnstiles into the

ground by the sheer weight and force of the crowd.

I then took one fan who had entered the turnstile without a ticket and

escorted him to Gate B on the attached plan in order to eject him.

Gate A at this stage was closed, the steward being unable to open it

because of the volume of the crowd outside.    Gate B was also closed

but an Officer at that Gate informed me that the next Gate, Gate C on

the attached plan, was open.   I took this fan to that Gate, it was

open and people were entering the ground quickly but orderly.      There

was no ticket check being made and accordingly I let the fan I had

escorted to that Gate enter the ground.

I returned to the turnstiles where I had been originally deployed and

shortly after saw the Gate A opened and large numbers of fans rushed

the gates and entered the ground into the North Stand.    I was unable

to see if this gate was opened by Police Officers or Stewards.       I then

turned to see that Gate B had been opened also.    Again I did not see

who opened it.

I then heard the command 'STOP THE GAME' over PC LARKIN'S radio.

Together with the other officers at our location I went to the pitch

via the rear of the Police Control post and the uncovered section of

the South Stand.   On doing so I saw that there were a large number of

people on the pitch.    I also noticed that the elevated section of the

Leppings Lane terrace was relatively empty.    My immediate reaction was

that a pitch invasion had taken place.     However, it quickly became

apparent that the problem was even more serious.     I could see

spectators in the West Stand lifting people from the terracing below

into the seated area.    Other people were being lifted over the
                                                                          PAGE    5
                                                                          S2212

        perimeter fence by Police Officers.    Inside the fencing I could see

        people alive, and dead, packed up against the fence.

        These people were four or five deep, and a gap began to appear between

        them and the remaining fans.    I was instructed by Superintendent

        GREENWOOD to climb over the fence and attempt to screen the bodies

        from the fans in an attempt to prevent further panic and distress.

        However, I was unable to do this and entered the terracing via a gate

        in the perimeter fence.    I went to the first person who appeared to

        be alive and pulled him from the pack.   He was unconscious and

        appeared to have an injury to his right hip.    I began to carry him to

        the rear of the West Stand and was eventually assisted in doing so by

        spectators and another Police Officer (details not known). This

        casualty was left in the yard at the rear of the tunnel with that

        officer.   I moved a number of onlookers from that area into the next

        yard out of the way of other casualties and Police Officers.




                                                  S M TITTERTQN DC2571 SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:     300489

     3SS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT
Incident    102     260390 OP8064       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                         STATEMENT NUMBER   S2390A

                                                                            Station

^^rname.            LARKIN

Forenames           EAMDN     FRANCIS

Age                                        Date of birth

Address             S YORKSHIRE POLICE,
                    WOODSEATS SHEFFIELD.

Occupation          POL PC2409

Telephone

IC                  Height                  Build

Hair colour

Hair type

^^s                                         Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses             Use                     Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                300489                                                   Signed


           On Saturday 15th April, 1989 (150489), I commenced duty at Wbodseats

           Police Station at 8.45 am (0845).    I then travelled to

           Hillsborough Football Ground with PS752 BATTY and other officers.

           Following briefing at the ground in company with EC's OAKES, TURNER,

           TITTERTON, FRIEND and PC THICKETT, we were on duty at turnstiles 1-8

           Leppings Lane end supervising entry of Liverpool fans to the North

           Stand.    I was in Serial 11 and regular visits were made by our Serial

           Sergeant PS2279 EDWARDS (El) and also 1 Inspector and Supt.

           GREENWOOD.

           The fans coning through the turnstiles were good humoured at this

           point and obviously looking forward to the match.    About 2.00 pn

           (1400) a steward cane to the turnstiles and said that soneone had

           put the wrong boards above the turnstile entrance and that fans with

           North Stand tickets were going into the enclosure for the West Stand.
                                                                 PAGE   2
                                                                 S2390A

He then opened the large dividing gate and moved a small barrier so

that there were two more turnstiles for the North Stand now 1-10 and

two less for the West Stand.

Some time after this it was obvious that there was a large crowd of

fans building up outside the turnstiles.    Fans were coming through the

turnstiles without tickets.    I saw one fan who wanted, to pay to enter.

He was told to go back out, but was unable to due to the crush of

people behind him.   He was allowed to enter after paying money to the

steward.   There was no other alternative but to allow this youth in.

It would have been impossible to eject this youth.    If he had been

taken to the Police room it would have seriously depleted the manpower

at the turnstiles and it was also inpossible to open Gate A and eject

him as the crush of people outside would have rushed inside.

People coming in were very distressed and saying that something had to

be done about the crush outside.    Decent middle aged and young fans

were screaming at me saying: "It's fucking murder out there". "Open

them fucking gates or you're going to be held responsible for their

deaths". "It's your fault if anybody dies". "You're killing them out

there".

At this time I saw beer cans and empty bottles being kicked through

the turnstiles including an empty bottle of Moet & Chandon. Attempts

were being made to open Gate A from the outside.     People were climbing

over the walls at the side of Gate A and the roof of the turnstiles.

These fans were not stopping to complain of the crush but merely to

get into the ground.   It was a very tense situation.    Nothing could be

done to stop the fans climbing over the walls.     It appeared to me that

the only way to prevent people getting crushed outside in Leppings Lane

was to open the large concertina gates.

Other Officers attended at my location and an Inspector lined these

officers up alongside Gate A to apparently try and control the fans in
                                                                  PAGE   3
                                                                  S2390A

case the gates were either opened by the Police or forced open by the

fans.    I did not see the gates opened but saw streams of fans running

in.

Whilst scrne fans were still caning in, I heard a radio message

directing all Officers onto the pitch at the Leppings Lane end.

Along with other Officers I ran across the rear of the enclosure at

the back of the West Stand.    I did not see any problems in the centre

entrance to the terraces.     I entered the South stand through the gate

below the Police control room and stepped over the wall fron the stand

onto the pitch.

I did not see any players on the pitch.     I saw a number of Officers up

against the fence at Leppings Lane.     I ran over and saw two young

girls who were at the front of the crush and pressed up against the

fence.   These girls were in the Centre Stand part of the terraces

between gates 3 and 4.     I immediately went to these girls and was able

to feel that they both had a pulse in their carotid artery. I climbed

up the fence to try and pull the girls out and get the crowd

to move back.     I heard cries of "Fuck off" at this.   I went back down

and again tried to revive the girls through the fence by slapping

their faces.

At this point someone climbed over the fence to escape the crush and

jumped down on top of me.     I was knocked unconscious and came round on

the pitch in the recovery position.     I immediately went back to the

fence but could not see the two girls anywhere.

I went to gate 3 which was open and saw a young man laid on the ground

and he appeared to be trapped by his legs as someone else was laid

across his legs.     It was inpossible to get anyone else through this

gate without first removing this young man.     Chief Superintendent John

NESBIT and I pulled this man from the gate.     With a Notts Policeman

I ran onto the pitch with this man.     He did not have a pulse so we
                                                                 PAGE   4
                                                                 S2390A

immediately started mouth to mouth and cardiac massage.   We were

joined by PC Tommy JACKSON (FI) who took over mouth to mouth.    We kept

this up for quite a while and the young man started vomiting.    Then PC

JACKSON and the Notts PC took this man round to the gymnasium.

With another Officer, and sane Liverpool fans, I carried a fan who

appeared to be dead, round to the gymnasium.   We entered the gym

through the rear door and placed the body on the floor.   The other

officer stayed with the body.   (No description remembered). I then

made my way towards the door.

At the door I was told to keep people out of the gym, direct Officers

with dead and injured to different parts of the gym and to tell a

Police Officer to stay with each body.   I was also arranging

ambulances to carry the badly injured to Hospitals at the request of

an unknown Doctor.




                     at the Hospital assisting a team of four Officers

led by Inspector YOUNG (Dl). I was dealing with enquiries by the

Hospital Staff, Social Workers and answering telephone calls from

matibers of the public trying to trace relations.   I remained at the

Hospital until relieved at 9.10 am (0910) and finished duty at

Woodseats at 10.00 am (1000) Sunday morning.

There had been breaks in radio transmissions whilst the crush was

building up outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles.    I had to turn my


                                                                            31 14
                                                                         PAGE   5
                                                                         S2390A

        radio down low because of the interference that was coming through.

        Sans days after the incident I saw the Daily Express Newspaper and saw

        that the two girls I tried to help were alive.     These girls were

        called Debbie ROUTLEDGE and Lisa RIDING.     They told the Newspaper that

        the Police had not helped them in any way.     I had in fact tried to get

        them out of the crowd.

        In ity opinion the situation at Leppings Lane was very dangerous and

        the only action available at that time was to open the large

        concertina gates.




                                                              E F LARKIN SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

          TIME              DATE

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE

END OF REPORT
Incident       102   260390 QP8064    DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                        STATEMENT NUMBER    S2655

                                                                           Station

Surname              BROPHY

Forenames            D   N

Age                                       Date of birth

Address


Occupation           POL PC2209

Telephone

IC                   Height               Build

Hair colour

     ir type

«    es                                   Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses              Use                  Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                 040589                                D BROPHY PC2209 Signed


           Reported on duty 8.45am (0845) at Woodseats Police Station.     To

           briefing at ground North stand at 10am (1000).

           To point of duty upper concourse level of North stand working with

           Sgt. 2279 EDWARDS (E Division).   Serial 11 Sub Sector 5.       (Officers

           present - PCs BUNGARY, MARSH, ROE, ELLIS.)

           Responsible to Sgt. EDWARDS.

           Until incident not deviated from point of work on upper concourse,

           North stand.

           I became aware that closer to 3pn (1500) various radio messages about

           the 'opening of scrne gates' being necessary.    These messages appeared

           to be of an urgent sounding nature.     I believe they came fron sane

           officer in authority Leppings Lane end.

           As 3pn (1500) approached the volume of supporters increased to

           extremely heavy level.    Sane obviously the worse for wear for drink.
                                                                    PAGE    2
                                                                    S2655

Noisier and much louder in conversation.

A number of allegations made about the lack of control at leppings

Lane end of ground, made by numerous supporters as kick off

approached. Obscene language used at us by many regarding policing

outside of ground.     Looked over gantry at Leppings Lane and saw a

large number of men urinating below me at against wall below North

stand.   Seme advised and moved on.

Returned to upper concourse.      Detained another man for use of obscene

language and advised him.      He apologised and I allowed him to

continue on his way.

At 3.05pm (1505) on the outbreak of trouble I heard a radio message

'All officers to assemble on pitch'.     With PC ROE at this stage and

attanpted to cut through North stand from upper concourse to ground.

We quickly realised this was impossible as abuse and threats frcm

Livarpool supporters was so fierce we had to retreat to upper

concourse level frcm North stand.

We then assembled on Kop end of North stand on ground floor with

Police Dogs, horses, many other officers.      I thought we had a pitch

invasion at this time on our hands.

An officer in charge then directed my group onto the pitch and we were

told to line up facing North stand on the pitch.     Whilst standing

facing the North stand I    saw somethings being thrown frcm the crowd

in our direction, possibly coins.

At this stage lots of threats and abusive shouts frcm the crowd who

were pointing in direction of Leppings Lane end.

I still believed we were dealing with a pitch invasion at this stage.

I could see many supporters who appeared to have spilled onto pitch.

Scire of them were laying on the ground near to the goal mouth and

penalty area.

Some supporters jumped frcm the North stand in front of me and took
                                                                 PAGE      3
                                                                 S2655

advertising boards which they carried towards the area where the

trouble seemed to be.

Almost irtmediately one of these groups of supporters returned with a

supporter laying on the stretcher whose body was twisted and appeared

to me to be obviously dead.     It was not until this point in time that

the gravity of the incident came home to me and I began to realise

that we had a serious incident on our hands.

I remember thinking there was, for some reason, little radio direction

from control and so as I appeared to be doing nothing more than

aggravating the crowd by my presence with a few otter officers facing

the North stand, I decided to move into the area where people were

lying down injured and offered assistance.

The first person I helped was a youth aged about 18 years who said he

could not move one leg and one arm.     As I spoke with him a stretcher

appeared beside him and with the help of another officer I assisted

the injured man onto the stretcher.     With the help of seme supporters

we carried this person off the pitch, and placed him down near to the

gym where a large number of casualities had now appeared to have been

put.

I returned to the pitch and assisted with the removal of two otter

injured supporters.      And was then directed by a supervisory officer

with a group of other officers to go to the lappings Lane end of the

outside of the ground.

On arival at that point I saw approximately 14 bodies laid at the side

of seme fencing, a number of Police officers were already near to

these bodies.   The bodies were sectioned off by a stretch of crowd

control barriers.

On route to this location I saw 2 or 3 firemen with oxygen equipment

working apparently without success to revive a supporter laid near to

the rear of the control hut, but outside of the ground.
                                                                        PAGE     4
                                                                        S2655

       Whilst standing near to the 14 bodies, I together with other officers

       was insulted by Liverpool supporters as they left the ground showing

       open hostility towards us.     Scmeone shouted that was all we were fit

       for, standing around.

       An Irish doctor from the Hallamshire Hospital put the keys of his car

       in my hand telling roe where it was in case it needed moving as he was

       busy tending to the injured.

       A police officer scuffled with a Liverpool supporter in my viewing and

       a further group of Liverpool supporters moved in the direction of the

       officer but an ambulance drove slowly between the group and it

       dispersed.     The crowd continued to leave the Leppings Lane end.   I

       then returned to the gymnasium and I recall going to a de-briefing in

       the North stand.

       After that I took up a point of duty at the Penistone Road entrance to

       the ground and with P.S. BATTY and other officers worked this point

       until 5.30a.m. (0530) the following morning.

       Throughout the night I was on duty at this gate point preventing press

       from entering and meeting relatives from Liverpool who were arriving

       throughout the night.

       Eventually sufficient counsellors arrived to act at an intermediary

       stage between myself and the I.D. process in the gymnasium.

       D N BROPHY




                                                    D N   BROPHY PC2209 SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:             DATE:   040589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

   OF REPORT


                                                                                     31 19
Incident       102   260390 OP8Q64        DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                           STATEMENT NUMBER   S1850

                                                                              Station

Surname              BUNGAY

Forenames            PHILIP

Age                                           Date of birth

Address              S. YORKSHIRE POLICE
                     WOODSEATS, SHEFFIELD

Occupation           POL PC1847

Telephone

IC                   Height                   Build

Hair colour

     ir type

«    es                                       Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses              Use                      Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                 040589                                                    Signed


           On Saturday, 15 April 1989 (150489), I commenced duties at 8.45am

           (0845) at Woodseats Police Station and at 9.00am (0900) that day I was

           transported to the Sheffield Wednesday Football ground, arriving there

           at approximately 9.30am (0930).

           At 10.00am (1000) that day I took my seat in the North stand, along

           with the other Officers in Serial 11, and stayed until the match

           briefing had concluded.

           At 11.00am (1100) that day I commenced my assigned duties patrolling

           the upper corridor of the North stand, in company with Police

           Constable 1506 MARSH.      The serial sergeant, Police Sergeant 2279

           EDWARDS, assigned six of the serial to the corridor patrol and the

           other four officers to turnstiles duties at the Lappings Lane

           entrance.       Those of us working the upper corridor had been informed of

           a robbery that had taken place at the previous year's Semi Final
                                                                     PAGE    2
                                                                     S1850

match, and we had been warned to pay particular attention to the

refreshment booths and also to a betting booth.

During the first hour up to the turnstiles opening at 12 noon (1200),

PC MARSH and I spoke to the personnel opening the refreshment booths,

in particular to those setting up a sales area on a group of tables,

erected especially for the day.    We informed them that in the event of

any problems with customers, they were to contact us and we would

assist in closing the 'booth'.    We also spoke to seme of the

stewards, informed them of our patrol area and instructed them to

contact us in the event of any trouble.

From 12 noon (1200), the turnstiles were open, but there was a slow

trickle of fans coming up to the top corridor.    At some time shortly

after 12.00 (1200), we spoke to PS EDWARDS and an Inspector.     The

Inspector asked for one of us to stay with the staff of the betting

booth at 3.00pm (1500) until the takings had been counted up, and then

escort the staff through the corridor, down to the rear of the stand,

across the front of the Spion Kop, at the side of the pitch, and along

the front of the South Stand into the player's entrance to a rocm

where all the money was to be collected.    The officer was then to

resume to the North stand.

After speaking to the Inspector, PC MARSH and I decided that we would

work the duty together, following the standard match procedure of

always working in pairs for safety.

Until 2.00pm (1400) there was a steady but slow influx of fans.

During that time the fans we saw were behaving in a reasonable manner,

none appeared to be the worse for drink.    Seme of those fans did speak

to us, mainly about the match, and all that did appeared friendly and

in anticipation of an entertaining match.

At 2.00pm (1400) I left PC MARSH at the bottom of one of the flights

of steps leading to the seating area.     I walked to the top and looked



                                                                                 3121

                                                                 2
                                                                   PAGE    3
                                                                   S1850

to the Spion Kop end of the ground and being a life long Sheffield

Wednesday supporter, my thoughts on looking at the Kop were that it

looked a magnificent sight when it was full.     I was aware that it was

not full to capacity, but the fans were evenly distributed and I

estimated that the Kop was about three quarters full.     I then looked

to the Leppings Lane stand although there were a lot of Liverpool fans

in that stand, it seemed to be less than half full.

I then resumed patrol with PC MARSH along the corridor.    Frcm

approximately 2.15pm (1415) the volume of fans entering the corridor

increased considerably.     It was apparent that many of them had been

drinking, although at first, there was no marked change in the general

attitude of the fans.

At approximately 2.20pm (1420) we were approached by a steward who

informed us that some of the Liverpool fans were climbing over the

fence, between the West (Leppings Lane) stand and the North stand.

Together with PC MARSH, I went to the top of the stairway and watched

for a few seconds, after which a youth was seen to climb over the

fence from the West stand into the North stand.     PC MARSH and I

approached the youth and detained him under the ground regulations.

He produced to us a ticket for the North stand, stating that he had

been let into the West stand on that ticket.     The ticket had the

counterfoil stub missing.

We escorted the youth down to the charge office below the stand,

where we ascertained that he was called

                              Liverpool.   On searching       PC MARSH

found a second ticket for the West stand in his pocket.     This

ticket also had the stub missing.

Having confirmed by telephone that the youth was who he said he was,

we escorted him to the Leppings Lane end of the ground.     It is normal

practice to eject such people from the ground by means of the large
                                                                  PAGE       4
                                                                  S1850

metal double gates situated at the sides of the turnstile blocks.       On

approaching the turnstiles from the North stand, we approached the

gates directly to the right of the turnstiles.    Looking through the

glass panel, I could see that there were Liverpool fans pressed right

up to the gate, and that if the gate was opened, a large quantity of

them would gain entry. I could not see how far back from the door the

body of fans extended.    We walked by the turnstiles, towards the

dividing fence separating the West stand entrances from the North

stand entrances.    As I passed the turnstiles, there was a fan in one

of them shouting at the operator that he was unable to go back out of

the turnstile.     I did not hear why he could not be let through into

the ground.

We passed through the barrier which had been opened by a steward, and

I saw that the large blue gates immediately to my right were also

being pushed against by a large number of fans on the outside.       I then

looked across the enclosure to the double gates situated along the

wall adjacent to the approach to the South stand.     I could see that

two officers were ejecting another youth from the ground.     I saw than

start to close those gates, and shouted to them to hold them open.        We

advised          that he should not try to re-enter the ground and

ejected him through the door.     Although there had been a large number

of fans pressed against the other double gates, on looking out of this

gate, the crowd seemed the same as would be seen on a normal Saturday.

I recall that when we were leading          out of the gate, there were a

group of fans inside the ground shouting at a group of fans through

the open gate.     The exchanges were of a threatening nature.   One

youth in particular on the inside of the ground was very agitated.        I

renumber that he was a white male approximately 6 feet (6') tall. In

his late twenties, with short dark hair.     He was wearing a pair of

brown trousers and an old style sports jacket with a small check
                                                                   PAGE    5
                                                                   S1850

pattern. Predominantly brown.   There were one or two other fans with

him who appeared to be drunk.   Others in that area were similarly the

worse for drink, but there were too many to deal with and as the time

was 2.30pm (1430), PC MARSH and I decided to return to the upper

corridor to attend at the betting booth.

On returning to the approach to the North stand, it was apparent that

the volume of fans entering the pitch had increased tremendously.     We

stopped and spoke to two programne sellers near to the turnstiles,

before returning to the upper corridor at 2.35pm (1435).

The number of fans on that corridor had increased considerably, again

many of them appeared to have consumed a considerable amount of

alcohol, although not in the majority, seme of the fans appeared in an

aggressive mood.

At 2.50pm (1450) PC MARSH and I took up a position next to the betting

booth to await its closure, and prevent a last minute snatch.

I saw PS EDWARDS escorting a prisoner along the corridor frcm the

Leppings Lane end to the Spion Kop end.    He was being assisted by a

Policewoman, but a second youth was walking behind them, arguing with

other officers.    I approached the youth and advised him regarding his

conduct.   At first he appeared to want to fight but then changed his

mind.   I again advised him before returning to PC MARSH.

During the next few minutes, the number of fans coming along the

corridor continued to increase.     Many of them running to the stairways

in order to find their seats.     At 3.00 (1500) the betting booth closed

and the staff started to check the takings.    While standing at

the door to the booth, we were approached by a middle aged man and

woman, who made us aware of the extent of the crowd waiting to get

into the ground at the Leppings Lane end. The weman in fact made

reference to the Heysel Stadium disaster. PC MARSH did not have a

radio but I had my personal radio with me.     At that time there was a
                                                                  PAGE     6
                                                                  S1850

certain amount of radio traffic, seme of it concerning the fans

waiting to enter the ground at that end.

This would have been just after the game had started.    We could tell

that the game had comnenced, due to the volume of noise.     There was

one particular loud roar and from the sound it was apparent that one

of the teams had just missed the goal.     There were still fans running

along the corridor, the numbers had not decreased. This was not

unusual, as at most matches it is common for the last rush to continue

for five minutes after the game had conmenced.

The first indication that anything was wrong was when a steward came

down and informed us that there had been a crowd invasion.     We could

then sense the difference in the crowd noise.     I walked to the top of

the nearest stairwell, just in time to see the players walking from

the pitch, and a large crowd on the pitch near to the Leppings Lane

end.   There were officers running across the pitch to the crowd, but I

did not see anyone who was apparently injured, nor could I tell that

it was anything other than a crowd invasion.

A group of fans at the rear of the stairway shouted that the invasion

was the 'Police's fault'.   I approached them and spoke to them,

informing them that the situation would be dealt with as soon as

possible, and that the game would then continue.     As I turned to walk

away there were shouts of 'Fuck Off'; 'Fucking Bastard' and otter

derogatory remarks, but I ignored them and returned to PC MARSH in the

corridor.

We were then approached by a few Liverpool supporters, who complained

about the attitude and actions of seme of their fellow fans.     One of

the supporters a young man in his early twenties stated that he had

seen the fans shouting at me and that one of them had moved towards

me, but stopped.   The man informed us that in the event of any trouble

he would assist us, intimating that he was a Police Officer from
                                                                 PAGE      7
                                                                 S1850

Liverpool.

During the next few minutes, a large number of fans started to filter

down the stairways the first couple of them stated that two dead fans

had been carried from the Leppings Lane end.    Several others came down

the stairs, and started to shout that we were murderers, we had killed

their friends and then they started to threaten our lives.

We had already informed the betting booth staff to stay in the booth

until order returned, but we were becoming aware that this was not an

ordinary occurrence.     I could hear that there was a considerable

amount of radio traffic, although because of the loud crowd noise, I

could not ascertain what was happening.

I have attended at numerous football matches and also worked on a

support unit during the Miners' Dispute. In both circumstances I have

been subjected to threats of violence and even threats of murder.     In

scare of those cases the threats were at the time meant, however, I

have never been subjected to such feelings of hatred and it was

apparent that the threats would soon became a reality.     The number of

fans threatening us were increasing all the time.     There were in

excess of thirty shouting at us, and many more milling around at

the rear of the group.     It was obvious that we were out on a limb and

to ask for assistance was not only futile but wrong, so we decided to

leave our position.    At that time I was in fear of my life.   I can say

that I have been more frightened but only one other occasion, when

standing 25 yards (25 yds) from an unexploded German bcsnb found m a r

the Bramall Lane Football Ground.     I have never been so afraid for my

life from other people before.

PC Marsh and I walked away from the crowd towards the Kop end of the

corridor and then onto the ramp leading down to the rear of the stand.

We looked over the edge towards the opening between the North stand

and the Kop, and saw that several people were laying on the ground
                                                                    PAGE     8
                                                                    S1850

being attended to by other fans and Police Officers.     Other injured

people were being brought from off the pitch.    We knew that it was

futile to return to the corridor, so we went down the ramp to assist.

At the bottom of the ramp, I lost contact with PC Marsh.

I estimate that the time was approximately 3.11pm (1511).     I walked

quickly to the gap leading onto the pitch, and saw two people being

brought from the pitch on broken hoardings.     An ambulance then came

up behind me and an Inspector shouted for the gate to be cleared.       The

two hoardings were let through and others were held back on the

pitch, as the ambulance made its way onto the pitch.

I looked at the first person being carried out on a hoarding.       It was

a large white male, about 15 stone, I would guess.     His red jumper was

pulled over his head, he had no clothing on his chest, ____________



I took one look at him and thought 'He's dead'. The second person was

alive. I did not pay much attention to him, there were several people

carrying him, and I could hear him screaming.

As the ambulance was trying to get onto the pitch, a man walked across

the front of the vehicle.   I pulled him away from the front of the

vehicle, to the outside of the gate across that gap.     The man grabbed

me by the shoulders and was crying.    He kept shouting 'I was in

Belgium, I was at Heysel, not again, please not again'.     I saw

another fan who was apparently alright, so I asked him to look after

the first man.   I managed to get through the gate to the inside but

another ambulance came out, so I had to wait a few seconds.     I then

walked quickly onto the pitch.   At the co m e r near the gap, leading

off the pitch, there were a lot of people laid on the grass, several

of them were obviously dead, others were being tended to by other

officers, fans and St. Johns people.    There were people around each of

those laid out, and I realised that I could be of better use at the
                                                                   PAGE    9
                                                                   S1850

Leppings Lane end of the pitch.

I felt that I did not want to be near what was happening but I had to

do what I could.    All the feelings of fear had evaporated when I went

to get on the pitch, but a feeling of apprehension had taken its

place.   I wondered what was the best thing to do, and decided to

follow a group who were carrying a makeshift stretcher up the pitch.

I ran along with them, but when I got to the Leppings Lane end of the

pitch I could not    get near the fence dueto the large volume of people

and the confused nature of    the incident. There were people walking

about as if nothing had happened,     seme oblivious to the dead and

injured, others obviously in shock.     I started to look around for seme

way to get involved but after a few seconds, a senior officer was

shouting for a line to form across the centre of the pitch, so I went

to join the line.     I stood next to PC 41 BELLAMY, and other Officers I

did not know.   Atfirst I could not see the use of the line but with

the confused nature of the events, it became obvious that not only
                                                   |

wera we keeping the few idiotic fans from incitihg trouble by going to

the Forest supporters, but it was a point from which officers could

be taken to assist in other areas, as in fact later happened.

While in the line, I was facing the Liverpool end.     I saw people

obviously distressed, but only a few feet away from them were others

that were unaware of the situation.     I saw one group of three

Liverpool supporters obviously drunk, one of them openly urinating on

the pitch in front of other fans.     Seme of the people were screaming

at us that we were murderers and venting extreme anger at us.      I

knew that it was a reaction to the situation and there were times when

in different situations firm action would have been taken, but not

under the circumstances prevailing.

I also saw that the fans in the North stand were becoming more and

more irrate, and noticed at least two fights amongst the fans.        On the
                                                                 PAGE 10
                                                                 S1850

pitch while some fans were blaming us, others were pulling them away

and saying that it wasn't our fault.    To the rear of us, there seemed

to be a lot of people milling about doing nothing.    Near the players'

tunnel were a number of people in yellow UMBRO jackets, just pointing

at the crowd and talking.    There were officers on both sides of the

line talking to and assisting people.

At approximately 4.10pm (1610) we were ordered onto Penistone Road as

the decision to clear the ground had been made.    Once onto the road I

helped make a cordon across the road, to keep all the Forest fans frcm

walking along Penistone Road away from the City.     I continued doing

that until the fans had all cleared, and then stood in front of the

entrance to the ground, that leads to the North stand and controlled

the traffic flow along Penistone Road, keeping the road clear for

emergency vehicles but at the same time keeping the regular traffic

flowing in order to reduce the bottleneck closer to the city.    At

approximately 7.00pm (1900) I went back into the ground, and onto the

North stand, where most of the other officers who had been at the

match were situated.   After a few minutes, I went to the rear of the

stand where I met Police Sergeant 752 BATTY.    It was decided that the

area officers who had been at the match and were working a 6pm

(1800) 2am (0200) shift would work together.    Whilst waiting for

orders we were standing at the side of the gymnasium when I saw

Special Constable MARTIN stood with a group of Special Constables.        It

was obvious that she was very distressed and I walked over to her.        I

took her to one side, and she immediately burst into tears.     She was

sobbing uncontrollably.     At PS BATTY'S suggestion I took her into the

Police room, where after making her a cup of tea, and listening to

what she had done, she suddenly said she was alright, we walked out

into the area next to the gymnasium, where she said "I've got to go

back in". She then walked away frcm me into the building.



                                                                               3129
                                                                          PAGE 11
                                                                          S1850

       From approximately 7.30pm (1930) to 8.00pm (2000) I was on security

       duty on the gate between the North stand and a group of outbuildings.

       After 8.00pm (2000) until 5.30am (0530) the following morning, I was

       on security duty at the entrance to the rear of the gymnasium from

       Penistone Road.   While there we were keeping the press from entering

       the ground, or from getting in the way.   Meeting the relatives,

       Social Workers, Ministers and others ccming to the ground and

       escorting those that were allowed through to the reception area and

       keeping others out.

       At approximately 8.00pm (2000) while inside the ground a coat was

       found at the rear of the North stand, next to the sand bins.    I took

       that coat into the gymnasium and handed it over to the officers there.

       The only dealing I had with a body was to assist ambulance staff in

       carrying one into the gymnasium.


                                                            P. BUNGAY SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

         TIME                DATE

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE

   OF REPORT
Incident    102   260390 QP8064       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                         STATEMENT NUMBER   S546A

                                                                            Station

Surname            ROE

Forenames          DAVID     ALLEN

Age                31                       Date of birth

Address            S YORKS POL
                   WOODSEATS SHEFFIELD

Occupation         POL PC1479

Telephone

 IC                Height                   Build

Hair colour

      ir type

<     es                                    Complexion

 Facial hair

Glasses            Use                      Accent

 Number of Pages

 Dated              030589                                    D A ROE PC1479 Signed


           At 8.30 a.m.(0830) on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I commenced

            duty at Woodseats Police Station in order to attend the semi-final

            between Liverpool F.C. and Nottingham Forest F.C. to take place at

            Hillsborough Football Ground.

            At approximately 10.00 a.m. (1000) that day I was present during a

            briefing conducted by Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD, given to a

            large contingent of officers on the North Stand of the ground.     I

            considered the briefing to be concise and 'to the point' - the overall

            message in terms of our Policing tactics was to be firm but fair.

            There was an air of good humour and everybody seemed to be looking

            forward to the game going ahead without any problans.

            The gates to the ground were opened to the public at midday (1200) and

            the few fans who entered the ground at this time were very good

            humoured. My duties, under the leadership of Inspector (Serial 11),
                                                                 PAGE     2
                                                                 S546A

wera to maintain order on the upper level of the North Stand and to

pay particular attention to the betting booth and cafeterias where

trouble had occurred last year.

As the kick off time neared I remember commenting that the Nottingham

Forest end was full of spectators whilst the Leppings Lane end was

sparse in comparison.

At approximately 2.40 p.m. (1440) several supporters were informing me

in passing that problems were occurring outside the Leppings Lane

turnstiles with overcrowding/pushing.    I recall one or two people

rushing past me with obvious minor leg injuries, as they were limping.

I was experiencing difficulty in receiving radio transmissions during

that period but I could hear officers outside the lappings Lane end

discussing the crowd situation but there was no sign of any panic,

they seemed to be in control of the situation.

As 3 p.m. (1500) neared, large numbers of Liverpool supporters were

still entering the ground and coming into the North Stand.    The

situation outside at the time was obviously getting worse.    The radio

corrimunications between the officers outside and the control room was

dominating the transmissions.     The attitude of the crowd had also

changed, large numbers were obviously drunk and were shouting

obscenities at the Police in relation largely to the situation outside

the turnstiles, they were complaining of the pushing and stating we

weran't doing anything about it.     In turn, I had to speak to several

supporters hboutjtheir language and general conduct, although I

accepted by now that there was a problem.     It was not practicable to

turn any of these supporters away due to the large numbers of drunks

coning in.   I couldn't have ejected them through the turnstiles

anyway.   People were coming into the North Stand with tickets for

other p»arts of the ground and on one occasion I allowed access to the

North Stand of one person who had a ticket for the Leppings Lane end.


                                                                              3132
                                                                 PAGE      3
                                                                 S546A

I felt at this time that we were short of officers at the rear of the

North Stand but clearly, the problems were outside Leppings Lane and

any deployment of officers would be there and not the North Stand.

Also at this time a very large number of Liverpool supporters were

reproached about urinating at the rear of the North Stand near to the

Leppings Lane turnstiles.    A large 'stream' of urine was evident on

the concourse.    We were then directed to the pitch area in response to

a pitch invasion at the Liverpool end.

Myself and Police Constable BROPHY attempted to get to that particular

area by going from the top of the North Stand through the aisles and

onto the pitch.    However, it was clear that the mood of the supporters

was an aggressive one and there is no doubt in ray mind that had we

gone that way, fighting would have broken out.    Only minutes earlier

the stewards on the North Stand warned that they were experiencing

trouble with fans and were scared for their safety.

I went with Police Constable BROPHY to the area outside the gymnasium

where we were held back.    It certainly appeared at this time to be a

pitch invasion, several fans could be seen on the pitch in front of

the Nottingham Forest end and gesticulating aggressively in their

direction.

I was then deployed with other officers in front of the North Stand

to prevent the invasion spreading.

It became clear both from some injured persons passing me and crowd

reaction to events at the Leppings Lane end that it was not a pitch

invasion in that sense.     I couldn't understand why the officers at the

Leppings Lane end were stood watching an event involving injury to

persons and not helping them en mass.     I assumed that it must have

been an invasion of the pitch and that the injuries sustained were as

a result of fans fighting one another.     Certainly, there were no

transmissions informing us of what was actually occurring.     The tannoy


                                                                               3133
                                                                          PAGE      4
                                                                          S546A

       system could be heard but again, it was to calm the fans down, but

       nothing was heard to tell people in the crowd of the injuries

       occurring.     I feel sure that had we been told simply to 'help' the

       crowd we would have done en mass.

       Having realised that injury, serious injury, was occurring to fans,

        I left my serial and attended the Leppings Lane end.      It was apparent

       that some supporters had been killed.     I attended to one person with

       the assistance of members of the public.    He was placed on a stretcher

       and taken to the gym en route to which I had coins thrown at me frcm

       people on the North Stand.

       That person was later identified as Francis MCALLISTAIR.       I had found

       this deceased person lying to the left of the goalposts at that

       Leppings Lane end.

        I witnessed fans fighting or arguing with other officers and cameramen.


                                                        D A Roe    PC1479 SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

   OF REPORT
Incident        102   260390 OP8Q64       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                            STATEMENT NUMBER   S1832

                                                                               Station

Surname               MARSH

Forenames             NIGEL     ANTHONY

Age                                          Date of birth

Address               S. YORKSHIRE POLICE E DHQ
                      HEELEY SHEFFIELD

Occupation            POL PC1506

Telephone

 IC                   Height                  Build

Hair colour

      ir type

«     es                                      Complexion

 Facial hair

Glasses               Use                     Accent

Number of Pages

 Dated                 030589                              NIGEL A MARSH PC1506 Signed


            I began ray duty at 8.30 a.m. (0830) on Saturday 15th April 1989

            (150489), at Hackenthorpe Police Station, where I saw ray sector

            (Serial Sergeant) Police Sergeant 2279 EDWARDS.

            We were transported to Hillsborough Football Ground by public

            transport and I was briefed together with other officers, in the

            North Stand.

            At 11.00a.m. (1100) that day, I was deployed to the upper corridor

            on the North Stand and I worked with Police Constable 1847 BUNGAY, to

            keep order.

            The two of us were given duties to escort the money from the betting

            booth, between stairways 'S' and 'T' down to the perimeter track,

            around the pitch and into the players tunnel after the kick off.        At

            2.25p.m. (1425) we were called by a steward to attend in the North

            Stand (Leppings Lane end) to eject a youth who was climbing frcm the
                                                                 PAC$    2
                                                                 S1832

West Stand into the North Stand.

This youth

             Liverpool.

He was taken to the Police Room and subsequently ejected at the

Leppings Lane end.   He stated that he was going to try and get back

in. Both myself and Police Constable BUNGAY had great difficulty in

ejecting this youth owing to the fans pressing against the gate.

Eventually this youth was ejected via a gate to the left of the

turnstiles when looking outward from the ground.   These gates were

immediately secured again and no awaiting fans gained entry at this

time.

After the youth was ejected we both made out way back to the upper

concourse and onto the betting booth ready for the duties outlined

above.

At 3.00p.m. (1500) I was aware that the football match between

Nottingham Forest and Liverpool had kicked off.

At 3.07p.m. (1507) an unknown Liverpool supporter came up to me and

told me that there had been a pitch invasion at the Leppings Lane end.

Shortly after this numerous fans came into the corridor stating that

a couple of fans had died, all these fans were very agitated.

At 3.11p.m. (1511) more fans appeared on the corridor and were very

antagonistic towards us (the Police), a large number stating, "IT'S

YOUR FAULT - YOU'RE DEAD." and other similar conments.

At this point we decided that we were unable to patrol the corridor

owing to the number of fans wishing to vent their anger on us.

I was in fear for my own personal safety and that of Police Constable

1847 BUNGAY.   I then walked down the ramp to the lower level.

At 3.15p.m. (1515) I went from the bottom of the ramp onto the playing

area which by this time was quite crowded.   I saw seme Liverpool fans

struggling with a body and a makeshift stretcher (hoarding) so I ran
                                                                         PAGE     3
                                                                         S1832

       towards them and carried the front left hand c o m e r of it (when

       facing them).     I carried this body back in the direction I had just

       cane from and the body was placed on the ground outside the gymnasium

       and left with other officers.

       I can only say that the body was that of a male (well built) and I

       cannot remember who the officers were receiving the bodies.

       I then went back onto the pitch where I was met with a very similar

       situation except the person was alive, male, about 30 years and again,

       taken to the area outside the gymnasium and left with Ambulance

       personnel.

       I then went back to the playing area and assisted a St. John's

       Ambulance female carry a young male teenager (16 years) who was

       conscious and talking and carried him into the area in front of the

       gym and sat him in some dry sand where the St. John's Ambulance girl

       dealt with him.

        I was then ordered to stand with other officers in a cordon across the

       concrete area, effectively protecting the gymnasium area frcm other

       very distressed fans.

        I was contantly approached whilst in this cordon by Press, relatives,

       nurses, doctors and firemen.     Throughout this I was not in possession

       of a personal radio.

        I can state that throughout the incident I constantly kept smelling

        stale intoxicants.




                                                  NIGEL A MARSH   PC1506 SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:



                                                                                      3137
Incident         102     260390 QP8064      DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                              STATEMENT NUMBER   S1860

                                                                                 Station

^ r n leairte            ELLIS

Forenames

Age                                              Date of birth

Address                  S. YORKSHIRE POLICE
                         WOODSEATS SHEFFIELD

Occupation               POL PC3116

Telephone

 IC                      Height                  Build

Hair colour

Hair type

^^s                                              Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses                   Use                    Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                     030589                                        P. Ellis Signed


                At 8.45am(10845) on Saturday, 15th April 1989 (150489) , I started

                duty at Woodseats Police Station. I arrived at the ground and was

                directed to my serial, no. 11.    Sergeant EDWARDS 2279 of Hackenthrope

                and Inspector WOODWARD were in charge.    I was deployed at North

                Stand, upper corridor on crowd control.

                At approximately 3pm (1500), the crowd became more intense and were

                complaining of a turnstile crush outside the gates at Leppings Ln end.

                By this time lots of people were pouring in.     At 3.03pm (1503) I

                arrested a youth named           :or being drunk and incapable inside

                the ground and took him to the Police Room situated under the North

                stand.    After documenting etc. of the prisoner, I left the Police Room.

                It was approximately 3.15pm (1515) all I saw were bodies, mostly dead,

                laid on advertising boards being rushed in to the gym opposite the

                Police Room.


                                                                                            3138
                                                                           PAGE    2
                                                                           S1860

         I decided that it was pointless trying to fight against the crowd to

• #      return to the North Stand, upper corridor, and instead went into the

         gym to assist.     Once inside I was called to a youth by another officer

         who was giving mouth to mouth, to take over external chest compression

         as it seemed there was a slight pulse on the youth. After about 15

         minutes a doctor assessed that it was pointless, the youth was dead.

         He was aged approximately 20 years, dark brown hair, jeans and blue

         shirt.     The other officer, who I did not know, stayed with the body.

         I then continued assisting the medics with various casualties in the

         gym until all the casualties had gone.     I then joined by serial, those

         of when I could find, on the North Stand, seated area where we had

         been told to congregate.

         At 7.15pxn (1915) that evening, I arrived back at Woodseats and went

         off duty.

         I saw a lot of people that day that had been drinking and smelled

         highly of intoxicants.     They were very upset by the actions outside

         the gates and the overall feeling was that of discontentment and

         frustration.




                                                      P. Ellis POL PC3116 SIGNED

  STATEMENT TAKEN
            PLACE:

            TIME:              DATE:

  WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

  OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

 END OF REPORT
