                                                    Sheffield Archives Ref: fbL          m ir.i

 OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                            Date and time raised   2 35-p      ^ Is lm        Number

 Title
 (Include source and any document number if relevant/

 Receiver's instructions - urgent action - Yet/No
                                                                                                               Receiver



 Document registered/indexed as indicated                                                                       Indexer

 No(s) of actions raised

 Statem ent reader's instructions                                                                          Statement Reader



 Indexed as indicated                                                                                          Indexer

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken
                                                                                                                     SIO




Further action No(s)                                                                                          Indexer

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
   EAST RIDING COUNTY FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION



                     24th April, 1989

The Qhief ^ecutive,
The *ootball Association   PPS   JT.’C   14
16 Lancaster Gate,
LONDON W2 3LW
Dear Graham,
           I travelled to Sheffield for the P.A.
Cup Semi Final with a friend, via the City Centre.
The traffic was fairly heavy and we eventually -parked
on a grass verge about three quarters of a mile
from the ground about 1.15'p.m.
           At that time the density of the crowd
was not too great who moved along in an orderly way
albeit noisily singing, it was noticeable that every
public house en route was packed with many standing
outside but no drunkeness was apparent.     We were
asked several times if we had any tickets, largely
by young teenage bo^s-rwlic did not appear to be
accompanied by adults.
           Entrance to the ground was comparatively
easy and there was no hassle.
           We tookour seats at about 2.40 p.m..
When the trouble beganwe assumed that some spectators
were endeavc&ing to invade the pitch by climbing over
the fence and we saw some policemen trying to
prevent entry cr pushing them back.
             The seriousness of the situation did not
strike us until spectators were being stretchered
off, nor did we realise that there were any deaths
until informed in the private lounge that there were
4 , later 11 and then 50.
      EAST RIDING COUNTY FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION



    The Public Address system was unsatisfactory as
with the exception of the announcement by Kenny
Dalgleish, when the volume was greatly increased,
it was impossible to hear what was being said.
I am sure      of the crowd were- as unaware as we
were of what was happening.
     I enclose a:- cutting from our locsl paper.
       I an sorry that I cannot give much information
hope this might possibly^a^little.
                Yours sincerely,
