OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and tim e raised                                  Num ber \


Title   >S^ 5 ^ - — '^ 5 r
fInclude source and any document number if relevant)

Receiver's instructions —uraent action —Yes/ISk^                                          ^ C C V \.
   VJ                     •                 ‘                    ‘        \         '                                             Receiver




Document registered/Ma watl.as indicated                                                                                          Indexer

No(s) of actions raised            \
                                                                                                                       Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions                     <f~     / Q         /52-^£Ct&jP
                                       2     / / > ! £A                                                                7 -& q           7
Indexed as indicated                                                                                                              Indexer

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                    O/M             SIO




Further action No(s)                                                                            >~                 _          -   Incle x er-—   /
                                                                                                               1
When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form                  5       v. :   " '
                                                                                                               L_!
                                        r
                                        K                 \^\lg
   10th May 1989


                                                                        M 9oW
                                                                         f\     t


Subject:   F.A.Cup Semi final    Hillsborough Sheffield.    Saturday 15th Apr


The following infomation is sent concerning my thoughts and
observations during my visit to Hillsborough together with my
conclusions and recommendations.

May I point out that I have no connections apart from being a
season ticket holder^with Liverpool Football C l u b ,Hillsborough or
the police force.I travel from Blackpool to Liverpool for each
home game and the occasional away game, with my son,who is 21
years old and I am 49.

We arrived in Sheffield at about 1.00pm and having travelled via
M 5 5 ,M 6 ,M 6 1 ,M 6 2 ,Ml to junction 36.We therefor did not experience
some of the road works that other travellers did. The traffic
from juction 36 was slow moving due to volume and I think some
road works. The police were pulling selected vehicles into a
layby to check them. This obviously had a slowing down effect on
the traffic flow.

We arrived on the outskirts of Sheffield at about 1.00pm and
parked on a road on the right hand side. I think the name of it
was Brownings Rd or Lane.We immediately started to walk towards
the ground having bought sandwiches and a drink at a motorway
services station. My son bought fish and chips on the way to the
ground.As we walked to the ground I saw no sign of any drunkeness
or bad behaviour although coaches had started to arrive and
indeed a train arrived at the station as we were passing.I was
asked on a few occasions whether I had any spare tickets or
wanted to exchange a ticket for any other part of the ground.
Having a stand ticket I declined. Outside the ground quite a few
people were gathering and we decided to go in. I looked at my
watch and it was hefwepn ^anri-lfl nast 2.We entered through
ent r a n t a Leppings Lane. There was nobody in front of us and we
had time to have a laugh with a policeman and policewoman who^
were on duty at two of the turnstiles. Even the gateman had time
 to have a laugh with me hoping that I had a head for heights as
 my seat was on row 46.

 On taking our seats we watched the players come out and have the
 usual pre match kick about. One of the pre match topics amongst
 the crowd was the ticket allocation.
  -* 1. Why had Liverpool received less tickets than "Nottingham
although Liverpools average home gate was twice theirs?
     2.     I was led to believe though I have no facts to corroborate
this, that Liverpool had been in touch with the F.A. about this
and that nothing had been done.
     3 Why was Hillsborough chosen again when it involved
Liverpool fans travelling twice as far.   i.e 36 miles as against
72 miles?
     4 If Old Trafford was suitable for a replay should it be
necessary why not for the first game. Also it is 72 miles to Old
Trafford from Nottingham and 36 from Liverpool?

We noticed as time went on that a lot of places around us had not
been taken and at five to three there were still several empty
seats as the teams came out.We also commented on the fact that
there were spaces in other stands and questioned whether some
tickets had not been sold.We also noticed how full the paddock
behind the Leppings Lane goal l o o k e d ,particularly when the crowd
swayed. However this is a common sight on the Kop at Liverpool
and was d i s m i s s e d .The game kicked off still with empty seats
around us. After about 5 minutes play Liverpool hit the bar and
then Forest attacked the leppings Lane end. It must have been at
this time that the tragedy happened.

The first visible sign to me was when a spectator appeared to
climb the fence from behind the goal. The Liverpool supporters in
the North Stand were booing him for going onto the pitch,and then
a few more^followed by a lot more went onto the pitch. The first
thoughts of the people around me was that there had been a pitch
invasion. Everybody was annoyed with this particularly as the
news about the return of English clubs to Europe had just been
announced.Im quite sure that both the Nottingham fans and the
police thought exactly the same. When one Liverpool supporter ran
the length of the field and gesticulated to the Nottingham fans
the police were wildly cheered when they caught him and
frogmarched him off the field. At first glances it appeared to me
that the police were trying to contain the supporters within the
paddocks obviously trying to prevent problems on the pitch,
totally unaware of what was happening at the rear of the paddock.
It appeared to take  fully 5 minutes before anybody realised what
was happening.With the game stopped I started talking to some of
the people around me. By this time all the seats had been filled.
They talked of absolute chaos outside the ground. One said that
this was his last visit to a match. One man with ayoung son with
him said that he put the youngster on his shoulders and that he
had come through an opened gate and he produced his untorn ticket
as proof. He said he had never seen such scenes outside a ground
and had fealt somebody picking his pocket as he carried his son.
He said he too was bitter about the ticket allocation.

More police went to the troubled end and then it seemed that
people were lying on the ground. It was then that supporters
started to tear up the advertising boards and an ambulance
arrived and went behind the goal.It was still not apparent what
had taken place.We saw people climbing/being hauled into the
stand above^ but this had happended the previous year and thought
no more about it.A large number of police were then marched into
the stadium and they stood in a line facing the spectators in the
North Stand. It was about this time that that the realisation of
a disaster was dawning. The police were acting (I think) under
orders to keep the threat of further pitch invasion from the
North Stand. The crowd at the Leppings Lane end were angry at the
abuse of the Nottingham fans^who from their position still
thought it was a pitch invasion. The police formed a line across
the pitch to keep the fans segregated. I think that the Liverpool
fans were furious about what had happened behind the goal,being
restrained from going onto the pitch,help being too slow to
arrive^and being abused for going onto the pitch. All this whilst
a line of police stood looking at the North Stand crowd. Tempers
started to flare.

Make shift stretchers were being used to carry injured people to
the Kop end of the ground. It was then that I saw the first
person with his head covered go out of the ground. I said to my
son that there would be no further football as there had been
somebody killed. We saw more and more carriied out alive and
dead. On the pitch people were giving mouth to mouth and pounding
peoples hearts to try to save their lives.Three bodies lay
covered in front of the Kop for quite some time whilst attention
was paid to the living. It was only then that the enormity of the
tragedy was realised. All during this time I did not hear any
announcement over the public address.

There was then some sort of message over the public address
system from Kenny Dalgleish which was totally inaudible.

It was later announced by a policeman with a loud hailer going
round the ground that the match was abandoned and for people to
remain in their places so that the emergency services could move
freely.

As soon as we could we left the g r o u n d ,returned to the car and
headed for home listening to the radio for further information.

In hind sight a   lot of questions/solutions have been raised,acted
on answered and   forgotten.

For any enquiry/report I submit these with the hope that they
will prevent any such tragedy re-occurig.

  1. Selection of ground by F.A. To be. bdU-T       .
  2. Ticket allocation to be in line with number of supporters.
  3. Where were the ground stewards within the ground to prevent
     the paddock becoming overcrowded?
  4. It has been suggested that the fences at the front of the
     grounds be removed and in fact several clubs have already
     done this. I do not think that this is a good idea at all as
     hooliganism will rear its ugly head once more.
 ~5. The p r o b l e m at Hillsborough was that there were fences1
     running from back to front thus not allowing any sideways
     m o v e m e n t .Ccush barriers must be properly spaced to prevent
     large numbers of people behind them i,e,         better staggering.
 6. A public address system          that isaudiable
 7. Better radio communications between p o l i c e ,stewards and
     match officials.
  8. Delayed starts if too many fans are outside at- kick off.
  9. Loudspeakers outside to keep spectators informed.
10. I do not think that all-seater stadiums are the answer as
     very many people still wish to stand up at games.
11. More involement between the F.A. and police in selection of
     of grounds.
12. Allocation of Cup Final          tickets to be in line with average
     home gates of participants.
 •   •   Q   6 v v \ ©   v * J o X   c   C J>   • f W   - v J '   - [ - e v v C   £ S   ,
I hope that the information is of help.




                                                                                            Yours faithfully
