                                                                        g£?q±Y      3y

TIMOTHY RICHARD ABRAHAMS

POLICE CONSTABLE 2748

WOODSEATS POLICE STATION




I am a Police Constable of the South Yorkshire Police and I am presently

stationed at Woodseats Police Station,     Sheffield.




At 8.45 am on Saturday 15 April 1989,     I commenced duty at Woodseats Police

Station,   from there,   I was taken via a Police Transit to Hillsborough Football

Stadium where I was to be allocated duties in relation to the F A Cup Semi-Final

football match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.




After a lengthy briefing by senior officers,        I was assigned duties, together

with other officers,     on the Spion Kop end of the Stadium.     I was under the

direct supervision of Police Sergeant B a t t y .   This end of the stadium was

primarily for Nottingham Forest supporters,     however,    it was anticipated that

Liverpool supporters had obtained tickets and part of our serial's duties was to

assist in segregation of the two sets of supporters.




During the next few hours,     the Kop, and indeed the rest of the ground,    started

to fill up.




At 2.10 pm,   I arrested a Nottingham Forest Fan for being drunk inside the

ground.    I took him to the Police Room near the gymnasium and completed the

necessary proceedures there.      I then entered the gymnasium in order to start the

paperwork for the arrest.      Whilst doing this paperwork,    I heard, over my own

personal radio, an officer requesting gates to be opened but I did not pay much

attention to it and in fact turned my radio off in order to complete my

paperwork.    I did not make a note of the time for that request, nor did I know
at that time, what part of the ground was involved or which officer was making

the request.




After finishing the paperwork. I went back onto the Kop.    The play had started

and I did not notice any problem anywhere in the stadium.




At about 3.05 pm, I saw a Police Officer run on to the pitch and speak to the

referee, although I still could not see any problem.    Together with other

officers,   I was directed to that part of the Kop which was occupied by Liverpool

Fans.    Together with those officers, I formed a line between these fans and the

Nottingham Forest Fans.




Looking towards the Leppings Lane end I saw numerous Liverpool supporters

spilling onto the pitch.    I saw people being lifted from the standing area into

the seating area above them.    Other police officers, were running towards that

end of the ground.




The Nottingham Forest Fans obviously thought that it was a pitch invasion and

initially started to   'bait' the Liverpool fans with obscene chanting.   More and

more people came onto the pitch and there appeared to be a move by them to

approach the Nottingham end of the ground.    I saw a line of police officers near

to the half-way line to prevent this.




After a few minutes,   I saw ambulances arrive and one of these went onto the

pitch.    I then saw fans, police officers and Ambulance staff carrying injured

people towards the entrance to the pitch very near to where I was standing.       I

saw people pull away advertising boarding and use it as make shift stretchers.

Injured people were being taken out for quite some time.
1
                                            -   3-




    From my position,   all I could see of events at the Leppings Lane end of the

    pitch was a large group of supporters, Police etc,   I could not see any details.




    It was sometime before the gravity of the situation became clear to both myself

    and the other occupants of the Kop.    The Nottingham Forest fans were initially

    aggressive and I sensed that they were becoming restless and volatile.    However

    as more people were stretchered out infront of them, they calmed down.




    Eventually the message was passed by the loudspeaker system,    that the match was

    abandoned and the Forest fans started to leave the ground.     I assisted in the

    clearing of supporters from the Kop.




    After the ground had cleared, I sat in the stand together with other officers

    until a Senior Officer told us to stand down.




    I was the only officer in Sergeant Batty's serial to be on a leave day and was

    therefore the only officer from that serial who left the stadium,    the time being

    about 6.30 pm.




    I took no part in any of the dead or injured persons or their property.
