                     Kj'K' 1
        flBlLIP ALAN YARDY,
        ftolice Constable 2656,
        South Yorkshire ftolice
                                                                                  23
                                                                                    k
                                                                                       ,
        Woodseats , Sheffield
        D Group.

        At 8.J+5am on Saturday 15th April 1989, 1 paraded at Woodseate Police Station , Sheffield
or transport to The Hillsborougn Football Ground .
       I was conveyed there together with other officers from Woodseats by means of a double
ecker bus.

tiortly after my arrival I was told to attend the North Stand where a breifing took place by      *-j:
e*eral senior officers , with regards to the events of tfce day, this being the F.A.Cup semifinal
stween Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.
         At approximately 11.05am , after consuming a packed meal I attended the Spion K6pt
lere a further briefing was given by Superintendent GREENWOOD (Groun Commander), and Inspector's
X>TH and CALVERT.

was informed that Liverpool fans had    obtained tickets for the Nottingham end and that there
is a space at the Northern end of the   Kop had been set aside for them t this area was to be
jpt ^ ^ ’dand off.

          I commenced my duties at approximately 11.15am f My serial Sergeant being Ps MARPLES,
id after a short while took up a position in the sterile area, which separated the Liverpool
m s from the Nottingham fans.

          A® the kick off tine drew closer both the Kop and the area set aside for the Liverpool
re packed , both sets of supporters being reasonable.
         At 3«00pm the game commenced and shortly afterwards I saw Liverpool fans apparently
vade the pitch. The situation appeared to get worse with further fans and Police Officers
lliag around the goal mouth area. The players then left the pitch and it became apparent
at the incident was morethan just a pitch invasion.
         I saw injured Liverpool fans carried from the Leppings Lane aid of the ground to
e Kop end of the ground . These fans were placed almost directly below me by the main
trance to the pitch.

    ^    They had been carried by both Police Officers and football fans on stretchers and
vertising hoardings, some of them appeared to be dead . I saw Police Officers , St Johns
bulance Men and fans administering first aid to the injured fans.
          There was a lot of Police activity on the pitch with officers forming a cor dan
'ross tfce whole of the pitch and along the stands , however I was instructed to hold my
sition, as there was still fear of disorder breaking out*
          fi*om my position 1 could see ambulances behind the North Stand awaiting the arrival
the injured. I held «y position until the fans were released from the ground at which point
1203 MARPLES took our serial on mobile patrol as there had been reports of Fbblic order             j
;uations outside the ground .
          The vehicle took up a position in Middlewood Road , on standby but was not required.
.er the Ians had dispursed we returned to Hillsborough where after a short de briefing we
■e stood down.

                         /
