*» —.       %
        &


        Notes of Trevor Turner P.S. d / 5 9 btationed at F1. He Semi Final duties V 5 .b .$ %


 I reported on duty at Hammerton Road Police Station at 9* 15am that day. My duties were on

 Serial 3 which entailed duties in the upper level of the South Stand where the Nottingham

 Forest Supporters were to be seated. At 10ara I was at Hillsborough Football Ground and was

 given a full briefing in the North Stand with other officers.           I was given a personal radio.
 Inspector Darling was the senior officer in charge of my particular serial. From about 11.30am

 together with my Serial we were on our points which included duties at several turnstiles

 giving access to the South Stand. From about 12 noon the gates were opened and a steady stream

 of Nottingham Forest Supporters began to enter the groung. There were all sorts of fans, men,

 women, children all were in good spirits          and seemed to be looking forward to the match.

 Sewards 2 .30pm the influx of fans indreased but still they were well behaved and good humoured.

 About this time I became aware of a slight fault on the radio. After a message from contol was

 passed there seemed to be a noise as if the handset were faulty. We were to take our cooked

 meal in the grounds gymnasium during the game and as 3 o'clock approached it had been decided

 that shortly after the kick off myself and P.O. 70 Whiteley an offieer on my Serial would go

 and eat„ Shortly before 3 pm        I became aware of there being some concern Re the size of the
 crowd at the Leppings Lane End.        I heard on the radio calls from an officer there (I can't recal.
 who) wanting more manpower to assist with the large crowd,           I cannot say if anyone was directed
 to assist.       I then remember an Officer believed to be Supt. Marshall requesting that some gate
 be opened to relieve pressure on the crowd at Leppings Lane. I think this request was made more

^ a n once but dur to the noise of the crowd near this officer and the interference on the radio

 $t was difficult to hear him clearly.         I remember him telling control that if the gate were not
    opened to relieve crowd pressure there was a great risk of injury to fans. The reply from

 control was tc the-'effect that if lives were in danger to 'OPEN THE GATES!            By this time it

 was just gone 3pm myself and P.O. 70 made our way down the players tunnel onto the perimeter of

 the pitch. The game was underway and         I saw that a few of the crowd at the Liverpool End
  (leppings LaneI had spilled onto the perimeter track around the pitch. This seemed to be just

    overspill and there seemed to be plenty of officers in the area to deal with the problem. W*

    continued around the pitch. Passind the Nottingham Forest Fans on the Kop end who were becomin

    rather agitated at the behaviour of the fans at the other end. There were no instructions

 given on the radio so we went off the pitch to go into the gymn. As we were entering other *f

  officers were coming out and we were directed by a senior Officer personally ( not known who) t

  o onto the perimeter of the pitch and stand facing the Nottingham            Forest Fans on the Kop as it
                                                                                             A
                              SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                            REF:

  FROM.                                                     STATIO N /D EPT.:

  TO:                                                        DATE:


             SUBJECT:   p.s. 2759    Continued


          was feared that they may invade the pitch. We did this and on looking towards

          leppings Lane I saw more people on the pitch milling about. I remember seeing .tM..

          others being pulled up from the standing areas into the seating above. The Forest

          fans were becoming very agitated as they thought the Liverpool fans were invading tt

          the pitch and that they had caused the gam. to b. halted. One liverpool fan then

          ran from the Leppings Lane end the fill length of the pitch and stood in th. goal

          area facing the Forest Fans. He began gesticulating to them with his two fingers

          and shouting abuse at them. This obviously enraged the Forest fans further. After

          about a minute he turned and went back on the pitch towards the Leppings Lane End

          where he was eventually apprehended by an officer and l.ix taken away. Another fan

          caae towards the Forest End from the Leppings Lane End. H« was older and appeared

          to be drunk. He was not abusive but was Just w a v i n g . H o w e v e r the Forest fans

          were becoming more and more irate. Myself and others including P.O. 70 went onto

          the pitch and tried to usher him back tcards the other end to prevent any trouble.

          At this time there were more and more Liverpool fans on the pitch at the Leppings L.

          Lane end maybe stretching upto the halfway Line. I cannot recall any radio messages

          at this time as to the reason for this. Vie continued walking to that end. A line of

          Police were across the pitch near the halfway line and when we passed through this

          line that is th. first time I became awar. that p.opl. had b..n injur.d. Som. w.r.

          lying on the ground getting their breath back others were obviously injured. Som.

          w.r. Just milling about. We cam across a man with a leg injury        and   w. took him

          half carrying him to the First Aid post near to the gymn. There were many injured

          people at the first Aid post being tended to. An officer I know from 01 Division

          P.O. 2910 Cammock was in posession of a stretcher and myself PC 70 and another

          stayed with him and th. stretcher and went back th to th. pitch to assist where we

          could. Lying on the pitch we came across a young man who had an injuty to th.

          lower part of his stomach. H. was unabl. to walk and obviously in pain. W. placed

:n/2      him on the stretcher and took him to the first Aid post. I remember one ambulanc.
                             SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

                                                           REF:
FROM:
                                                           STATION/DEPT.:
TO:
                                                           DATE:


            SUBJECT:   p.S 2759 Continued,

        being there but the First Aid staff seemed to be having difficulty coping with

         the ammount of injured. The casualty was laid on the floor on a blanket. We

         returned onto the pitch with the stretcher as there seemed to be a great need for

         them. By now I was aware that many people were suffering from bad injuries as they

         were laid on the pitch. I was aware of Police Officers Ambulancemen, St Johnsxfcnifit

         ambulancemen and other fans giving assistance to persons in need. Other fans just

         seemed to be milling about and it was difficult to see who was in the most need of

         treatment. Fans had broken down boardings and were running the fill length of the

         pitch with injured. By this time the Forest fans seemed to realise the serious

         nature of the incident and were applauding Liverpool fans as they carried off the

        injured. When we returned to the injured we came across a man laid on the floor.

        A woman was giving him cardiac massage and a man giving him the kiss of life.

        A bottle of oxygen was also being used to try to revive him« A man who stated he was

        a doctor came and was also assisting. After about 5 minutes of working on him and no

        sign of life the Doctor said he was dead. I decided we should remove hime as

        quickly as possible and he was put on the stretcher. As we neared the gymn as the

        man was dead we were instructed to take him to the gymnasium which we did. It was

        then on entering the gymn that I became aware of other fatalities as several

         bodies were tayeit laid out with white blankets covering them. We put the body

        down it was covered and I instructed an officer who had assisted in carrying the

        stretcher to stay with the body. (I don't know who the officer wasX. The body was

        a white male heavy build about S'OO" tall. He had brown hair. Wearing a grey/white

        shirt

                           I went back again onto the pitch and was seperated from the other

        officers I had been with. By thid time there seemed to be more medical assistance

        on the pitch. Ambulancemen and ambulances were in the vicinity and most of the

        injured had been moved or were being moved. I can still not recall what was being

        said on the radio. Officers were just trying to clear the pitch of fans so that

        medical assistance could be given to those in need.
                           SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                        REF:
FROM:
                                                        STATION/DEPT.:
TO:
                                                        DATE:


           SUBJECT:    P.S. 2759 Continued.

        At this time I met up with PS Gardner who was part of my serial. He indicated to

        me that other people had been injured and bodies were at the rear of the Leppings

        Lane stand outside in the Lane and assistance may be required there. At this time

        I became aware that the fencing at the front of this stand had large holes ripped

        in it and a saw a barrier had been knocked over. We attended at the rear of

        Leppings Lane.Some bodies had been laid out near the fence to the river . Officers

        had placed barriers in front of them and were stood around them. Several injured ps:

        persons were also there next to the wall. Officers and medical personnell were

        assisting them whilst an ambulance arrived. I assisted there as some fans had xtaxt

        started to leave the ground. They were calling Police 'Murdering bastards and other

        similar phrases but all officers kept quiet and concentrated on the job in hand.

        I recall a lodspeaker message going out asking fans to remain in the ground as

        their departure was hampering the arrival of ambulances. I was necessary from time

        to time to prevent the crowd from leaving to allow ambulances to attend to treat

        the injured. The injured persons were removed prior to the bodies being moved.

        Officers were subjected to much abuse and ridicule by upset Liverpool fans

        leaving. I remember a number being passed over the radio for persons to ring re

        casualties. I made a note of the number and gave it other officers as lots of

        people were making enquiries. After a time I remember a message being passed on

        the lodspeaker that the game would be cancelled and that fans should keep tickets.

        Officers who were not engaged in special duties were then asked to attend at

        the North Stand where they were to be given duties as required. I attended there

        with my Serial. At this time the extent of the seriousness of the incident had

        become apparant and all officers seemed very upset depressed and confused by the

        days happenings. There were no further dities for us to do and we went off duty

         at 7pm
         The only time I became aware of the serious nature of the incident was when I

         came across the in^mred people and the bodies. I felt sick and helpless that there
                               SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                            REF:
    FROM:                                                   STATION/DEPT.

    TO:                                                     DATE:


               SUBJECT:   P.S. 2759 Turner.



            No cns seemed to be able to say what had happened or why. All I could do

            assist in the way I did but even that did not se*m to be enough©




            P.6. 2759




GEN/2
