oV v
                                       A/ S/51S.                                     6ne
         Statement of :-          Robert Simons
                                    "over 21"
                                  Police Constable 750
                                  Hammerton Road Police Station, Sheffield.


I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police, currently serving at Hammerton
Road Police Station, Sheffield.


At        on Saturday, 15th April, 19§9i I paraded for duty at Hillsborough football
ground, Sheffield, for duties in connection with an F.A. Cup semi final football
match to be played between Nottingham Forest F.C. and Liverpool F.C.


My alloted duty was to drive a marked police Transit van and to be available to collect
persons arrested outside the ground and transport them and the arresting officer(s) to
either Hammerton Road or Ecclesfield Police Station, where the prisoners would be dealt
with.


My instructions were to stand by until required with the van in the vicinity of the
junction of Leppings Lane with Penistone Road North. In the event, I parked the van
on the forecourt of Law Bros., Garage,which is in Leppings Lane close to the afore­
mentioned junction, and approximately     mile from the football ground.


Whilst I was on the forecourt I received a complaint from a resident of Farndale Road,
which is close by, that Liverpool fans were openly using his rear garden as a toilet
and that they had been aggresive and abusive to both him and his wife when asked to stop.


During the course of ir,y duty with the van I was called upon pehaps three or four times
to attend at incidents where transport may be required for prisoners but I was needed
on only one occasion to provide transport for an officer and prisoner from Leppings
Eane to the Police Room within the ground.


As the day passed the number of fans, mainly wearing Liverpool favours, making their way
in the direction of the ground along Leppings Lane increased. Many were openly carrying
and drinking from cans of alcohol as they passed and most were in possession of
additional unopened cans. I noticed that many of these fans were opening new cans and
drinking from them as soon as one can became empty. My opinion was that they were
drinking the alcohol in order that they wouldn't be caught with it in their possession
when they arrived at the ground.


In addition to the above, groups of fans were sitting on the boundary wall of the fore­
court and again were drinking from cans of alcohol with extra cans in reserve.


I would describe the behaviour of the fans at this stage as boistrous but in the main
good humoured.                                                                      —■
                                                                                                 \ &
      ‘                                                          two
                   Statement of           Robert Simons                                    — —


 I recall looking at my watch shortly after 2.30pm and thinking to myself as I saw the
 number of fans still making their way towards the ground, many at a leisurely, aimless,
 sort of pace, "Therefs no way    that^all these sire going to get in by the kick-off. -
 Why don't they come in plenty    of time?"


 In what appeared a short time    later I heard Superintendent MARSHALLvia my personal      radio
 ask in the region of four or five times for a gate to be opened. I did&’tknow the location
 of the gate he was referring to at this time, and I don't recall what answer he was given.


 At about the same time I heard Police Constable Mick BUXTON ask if it was possible to have
 the kick-off delayed. I don't recall what the reply was.


 When it became evident that events were taking a turn for the worse at the ground, I
 decided to make my way in that direction to afford what assistance I could give. When
 1 reached the Leppings Lane entrance to the ground the carriageway was blocked by the
C r o w d s and it was with great difficulty that I was able to make any headway with the van.


 At this location I remember a fan shouting at a mounted officer something like "It's
 you busies. It's your fault what's happening in there."


 I couldn't park the van in Leppings Lane so I drove round into Catchbar Lane, which runs
 parallel with the south side of the ground, and parked up near to the police section
 station.


 I saw groups of fans on various vantage points such as walls, fences and a workmens' hut,
 looking across towards the ground. At this stage they didn't appear to be aware of what
 was happening inside.


 I got out of the van and went round the various groups telling them that there had been
 a serious incident inside the ground    and asking them to leave the area in order that the
 emergency services could work unhindered.


 Nobody seemed concerned about what had actually happened - They only wanted to know if
 the match had been abandoned!,


 Eventually Catchbar Lane filled with fans who had obviously been in the vicinity of the
 Leppings Lane end of the ground, many of whom were very hostile towards me.


 I then took the van into Penistone Road North and parked outside the ground near to the
 junction of that road with Herries Road South. It was at this location that a number of
 ambulances were gathering whilst awaiting duties*        eventually the system evolved
*
                         Statement of
                            ■" ■ ■ i
                                            Robert Simons                             three
         4
     0




    whereby I would direct ambulances to where they were required on receipt of that information
     ft
    via personal radio from Police Segeant GODDARD who was on duty in the Police Control Box
    inside the ground.


Later in the evening I was employed on security duties outside the gates in Penistone Road
North where members of the press were congregating, and then outside the mortuary which had
been set up in the gymnasium receiving parents/relatives/friends of the dead fans.


    I finished duty at if.15am on Sunday, 16th April, 1989
