                                                                                                                                                                            <o>
                                                                                                                                                                            J 7'

H aaim ond S u d d a rd s                                                                                                           £ T l“‘
             S O L I C I T O R S _________
___________________
                                                                                                                                    U31ES
                                                                                                                                     Telephone (0113) 284 7000
                                                                                                                                     DX No. 26441
                                                                                                                                      Fax (0113) 284 7001


  The Right Honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
  The Hillsborough Scrutiny
  Room 1106
  50 Queen Anne’s Gate
  London
  SW1H 9AT


  Our Ref                                                             Your Ref:                                                      Date:
  PCM.SB.MMI. 1-103                                                                                                                   11 November 1997


  Dear Lord Justice Stuart-Smith

  PREPARATION O F STATEMENTS FOLLOW ING THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

  Thank you for your letter o f 28 October 1997 which as you know did not in fact reach me until 7
  November 1997.

  The following response is made with my clients’ permission but the factual material is derived from
  my fij^s and any views expressed are my own. The clients’ permission extends to disclosing to you
  the attached documents but this disclosure is in confidence to the Hillsborough Scrutiny.

  Here are my answers to the points raised under paragraph 4 of your                                                                    letter. I               havegrouped under
  item 1comment on each o f the points made in paragraph 3.

  1.1.        I understand that the decision to ask all officers present to provide self taken statements was
               made at a meeting at Police Headquarters on Monday 17 April 1989. I was not present at
               this meeting. I cannot therefore say whether officers were specifically asked to include
               comment and impression,

  1.2.        It is correct that when the West Midlands Police asked for statements from particular officers
               the self taken statements for those officers were forwarded to me. I read through the
               statements and made comments by fax to Chief Superintendent Denton. I did not amend any
               statements. Where my comments suggested changes, these were principally removal of
               comment and impression.         They also included suggestions to re-address apparent
               contradictions or ambiguities, to consider removal of evidence about events after the officers
               had gone off duty and, on occasions, to reconsider intemperate language.

  1.3.        The statements were intended to be used for the purpose of Lord Justice Taylor’s enquiry
              but they were not, so far as I am aware, intended to form Criminal Justice Act statements.
              There is a letter dated 7 May 1989 from Mervyn Jones to Peter Wright which refers to
  O m e n also at:

  7 Devonshire Square              Trinity C ourt                     Pennine House                   Suite 6K8 Lloyd's                      Avenue Louise 250
  London                           16 John Dalton Street              3 M J Well Slreei               One Lime Street                        1050 Brussels
  EC2M 4Y H                        M anchester                        Bradford                        L'lodon                                Belgium
  Telephone (0171) 655 1000         M 608H S                          BDI 5NU                         E O M 7HA                              Telephone (00) 32 2 627 7676
  Fax (0 1 71 )65 5 1001            Telephone (0161) 830 5000          Telephone (01274) 734700        Telephone (01 7 1)3 27 3388/3399       Fax (00) 32 2 627 7686
                                    Fax (0161) 830 5001               Fax ( 0 1274) 307239            F a \ (OI71) 6 2 11217

  A list o f Partners can be viewed at the above address   This firm is regulated by the Law Socierv in the conduct of investment business
                                                                                          2
                                                                        11 November 1997
                                             The Right Honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
                                                                 The Hillsborough Scrutiny


officers providing ‘recollections in writing’ and ‘written submissions’. I would have
expected this letter to refer explicitly to CJA statements if that was the intention.

With the passage of time it is difficult to say precisely why this approach was adopted. Re­
reading the file I think that it followed on from the procedure adopted with the senior
officers and in particular the officers who had borne the brunt of the press criticism following
the disaster. At an early stage these officers were asked by the West Midlands Police to
provide self taken statements. I attach a copy of my attendance note of discussions on 29/30
April 1989 at which the provision of these statements was discussed between myself and
Peter Hayes, the then Deputy Chief Constable. This states - at the top of page 2:-

         “It was agreed, however, that it would he sensible fo r me to see these
         statements before they went to the West Midlands Enquiry and to have
         some time to go through them with the men involved".

Again I cannot really say whether this was my idea or Peter Hayes’ idea but it does seem,
now as then, entirely appropriate. Although there was no suggestion of criminal proceedings
at that time, these, men had been the subject of severe criticism and might well expect to be
further criticised at the enquiry. I attach a copy of my attendance note dated 2 May which
details the meeting with the senior officers on that day. The note indicates that changes were
suggested but the comment in relation to A C C Jackson does tend to indicate that these
changes were not major.

When the letter of 7 May, referred to in 1.3. above, was received by the South Yorkshire
Police, Chief Superintendent Denton spoke to me on 9 May and a copy of my attendance
note of that conversation is enclosed. You will note the final paragraph which effectively
records the decision to scrutinise these statements without stating whether this was my idea
or Chief Superintendent Denton’s. It does however record that the intention was to remove
 “comment or matters o f speculation

As indicated at item 1.1. above I am not aware that anyone specifically asked for officers’
comments and impressions. The only record of the request will be in Chief Inspector
Bettison’s note of the meeting of 17 April which I have not seen. There is no doubt that the
self taken statements did include comment and impression.

Without wishing in any way to be flippant about such an awful tragedy I am afraid that the
reference to "usualprocedure” would not have found an echo in the meetings which we had
at that time. Ninety five people had died. Officers who had given a lifetime of public service
suddenly found themselves objects of public vilification and accused of negligence leading to
mass slaughter. I do not think that anybody really knew what would be usual procedure in
those circumstances. I would say however that by then the enquiry into the events - whether
it was eventually to turn into a criminal enquiry or not - was firmly in the hands of the West
Midlands Police who had the authority to impose whatever procedure they thought
appropriate.
                                                                                                   3
                                                                                 11 November 1997
                                                      The Right Honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
                                                                          The Hillsborough Scrutiny


       As a matter o f additional personal comment, it seems to me that the West Midlands Police
       had little practical choice, because of the constraint imposed by the political requirement that
       the Taylor Enquiry should produce an interim report before the commencement of the next
       football season. To conduct the enquiry on the basis of West Midlands officers taking CJA
       statements from individual South Yorkshire Police officers would probably have rendered
       that goal impossible to achieve.

5.     I do not know precisely what procedure was adopted after I had provided faxed comment on
       statements presented to me. I am not in a position to say whether any officer refused to sign
       an amended statement and indeed I am not aware as to whether officers were presented with
       amended statements as opposed to reviewing their own statements in the light of the
       comments I had made. It may be that the former was the practice adopted because of the
       time pressure. Whether or not that was the case I cannot recall any instance when the matter
       was referred back to me and I must assume either that the officers signed amended
       statements, or that if they did not, the statements went to West Midlands in their original
       form.

I hope this is helpful. Please let me know if I can be of any further assistance.

Yours sincerely




P C METCALF




                                                                                    m m i.0 0 1 -0 1 0 3 .le tl.1 0 1 l.pcm.doc
ATTENDANCE NOTE


DATE:     29th/30th April, 1989


RE:       HILLSBOROUGH




(1)     Attending Terry Wain on telephone 29/4.

      He read to me the contents of a letter received
      from the West Midlands Force, asking for Senior
      Officers to prepare what would effectively be
      self-taken statements to present to the West
      Midlands inquiry.  This had given rise to some
      concern.  He and Belinda had drafted a form of
      holding response to be sent by- the Deputy, but
      the latter had amended this to tone it down
      somewhat.  I approved it in its amended form,
      which effectively said that the Police would be
      doing everything they could to co-operate but
      asked what was the specific purpose of these
      statements and whether they would be the only
      statements likely to be required.

      He told me that the Deputy would be seeing the
      Officers concerned on Sunday and would like to
      speak to me afterwards.  I said that I would be
      available.


(2)   I spoke to Peter Hayes at Sunday lunchtime.   The
      Officers had now all seen the videos and were
      fairly relaxed about giving factual statements.
      They were not particularly concerned that these
      would be self-taken rather than CJA.   I raised
      with him the points which had concerned me,
      namely, that the inquiry was supposed to be
      fulfilling some statutory functions in terms of
      disciplinary proceedings and in terms of
      supporting H.M. Coroner.   I said that it might
      not be fair on the Officers if these self-taken
      statements were to be used for those purposes,
      as opposed to the purposes of the inquiry.   He
      discussed this with the Chief Constable, who was
      also present and said that the Chief Constable
      was satisfied that the West Midlands inquiry had
      a duty to report only to the Judge.   Moreover,
      it seemed that there was no practical difficulty
      because there was not going to be anything in the
      self-taken statements which would not have been
      in CJA statements if taken.


                                             / . . .   contd.
                            - 2 -



      It was agreed, however, that it would be sensible
      for me to see these statements before they went
      out to the West Midlands inquiry and to have some
      time to go through them with the men involved.
      I said that I would make myself available on the
      Bank holiday, if need be, but otherwise could be
      in Sheffield on Tuesday.  He said that he would
      be considering the position and would contact me
      again later in the day.


(3)   Later on, he telephoned back and said that the
      sensible course would be for me to come down to
      Sheffield on Tuesday to discuss progress with
                      and then to see the Officers in
      the afternoon.

      I said that it might also be helpful at that
      stage to have a meeting with Terry Wain to
      discuss format and presentation of the report
      with reference to indexing and perhaps cutting
      down the appendix.

      I also as)<ed  if I could take away   with me a copy
      of the video   or videos which were   relevant to the
      case and indeed any relevant still    photographs.
      He said that   he would arrange for   this.

      He said that   he would be going away for a few
      days break, but could be contacted if need be.




                     P; C. Metcalf
ATTENDANCE NOTE


DATE:     2nd May, 1989


RE:       HILLSBOROUGH




Attending at Sheffield Police Headquarters.

(1)     I had a meeting with the Chief Constable at which
        he asked how things were going and I reviewed
        progress.

        He raised the point that Mr. Hayes appeared to
        have left instructions for the self-taken
        statements to deal only with the events of the
        match:, he felt that they should go rather wider
        and deal with the planning and history.   I said
        that this depended very much on what had actually
        been asked for, but if the request for statements
        was general, then the statements themselves should
        be'general.

        He indicated that he would make himself available
        for consultations or meetings at any time in
        connection with this matter.


(2)     I then spoke with Stuart Anderson and we discussed
        what needed doing in the afternoon.   Essentially,
        this was to go through the self-taken statements
        which had been prepared and I asked then to have a
        discussion with Terry Wain about the format of the
        report.   At this stage, I was able to have a look
        at the letter which had been received from the West
        Midlands Force and I noted that it was somewhat
        ambiguous.   The request was for a recollection of
        events prior to, during and after the match.     My
        reading of this would have limited it to the day
        in question but, on the whole, I felt it
        preferable to deal with the case as fully as
        poss ible.


(3) . During the course of the afternoon, I went through
      statements with A.C.C. Jackson (Operations),
      Superintendent Roger Greenwood (Ground Commander),
      Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield (Overall
      Commander), Superintendent Roger Marshall
      (Liverpool Sector Commander), Superintendent
      Bernard Murray (Operations, Second in Command),
                             - 2 -
*


          Superintendent David Chapman (Nottingham Forest
          Sector Commander) and Chief Inspector Bob Creaser
          who was effectively a Sector Commander under
          Superintendent Marshall.

          I made various suggestions for alterations to
          their statements, the principal change being that
          in respect of A.C.C. Jackson, who had not included
          any of the details of the planning of the match.
          It was agreed that he would be dealing with this
          overnight and that I would attend at Sheffield
          again on Wednesday to go through this.


    (4)   I looked through the statement of Inspector Hans
          Davis, in charge of mounted Officers.  Although
          there were one or two minor changes which I would
          have suggested, he was away on leave and it was
          felt appropriate that his statement should be
          handed over.


    (5)   I then had further discussions with Terry Wain
          and with Stuart Anderson.   The team have assembled
          two sets of photographs dealing, respectively,
          with the situation on both sides of the Leppings
          Lane turnstiles and inside the Leppings Lane
    «     terracing.   The latter photographs were
          particularly instructive because, in a time
          sequence, they appeared to show various people
          standing at or around the mouth of the tunnel
          during the whole period from 2.45 p.m. to 3.05 p.m.,
          which would cast serious doubt on the suggestions
          that there was some sort of a surge through the
          tunnel as the result of a gate or gates being
          opened.   I was not able to take away copies of
          these photographs but I was supplied with a set
          of copies of Police videos.   Later that evening,
          I watched video number 14 which, interalia, shows
          the situation inside and outside the Leppings Lane
          turnstiles.   The film goes into what is referred
          to as elapsed time mode during the critical
          period, so that there are effectively a series of
          single shots with a gap of one to five seconds
          between them.   This is not particularly helpful
          but, insofar as anything can be made out, there
          again does not appear to be a surge towards the
          outside entrance of the tunnel, which has been
          implicated in the disaster.


    (6)   I asked various of the Officers about leave
          commitments.   Superintendent Murray indicated
          that he had leave booked from 11th to 26th June
          and Superintendent Greenwood from 19th May to
          2nd June.   I promised to bring these matters to
          the attention of the Treasury Solicitor, although


                                               / . . .   contd.
                       - 3 -



    I could give no promise that they might not be
    called during indicated periods.




                  P. C. Metcalf




#
ATTENDANCE NOTE


DATE:     9th May, 1989


RE:       HILLSBOROUGH




Attending (1)      K. S. Anderson on telephone.

             (2)   K. G. Holmes on telephone.

             (3)   Don Denton on telephone.


(1)     He telephoned in response to my-.fax and said that
        they understood there may be a need for editing.
        He was concerned as to whether he would actually
        be called into the meeting this afternoon and I
        said that he should proceed with his existing
        arrangements and that we would fit in if we
        needed to consult him.  He said that he would be
        providing some sandwiches at 5.00 p.m.

        So far as the report/proof is concerned, the
        basic version is about 2" thick, but there are
        a very large amount of appendices.  I said that
        this was not too bad and that if we could cut it
        down to 1" thick, with just a few crucial
        documents included as appendices to the report
        itself, then I would be really quite satisfied.

        He was a little concerned as to whether the work
        would be done by ourselves or by the Police and
        I said that we would wait and see the size of the
        task before going any further.


(2)     He telephoned to mention his concern about the
        overall financial cost of the operation.  He was
        referring to the MMI involvement on behalf of all
        parties and wanted to send out a letter suggesting
        that it should not be necessary for Leading and
        Junior Counsel, a Partner and Assistant Solicitor
        to be present all the way through the hearing.
        I reassured him that I already had this point on
        board and, whilst it may be difficult to cut down



                   V.
                                                /. . .   contd.
                          - 2 -



       on the representation as regards Counsel, our
       intention was that there should only be one
       representative from Hammonds at any given time,
       which might be myself, Belinda or Kate.  I said
       that, nevertheless, there would be no harm in
       putting the position on record.

       I mentioned that we had a conference this
       afternoon and also there was the conference on
       Friday, which he knew about.  He said that he did
       not require to attend either of these conferences.

       We discussed the question of Counsel's fees.  It
       was agreed that I would try and do some research,
       by way of telephoning up people who had been
       concerned in the Cleveland inquiry, with a view
       to discovering what Brief fees had been paid.   In
       this particular instance, we both agreed that he
       ought to specifically approve the Brief fee before
       it was agreed and that this, in turn, might need
       the approval of Steve Walker.


(3)'   He told me that they had now received the formal
       request from the West Midlands for self-taken
       statements for some 120 Officers,- of whom they
       already had Minutes or accounts of events in
       respect of 100.

       Obviously, no problem was presented in relation
       to those who had not provided an account of events,
       because they could be asked to do one specifically
       for the West Midlands request.   As for the others,
       there would need to be some scrutiny of the
       existing documents.  Many of them might be suitable
       to be handed on without further ado, but those
       which included comment or matters of speculation
       would probably have to be redone.   I said that we
       might be able to deal with something of this this
       afternoon, depending on the extent to which time
       was taken up with other matters.




                      P. C. Metcalf




                 v
                                                                                                                                       2 Park Lane
H ammond S uddards                                                                                                                     Leeds
                                                                                                                                       LS31ES
           S O L I C I T O R S
                                                                                                                                       Telephone (0113) 284 7000
                                                                                                                                       DX No. 26441
                                                                                                                                       Fax (0113) 284 7001


The Right Honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
The Hillsborough Scrutiny
Room 1106                                                                                                        I.          a
50 Queen Anne’s Gate                                                                                            V’          &
London
SW1H 9AT



Our Ref:                                                          Your Ref:                                                            Date:
PCM. SB.MMI. 1-103                                                                                                                    20 January 1998


Dear Lord Justice Stuart-Smith

I am most grateful to you for the opportunity to comment on the section of your draft report dealing
with my firm’s vetting of South Yorkshire Police officers’ statements before their submission to the
West Midlands Police. I' should say that I have consulted                              5C and the
submissions which follow are based on his advice.

By \#ay of background I understand that there is no criticism of the fact that these statements were
vetted. It is accepted by you that the Inquiry team, including Lord Taylor, were well aware that the
statements were being vetted by solicitors and in some cases altered (para 12 draft report), that other
parties to the Inquiry had statements vetted, or in some cases drafted, by solicitors (para 13) and that
the removal o f certain matters cannot be the subject of criticism (para 8).

Given that it is accepted that vetting by solicitors was appropriate then the question arises as to the
basis upon which any criticism can be made as to the manner in which it was carried out. The
drafting or vetting o f witness statements is a very uncharted area, in which I believe there are no
reported decisions or authoritative conclusions, and this was all the more so the case in 1989, the
time when my conduct falls to be judged. I would respectfully submit that any criticism of the actual
vetting process ought to be made (if at all) by reference to appropriate Rules or guidelines for the
preparation o f statements.

Whilst there are and were no specific rules promulgated by the Law Society, the Bar Council has
helpfully produced, but only in 1997, guidance for members of the Bar when instructed to prepare or
settle a witness statement for use in civil proceedings. I attach a copy for reference.

I would readily accept that no lesser standards should apply to solicitors than to members of the Bar
and respectfully submit that this is the Guidance which should form the basis for any judgment as to
whether material was wrongly edited out of the self-taken statements of the officers. However, I
would respectfully point out that as my own conduct is thus being tested by a retrospective
Omces also at:

7 Devonshire Square             Tnnity Court                      Pennine House                   Suite 688 L loyd's                           Avenue Louise 2SO
London                          16 John Dalton Street             39-45 W ell Street              One Lime Street                              1050 Brussels
EC2M 4 YH                       M anchester                       Bradford                        London                                       Belgium
Telephone (0171) 655 1000        M 60 8HS                         B D I 5NU                       EC 3M 7HA                                    Telephone (00) 32 2 627 7676
Fax (0 17 1 )6 5 5 1001          Telephone (0161) 830 5000        Telephone (01274) 734700        Telephone (0 1 7 1 )3 2 73 3 88 /3 39 9      Fax (0 0 ) 32 2 627 7686
                                  F a x (0161) 830 5001           F a x (01274) 307239            Fax (O I7I) 621 1217

A list o f Partners can be viewed at the above address This firm is regulated by the Law Society in the conduct o f investment business.
                                                                                                 2
                                                                                  20 January 1998
                                                    The Right Honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
                                                                        The Hillsborough Scrutiny

application of the Guidance and at a time when no such assistance was available, that it should not
be readily the subject o f criticism.

Without wishing to put a gloss on the Guidance, I submit that the principles to be derived from it for
the purpose o f considering the validity or otherwise of the editing process are as follows:

      (1)     The statement must accurately reflect a witness’s evidence, but exclude inadmissible
              hearsay, comment and argument.

      (2)     It should be succinct, exclude irrelevant material and unnecessary elaboration, and
               should not serve as a commentary on documents.

      (3)     It should contain all the witness’s evidence in chief: it should not be edited so that it
              no longer fairly reflects the answers which the witness would be expected to give in
              response to viva voce examination in chief

      (4)     No material should be excluded which might render the statement anything other than
              the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, e.g. by leaving in fact A while
              excluding fact B in such a way as to render untrue or misleading anything which
              remains in the statement

      (5)     The exclusion o f unfavourable material, other than in such manner as to amount to a
     *        failure to comply with guideline 4, is a matter of judgment.

      (6)     It is permitted and appropriate to draw to a witness’ attention that what he proposes
               to say appears in conflict with other evidence, or may be found by a court difficult to
               accept, but if the witness maintains the evidence, then the guidelines in 1-5 above
               apply.

The context of the vetting was of course the convening of Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and the request for
the provision o f statements. However:

      (1)     The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire had no operational responsibility for
              investigating the events at Hillsborough. This had been passed to the West Midlands
              Police.

      (2)     There were at the time clear indications that there would be major civil proceedings
               arising out o f the disaster and calls for, at least, disciplinary action against police
               officers. A Salmon letter had been delivered detailing a number of criticisms to be
               made o f the police at the Inquiry. The first civil proceedings had been issued and
               served within a week of the disaster and one member of the public had made an
               attempt to persuade Sheffield Justices to issue warrants for the arrest of the Chief
               Constable and the directors of the football club on a charge of manslaughter. The
               application was refused but only after a formal hearing.
                                                                                                   3
                                                                                    20 January 1998
                                                      The Right Honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
                                                                          The Hillsborough Scrutiny

It was clear that any statement submitted to the Inquiry would be available in any subsequent
proceedings. In the circumstances I respectfully submit that there was a duty on the part of my firm
to consider these statements carefully and critically in the light of the principles referred to above, as
the statements, once served, would be bound to be used and available in and for the purpose of all
such proceedings.

I respectfully submit that in the light of the principles, and notwithstanding the one case where I do
believe that I may have made an error of judgment, the specific alterations or reconsiderations
suggested to the statements should not be subject to criticism. I propose to deal below with each of
the suggested alterations referred to in your draft report and also to those referred to by Chief
Superintendent Foster. The exception is the alteration in respect of PC Huckstepp. I have no record
of advising in relation to this officer’s statement (to which there is no reference in any of the letters,
copies of which you have seen) and I do not believe that I did so.

 Before dealing with those statements, I would wish briefly to refer to the one respect in which, in
your draft report, you make a criticism which does not relate to a specific statement, namely in para
15. I do not know if in forming your view of the legal advisers (who of course included Counsel as
well as solicitors) you have considered the question of any advice given to the client in relation to its
conduct of, and approach towards, the hearing, but without such consideration the comment seems
to me somewhat unfair.

I turn to the individual statements (for ease of reference I have taken the chronological order in
which the statements were vetted, by reference to my letters and the individual numbering there
used):-

(1)    Inspector White - 10.5.89 - No 2.1

       The “Additional points arising” which I suggested should be removed amount to comment
       within item 1 of the Guidance as summarised above. Moreover it would not have been
       material covered by examination in chief (item 3).

(2)    PS Crawford - 10.5.89 - No 2.2

       I respectfully submit that the suggestion of review of the comment about manpower was
       entirely justified. The comparative manpower available as between the 1988 and 1989
       semifinals and its deployment was a matter of record through the operational orders which
       had been made available to the Inquiry. The officer’s impressions could not add anything to
       these documents. In my submission this was both comment (iteml) and irrelevant (item 2). I
       am not as happy about the suggestion to review the reference to the serial at the centre
       tunnel. I would accept that this may have been either an error of judgment or simply an error,
       the latter being a possibility if I had mistakenly thought (as I may have done) that this was
       another witness mixing up the practice at League games with that at a semifinal (see (6)
       below and what in due course became the findings of Lord Taylor at paras 170 and 171 of
       his Interim Report). Even in this case I would point out that my recommendation was for the
       evidence to be reviewed and thus not necessarily altered. If I had added a comment of the
       type to be found at 1.12 (PC Parkin) in the same fax then I believe this would have been
                                                                                         4
                                                                          20 January 1998
                                            The Right Honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
                                                                The Hillsborough Scrutiny

satisfactory within item 6 of the Guidance but I accept that that comment was not expressly
added in this case as it could have been.

PC Walpole - 15.5 8 9 - 10.2

I respectfully submit that what PC Walpole did not hear and the significance if any of that
non event can only have been a matter of comment covered by item 1 of the guidance or
irrelevant within item 2.. It was common ground at the Inquiry and found as a fact by Lord
Taylor (Interim Report paras 53 and 303) that radio communications on the day were both
difficult to make out and unreliable.

PC Groome -15.5.89 - 10.6

The reference to Control Room paralysis was plainly comment. PC Groome was not in the
Control box and again reached his conclusions on the basis of what he did not hear. Likewise
the reference to supervisory Officers on pp 4/5. One or more BBC cameras were
continuously focused on the pitch from the time that the game was stopped. There was no
room for argument as to who was or was not on the pitch. In relation to the other points
which are referred to by C/S Foster I think it fair to reproduce what is said in my letter of
advice:

" The numbered paras o f comment beginning on page 5, are helpfulfrom our point o f view,
but not appropriate fo r inclusion in a statement o ffa ct"

I respectfully submit that this was the correct approach in accordance with the Guidance.

This is a statement in respect of which in your draft report there was no criticism, but I
address it because comment is made upon it by C/S Foster.

PC Brookes - 15.5.89- 10.10

I submit that his comments are a mixture of comment and argument, rightly excluded under
the item 1 of the Guidance. Further, his reference to “the sliding doors at the back of the
tunnel” indicated a lack o f direct knowledge of what he was talking about: the doors at the
end of the tunnel were hinged and could never be safely closed whilst there were spectators
in Pens 3 and 4 because they swung inwards towards the pens and if closed, would render
emergency evacuation impossible.

C/I Creaser - 23.5.89 - 20.8

The point which arose with this statement occurred a number of times. It had been explained
to me, I think correctly, that the practice of consecutive filling of pens was adopted at
League games where it was necessary to accommodate both visiting and SWFC supporters
in the Leppings Lane Terrace. This was done for reasons of segregation rather than safety:
the central pens could be left empty to allow a gap and a police presence between the rival
                                                                                         5
                                                                          20 January 1998
                                            The Right Honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
                                                                The Hillsborough Scrutiny

supporters. It was my belief that to leave this passage without comment was to risk raising a
red herring. My actual advice was:

 "...I feel that the comment about the packing o f the pens on page 4 should either be
expanded to include detail o f when (in his experience) this had been done, or the entire
section dealing with this should be deleted. ”

I did not express a view as to which alternative was preferable nor was I consulted about the
course adopted.

PC Woodcock - 30.5.89 - 24.28

As there is no criticism of the changes from yourself or C/S Foster I would respectfully
submit that there is no need for any reference to be made to this statement, nor any response
for me to make.

PC Ramsden - 2.6.89 - 26.12

This statement does not appear in your draft report but only in C/S Foster’s letter. I believe
that the reference to the 1987 semifinal amounts to comment (iteml). Moreover it would not
have formed part of this witness’ evidence in chief (item3). As to C/S Foster’s note I am not
sure that his interpretation is correct, but in any event I did suggest in my letter that the
following sentences also amounted to comment, and if they had been removed the possibility
of error would not have arisen. Whether these sentences were left in because the officer
disagreed with my view or whether this was an oversight I do not know, for, as with all the
statements, after sending the letters I neither dealt with nor saw them again before they were
served.

I submit that the remaining deletions are plainly comment.

PC Eustis- 5.6.89- 26.45

Although I accept that the statement about 1988 is factual there had been little or no
suggestion at the Inquiry that conditions at the 19.88 semifinal had been as described by this
officer. It should be noted that by the time this statement was vetted the fans had already
given evidence to the Inquiry and conditions at the 1988 game had not been a significant
issue. In my submission it was properly excluded both as irrelevant (item 2) and as material
which would not form part of examination in chief (item 3).

PC Powell - 14.6.89 -3 0 1

In rejation to the police numbers this was a matter of record for the reasons stated in respect
of PS Crawford at (2) above. So far as the “cordon"’ was concerned this was phrased as
comment but more importantly it was not at all clear where the cordon is supposed to have
been. This would not have formed part of evidence in chief (item 3).
                                                                                                  6
                                                                                   20 January 1998
                                                     The Right Honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
                                                                         The Hillsborough Scrutiny

It is obviously a matter of considerable concern to me and my firm that you should have formed
provisional critical views o f my performance in relation to the vetting of the statements and I very
much hope that what I say in this response will cause you to re-consider those views. However, I
would in any event respectfully submit the following:-

       (1)    If my conduct is to be criticised it must in justice be so criticised by being set against,
               and if appropriate found wanting against, a specified rule, regulation, requirement or
               standard. I do not believe I am suggested to have been in breach o f contract or
               breach of duty to my client, and so I assume it is against a professional standard that I
               would have offended. As I have indicated, I hope and believe you will not consider
               that I have contravened any rule or fallen below any standard of conduct as a
               solicitor, but if such be in your view the case, I believe it to be only fair that you tell
               me in what respect I have in your view breached or fallen below such rule or
               standard, so that I can meet the case and so that if criticism is deservedly made
               against me, its nature can be fully understood by myself and others.

       (2)    I believe you will accept that it is inevitable that there will be a great deal of media
               and other reaction to your report and thus attention paid to any criticism of me and
               my firm. It is for that reason also that not only do I hope that you will be able to feel
               that no such criticism is justified, but also that if it be justified, the nature of the
               relevant breach can be specifically identified.

   •   (3)    I do believe that it is only by spelling out the rule or standard against which my
                conduct is being judged that it can be clearly concluded whether or not my conduct
                should be criticised or whether, for example if there were any error, it be an error of
               judgment.

       I would respectfully request that in reaching your final conclusions the following three points
       would also be of material significance:-

       (1)    On the basis o f your provisional findings there is adverse comment to be made in
              relation to a maximum of seven out of over 400 statements which I considered.
              These statements were dealt with under intense pressure initially whilst preparations
              were being made for the Taylor Inquiry and thereafter whilst the Inquiry was
              underway. It was not a matter for delegation because of the need to try and maintain
              a consistent approach. If it is your finding that there were errors I would request that
              your report makes clear that they ought to be viewed in that context.

       (2)    On the basis of your draft findings (paras 16 and 17) no alteration to any statement
              made the slightest difference to the outcome of the Taylor Inquiry or any subsequent
              decision of the DPP or those looking into matters of police discipline. Again if there
               is a finding that errors were made I would request that any such finding be placed
               clearly in that context.

       (3)    In each o f these cases the product of the vetting process was not a deletion or change
               made by me, but advice given in the letters, copies of which you have seen: such
                                                                                                 7
                                                                                  20 January 1998
                                                    The Right Honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
                                                                        The Hillsborough Scrutiny

               advice, as can be seen from those letters, often invited review or in some cases
               offered the option of deletion or expansion and in many cases was not followed, no
               doubt after consideration of it. From that point of view also I would ask you to
               conclude that there has been no contravention of the principles underlying the
               Guidance.

I do hope that you will feel that if there are statements in respect of which no complaint is to be
made they can, like the other 390 or so, be simply omitted from your report; and I o f course
particularly further hope that in the light of this response you will feel able to say that my conduct
should notbe the subject of complaint. But if, after due consideration you still feel as you express in
para 14 of the draft report, I would invite you to consider whether that in your view amounts to an
error of judgment or to a specific allegation of breach of the (subsequently introduced) Guidance or
otherwise, and if so in what respect, namely so that I and others can understand what if any
complaint is being made against me; in either event I would ask you to give me notice so that I can
make further submissions in respect o f any such specific findings.

Yours sincerely
  „ __________________.       / O ________


P C METCALF




                                                                                mmi.OO 1-0103 .let1.2001 pcm.doc
               PR E PA R IN G W IT N E S S STA TEM EN TS FO R
                      U S E IN CIVIL P R O C E E D I N G S
                                    D E A L IN G S W ITH W IT N E S S E S

                          GUIDANCE FOR MEMBERS O F THE BAR

          Introduction.

          1.   The purpose of this paper, which has the approval of the Professional Standards Committee of the General
               Council of the Bar, is to offer guidance to members of the Bar instructed to prepare or settle a witness
               statement and as to dealings with witnesses. Guidance already exists for practice in some Courts, notably
               paragraph 3.7 of the Chancery Guide, Part XIV of the Guide to Commercial Court Practice and the Notes
               to RSC Order 38 Rule 2A in the White Book, to which attention Is drawn. The intention is that this paper
               should be consistent with that guidance.

flr       2.   This guidance is not applicable to criminal proceedings.       Attention is drawn to Annex H to the Code of
 n             Conduct.



          Witness statements

          3.   The cardinal principle that needs to be kept in mind when drafting or settling a witness statement is that,
               when the maker enters the witness box, he or she will swear or affirm that the evidence to be given will be
               the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth. In most civil trials almost the first question in ch'ref (and
               not infrequently the last) will be to ask the witness to confirm, to 1he best of his belief, the accuracy of the
               witfffess statement. It is therefore critical that the statement is one that accurately reflects, to the best of
               Counsel's ability, the witness's evidence.

          4.   Witnesses often misunderstand the function of those drafting and settling witness statements.             The
               function of Counsel is to understand the relevant evidence that a witness can give and to assist the witness
               to express that evidence in writing. It is important it is made clear to the witness (by reminder to the
               professional client or the witness, if seen by Counsel) that the statement once approved is the witness's
      i        statement. Ultimately it is the witness’s responsibility to ensure that the evidence he gives is truthful. It is
               good practice to remind witnesses expressly of this from time to time, especially where Counsel i$ putting
               forward a particular piece of drafting for the witness' consideration (which is expressly permitted by the
               proviso to Rule 606 of the Code of Conduct).

          5.   It is not Counsel's duty to vet the accuracy of a witness’s evidence1. We all may doubt the veracity of our
               clients and witnesses occasionally. Counsel is, of course, entitled and it may often be appropriate to draw
               to the witness's attention other evidence which appears to conflict with what the witness is saying and is
               entitled to indicate that a Court may find a particular piece of evidence difficult to accept. But If the witness
               maintains the evidence, it should be recorded in the witness statement. If it is decided to call the witness,
               it will be for the Court to judge the correctness of the witness's evidence.

          6.   It follows that the statement:

                (i)   Must accurately reflect the witness's evidence. Rule 606(d) of the Code of Conduct slates:

                            “ A practising barrister must not devise facts which will assist in advancing his lay client's case
                            and must not diaft any ... affidavit [or] witness statem ent... containing:
                             (d)   in the case of an affidavit or witness statement any statement of fact other than the
                                   evidence which in substance according to his instructions the barrister reasonably
                                   believes the witness would give If the evidence contained in the affidavit or witness
                                   statement were being given viva voce ;
                          Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall prevent a barrister drafting a [n ]a ffid a v it or witness
                          statement containing specific facts matters or contentions Included by the barrister subject to the lay
                          riiont'c confirmation
                          client's rnnfirmatioft as to their accuracv.-
                                                             accuracy.

                   Must not contain any statement which Counsel knows the witness does not believe to be true Nor should
     (ii)          the witness be placed under any pressure to provide other than a truthful account of his evidence.


     (iii)         Must contain all the evidence which a witness could reasonably be expected to give in answer to those - y
                   questions which would be asked of him in examination In chief. The witness statement e h ^ ld n c * fa e ^ g ||
                   drafted or edited so that it no longer fairly reflects the answers which the witness would bp e x p e n d to give
                   in response to viva voce examination-ln-chief in accordance with the witness s oalh car affirmation.               .:
                   Although it is not the function of a witness statement to answer such questions as might be pul in cross-
                   examination, great care should be exercised when excluding any material which is thoughtto^beunhejpfyl
                   to the party calling the witness and no material should be excluded which might render the stafertvsnt
                    anything other than the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth. While it as permissible to confine
                    the scope of examination-in-chief to part only of the evidence which a witness could give that is always
                    subject to Counsel's overriding duty to assist the Court in the administration of justice and not to deceive
                    or knowingly or recklessly to mislead the Court (Rule 202 of the Code of Conduct). Consequently, it woutd
                    be improper to exclude material whose omission would render untrue or mideadlhg anything w h ^ i
                    remains in the statement. It would also be Improper to include fact A while
                    in-chief containing fact A but excluding fact B could not have been given consistently                   S     # •
                    p ro rT a t o t r t the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth. Whether It w wise r t t t l
                    Interest in any given case to exclude unfavourable material which can properly be excluded is a matter of
                      judgment.

      (iv)            Save lor formal matters and uncontroversial facts, should be expressed a , fa , lis
                      the witness’s own words. This is especially important when the s ta te m e n t* deabngwith U tt c n ta l
                      factual issues in the case - e.g. the accident or the disputed conversation. Thus the statement should
                      reflect the witness's own description of events. It should not be drafted or edited so as to massage d
                      obscure the witness’ real evidence.

                      Must be confined to admissible evidence that the witness can give, including permissible hearsay.
                      Inadmissible hearsay, comment and argument should be excluded.

        (vi)          Should be succinct and exclude irrelevant material. Unnecessary-elaboration, Istcibe w * M . It is not
                      the function of witness statements to serve as a commentary on the documents in the trial bundles. Nor
                       are they intended to Serve as another form of written argument.

        Sometimes it becomes apparent, after a Witness statement has been served that                                          •
        altered This may happen When the witness sees how another witness puts the facte in a w ttriessstalem «r .
        served by another party. Where Counsel learns that the witness has had am ater.al change                              ■
        should be recorded in an additional witness statement to be served on the other p a r t i e s . W h ^ e tm s .s rK rt
        possible because it occurs veiy shortly before the witness Is to be called, the other parties should be “tonne
        ITd l ? SSSSSt cSrreded in chief before the truth of its contents is established. It would be ^ p ro p erfo r the
         other    to be kept in the dark as to a material change in the witness’s evidence especially when settlement
            negotiations are taking place.



Formalities

8.           A witness statement:

             (i)        Should be expressed in the first person;

                        Must state the full name of the witness and, unless there is a good reason                 1 u           tional
             C«)        residential address or, where the statement is made in a professional, busmess o r j °
                        capacity the address at which he works, the position held and the name of the firm or employer,
                        there is said to be a reason for omitting the witness’s address, the reason should be given.

              (iii)     M ust state the witness's occupation (if any);
     *   (rv)     Must state if the witness is a party to the proceedings or has a connection, with any .party - e.g. is an
                  employee e ra relative;

         (v)      Should be in chronological sequence divided into consecutively numbered paragraphs;

         (vi)     Must include a statement by the witness that the contents are true to the best of his/her knowledge and
                  belief;                                                            <v,

         (vii)    Except for good reason (which must be stated) must be signed by the witness;

         (viii)   M ust be dated.



Dealings with Witnesses
Counsel seeing witnesses2.

9.       The old rules preventing Counsel from seeing a witness, other than the client, have been progressively related
         over recent years. The current position in dvij proceedings can be summarised as follows:

         (i)      There is no longer any rule which prevents a barrister from having contact with any witness. Indeed, in '

U                 taking witness statements and generally, it is the responsibility of a barrister, especially when the witness •
                  is nervous, vulnerable or apparently the victim of criminal or similar conduct, to ensure that those facing
                  unfamiliar court procedures are put as much at ease as possible.

         (ii)      Although there is no longer any rule which prevents a barrister from having contact with witnesses, a
                   barrister should exercise his discretion and consider very carefully whether and to what extant euch
                   contact is appropriate, bearing in mind in particular that it is not the barrister’s function (but that of his
                   professional client) to investigate and collect evidence.

          (iii)   The guiding principle must be the obligation of Counsel to promote and protect his lay client’s best
                  fhterests so far as that is consistent with the law and with Counsel’s overriding duty to the Court (Code of
                   Conduct paragraphs 202, 203). Often it will be in the client’s best interests that Counsel should meet
                   witnesses whose evidence will be of critical importance in the case, so as to be able to loim a view as to
                   the credibility of their evidence and to advise the fay client property;

          (iv)     A barrister should be alert to the risks that any discussion of the substance of a case with a witness may
                   lead to suspicions of coaching, and thus tend to diminish the value of the witness’s evidence in the eyes
                   of the court or may place a barrister in a position of professional embarrassment, for example, if he
                   thereby becomes himself a witness In the case. These dangers are most likely to occur if euch discussion
                   takes place:

                   (a)    before the barrister has been supplied with a proof of the witness's evidence; or

                   (b)    in the absence of the barrister’s professional client or his representative.

           (v)     Rule 607 of the Code of Conduct provides that a barrister must not rehearse practise or coach a witness
                    In relation to his evidence or the way in which he should give it. This does not prevent Counsel giving
                    general advice to a witness about giving evidence e.g. speak up, speak slowly, answer the question, keep
                    answers as short as possible, ask if a question is not understood, say if you cannot remember and do not
                    guess or speculate. Ndr is there any objection to testing a witness's recollection robustfy to asoertain the
                    quality of his evidence or to discussing the issues that may arise In cross-examination. By contrast, mock
                     cross-examinations or rehearsals of particular lines of questioning that Counsel proposes to follow are not
                     permitted. What should be borne in mind is that there is a distinction, when interviewing a witness,
                     between questioning him closely in order to enable him to present his evidence fully and accurately dr in
                     order to test the reliability of his evidence (which is permissible) and questioning him wflh a view to
                     encouraging the witness to alter, massage or obscure his real recollection (which is not). The distinction
                     was neatly drawn by Judge Francis Finch in In Re Eldridge3 in 1880. where he said:

                           “While a discreet and prudent attorney may very property ascertain from witnesses in advance of
                    the trial what they in fact do know and the extent and limitations of their memory, as guide for his
                    own examinations, he has no right legal or moral, to go further. His duty is to extract the facts from
                    the witness, not to pour them into him; to leam what the witness does know, not to teach him what
                    he ought to know.*'

             At the risk of stating the obvious, this is a difficult area calling for the exercise of careful judgment.

     (vj)    A barrister should also be alert to the fact that, e\/en in the absence of any wish or Intention to do so,
             authority figures do subconsciously influence lay witnesses. Discussion of the substance of the case
             may unwittingly contaminate the witness’s evidence.

     (vji) There is particular danger where such discussions:

             (a)    take place in the presence of more than one witness of tael; or

             (b)    involve the disclosure to one witness of fact of the factual evidence of another witness.

             These practices have been strongly deprecated by the courts as tending inevitably to encourage the
             rehearsal or coaching of witnesses and to increase the risk of fabrication or contamination of evidence:
             R. v. A rif{\ 993) May 26; Smith N ew Court Securities Ltd v. Sctimgeour Vickers (Asset Management) Lift
             [1994] 1 WLR 1271.

     (viii) That is not to suggest that it is always inappropriate to disclose one witness’s evidence to another. If
             conflicting witness statements have been obtained from'different witnesses or servedby thp other side,
             it is almost inevitable that a witness’s attention must be drawn to discrepancies between statements.
             Discretion is. however, required, especially where the evidence of independent Witnesses Is involved.

     (ix)    Whilst there is no rule that any longer prevents a barrister from taking a witness statement in civil cases,
              there is a distinction between the settling of a witness statement and taking a witness statement. Save
              in exceptional circumstances, it is not appropriate fo ra barrister who has taken witness statements, as'
            0 opposed to settling witness statements prepared by others, to act as Counsel in that case becau.se it
              risks undermining the independence of the barrister as an advocate. Exceptional circumstances would
              include:

              (a)    The witness is a minor one;

              (b)    Counsel has no choice but to take the proof and this is the only practical course in the interests
                     of justice - this would apply, for Instance, where a witness appears unexpectedly at Court and
                     there is no one else competent to take the statement;                                            ^

              (c)    Counsel is a junior member of a team of Counsel and will not be examining the witness.

              The Cab Rank rule does not require a barrister to agree to undertake the task of taking witness
              statements.

      (x)     A barrister should be prepared to exchange common courtesies with the other side's witnesses.
              However, a barrister should only discuss the substance of the case or any evidence with the other side's
              witnesses in rare and exceptional circumstances and then only with the prior knowledge of his
              opponent.




'   If para 3.6(7) of the Chancery Guide suggests otherwise, the PSC respectfully disagrees.
1 This is largely taken from Annex H as recently am ended by the Bar Council and approved by the Lord Chancellor's
  Advisory Committee on Legal Education and Conduct and the designated judges.
3   New York Court of Appeals; 37 N Y 161, 171
     FEB   f St                                                                          PASE. Q01




                                                          SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                          CRIMINAL JUSTICE ADMIN DEPT
                                                         RICHFIELD HOUSE
                                                         SNIG HILL
                                                         Sh e f f i e l d
                                                   "     S3 s ly                .* ...




                       extemsi                                 FAX Externa?'
                       internal £xi.                           -AA interns!




                                       f a c s im il e   tra n s m is s io n




               C s t e : ________________ t o - 2 - ^ y

            To:

            For the attention cf: —          ?   C         K




           F                     M a ^ _ U d L l .

           Number-of pages (including this page);
                                                                       M    -




i0   FEB   ’ 38   10:5?                                                                  PF1QE . 0 0 i
                                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


                                                       REF:        LS/APWi

FROfvl; Alan Walker, Force Solicitor                   DCU/DEPT:   Legal Services

"I O:    PC K Greenaway                                EXT:        8780

         CONFIDENTIAL                                  DATE;       10 February 1998



SUBJECT:              H ILLS B O R O U G H :   PUBLICATION OF EVIDENCE



I enclose a copy of a tetter dated 9 February 1998 addressed to the Chief Constable from Mr Paul
Pugh, head of Operational Policing Policy Unit. It is self-explanatory, i would be grated..? for an
opportunity to discuss this with you as soon as possible.
                                                         '
    , a   pp                                                                                                                                             PAGE, 0 0 3
          09 FEE



                                                                                                                          Monte Office
                               sCt         t5v           -rv x i u r a t e
                                                                                                                          50 Queer* Anne's Gate,
                                                                                                                          London SWlH 9 A T „„,
               i ^ P;                                                                                                     Teteahonc:
                                                                                                                          fax*,'
                                   o ,: O p e r a t i o n a l r o H d n g Poiicry U n i t f.O P P U i




           Ri;"'“‘ivirci WsSis Esq OHM rM iOxon) C! Mgt                                                       W cvO ^            '-y-w
                                                                                                                                                            -A-                    ■
                   ■ Berkshire Police


                                                                                                        9 February ic ,                ^ " v‘*
                                                                                                                                                                  (X         **
                                                                                                                                                            )
                                                                                                                           ,    j      -
                                                 ®&w''
                                                                                                                                                           'ft A(l 2
                                                 • ?UBUC*>T!ON OP SVtDENCE                                                     .a’JN
                                                                                                                                           Tpu.
                                                                                                                       'W^S'V              N-•'->-v'•.
                                                             t'.‘,..i,on on some documents which were w r t- ■                                              *y         I-'
                                                                          mutiny.
                                                                                                                                                                       JkA^.ci
                                                                  ■•     ,-y announced the scrutiny, he so-     -.-si
                                                            :v-or ■ ,. as far as possible, make public l.r.- --u e r
                     n-n,                  '           . ,,d. Most of the key material considered by ih t -• - v :' ■
                                                    -die         his report, which will of course be pubiisneu. ;vkh,n
                                                  • ■■■?&\       he con^-^recl is already in the public domain, n F:b                                                  t          'f
                                                    ■jblic proceec»n9s or other published material
                                                                                                                                                                                  (A'

1                              •                  -ixuments, whicn the Judge considered which, as far as t am
■                                  '             pre-vteuaiy been mad® publicly available. Some of these ,are                                                                           .
■
                                                  are technically the property of South Yorkshire polic®, ana in


                     (!)            trie statements made by South Yorkshire police officers which the
                                   Judge refers to in part 2 of chapter 4 of his w o r n Some a rt co .nined
'                                  ;n Appendix 7, &ut the great majority are not.
!
                      : :          the South Yorkshire police operations! ordets for the 1988 arid
                                   FA Cup serrn-ftnais at Hillsborough,

                      flii}        the report produced by David Phillips, then deputy „Mef constable cf
                                   Devon and Cornwall in August 1990,

                      (iv)         ihe report prepared by Mr Noe! Burns considered by the Judge ir»
                                   chapter 6 of the report,




    1-0 KFB        ....... "           '           '                  ■                                            •                             • P ME . ;
F EB        *98     I;:--'-'-:-                                             PAGE.




  When the report is published the Home Secretary will want relevant material which is
  not otherwise in the public domain to be placed in the Library of the House o f
  Commons. The documents would therefore not be “published" in the conventional
  sense, but, through being available to Members of Parliament, They would in
  practice be pubiioiy available,

             . . oe grateful if you would let me know urgently if you consider that there any
   v   ..    .-,3 why the documents to which I have referred should not be placed in the
            ary of the House.

  I would be grateful also for clarification on your approach to video tape materia! held
  by South Yorkshire police, The Judge’s report makes dear that the police tapes
  181, TB2, TBS, and T84 were made available in their entirety to trie Taylor inquiry,
  and were available for inspection by the representatives of ail parties. In that sense,
  they have already been in the public domain, They have also previously been
  available by South Yorkshire police to Yorkshire Television, I assume therefore that
  there can be no objection to maieriai from these tapes being made available if it
  were re q u ite d .

 I understand that tape VRM2 is a tape of what happened in the mortuary at the
 ground. It setm s to me therefore that it would be quite inappropriate for it to be
 made puWdy avaiiiWe. I understand, however, that on request from relatives from
 victims. South Yorkshire pcifce are prepared to provide still pictures taken from mis
 tup# of MvfcfcMl victims to ®vt n t a ^ s of those victims. Perhaps you ccute confirm
 tftiA tfMft ufictewtaBXfing is oofTveL

 In natation to other rrwtwial ©brained by the scrutiny from South Yorkshire police,
 and in particular the body files relating to individual victims, i do not think that any
 question of making the material pubiiciy available arises.




                                           PAUL PUGH
                                                                                                       PAGE. 0 8 3


09 FEB               '98       I* <02 HO PE DIVISION 0171 273 -2?03                                        P. US.


                                                                                          Home Office
                     Police Policy Directorate
                                                                                          SO Queen Anne’s-^ate,
                                                                                          London SWIH 9AT*"
                     Paul Pugh                                                            Telephone;
                                                                                          rax;




               'onstabte
               Yorkshire Police


                                                                       9 February 1S98 /
                                                 19

                                                                                                                        ^

                                                                                      W -^ Jb
 HsllSBOROUGH: PUBLICATION OF EVIDENCE                                                V^cLi            1“ 4"


                          ,:a®fy| for clarification on some documents      w h ic h   were considered
         ,-rc Jus        „ Stuait-Smith during his scrutiny.

         . vou know, when the Home Secretary announced the scrutiny, he sen,-
                   •'■■■h the judge's report and, is far as possible, make public the w x
                          ';e considered. Most of the key material considered by the J u ^ .-
                            ;■* Appendices to njs report, which will of course be published. Muon
                                 . ,r ..3i wh,:*h he wonsidered is already in the public domain, in the

             / jiariseripit Gt pyoiic proceedings or other published material,

There are some documents, which the Judge considered which, as far as * -
aware Have not previously been made public1’/ available. Some of these ■*-
documents which are technically the property ... South Yorkshire, police, and
particular the following;

               ff)           the statements made by South Yorkshire police officers which the
                             Judge *©fers to in part 2 of chapter 4 of his report. Some are contained
                             in App«r-i'ix 7 but in?5 great majority are not,
                                            ,                                    £ U -5\,v d r\V c •^

               00             the South Yorkshire police operational orders for the 1388 arid l «....:
                              FA Cap semi-finals at Hillsborough,


                              Devon and O -        <r .u^yst 1090.

               (tv)           the report or»par»d. by Mr Noel Sums uansidered by the                           ;r.
                              chapter u



•l”.-'   - %    •    >   ’l&Ar*rl.Hrt
                                                                                                       PfiCiE , 0f;1i
1 1 FEB    ’ 9fcj   15:d9                                                                        PPGE. 0U4
              ,*     s«a    hu ^   UivXi-lU li UJL i i. - | ‘ S i . U j                               r . _    w

           /

       When the report is published the Home Secretary will want relevant material which V
       not otherwise in the public domain to be placed in the Library of the House of
       Commons. The documents would therefore not be “published” in the conventional
       sense, but, through being avaiiabie to Members of Parliament They would in
       practice be pubiidy available.                                     ^ ,

       I would be grateful if you would let me know urgently if you consider that there any
       reasons why the documents to which I have referred should not be placed in the
       Library of the House.

       1would be grateful also for clarification on your approach to video-tape material held -,
       by Souu Yorkshire police. The Judge’s report makes dear that the police tapes
       TB1> TB2, TB3, and TB4 were made available in their entirety to the Taylor Inquiry,
       and were available for inspection by the representatives of ail ^arties. In that sense,
       they have aiready been in the public domain. They have also previously been
       available by South Yorkshire police to Yorkshire Television, i assume therefore that
       there can be no objection to materiai from these tapes being made avaiiabie if it
       were requested.

       I understand that tape VRM2 is a tape of what happened in the mortuary at the
       ground. It seems to me therefore that it would be quite inappropriate for it to be
       made pubiidy avaiiabie. I understand, however, that on request from relatives from
       victims, South Yorkshire police are prepared to provide still pictures taken from this
       tape of individual victims to the relatives of those victims. Perhaps you could confirm
       that that understanding is correct

       In relation to other material obtained by the scrutiny from South Yorkshire police,
       and in particular the body files relating to individual victims, ! do not think that any
       question of making the material pubiidy available arises.




                                                PAUL PUGH




                                                                            ;:i ; 'i   f UT HL   F1Pi !-:i F . L) 0 4   ::r-' +
11   FEB   ’ 98     14:35                                                                        PAGE.0 0 4
    i 1 F EB   ’y0    1 5 : 3&                                                                   PAGE. 00£



                                         SOUTH YORKSHiRE POLICE


                                                               REF:          AW|

         FROM'        Alan Walker                            DCU/DEPT:       Force Solicitor, CJAD

         TO:          Discipline and   Complaints Department          EXT:   8780
                      PC K Greenaway
                                                               DATE:         11 February, 1998



         SUBJECT:          HILLSBOROUGH • PUBLICATION OF EVIDENCE

         l refer to the telephone conversation on 11 February 1998 and to Mr Pugh's letter dated 9
         February 1998. It would be helpful if you were to supply to ACC Mr I Daines comments upon the
         items specifically referred to in Mr Pugh's letter; whether they should be placed on deposit or any
         difficulties which you foresee arising from their content. These are items (i) - (iv) and the tapes
0        TB1 - TB4 (inclusive) and VRM2

         Mr Daines returns to Headquarters on Thursday 12 February 1993.

         I should be grateful if you would pass a copy of your comments directly to him.




          Ian Walker
         *orce Solicitor
         Criminal Justice Administration Department




    i 1 FEB    ’ 98   14 : 3 4                                                                   PAGE. 0 0 2
11   FEB   ’ 9E                                                                                             PAGE. ee i




                                                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE FG U C E
                                                                  CRIMINAL JUSTICE AOMIN DEPT
                                                                  RICHFIELD HOUSE
                                                                  SNIG HILL
                                                                  SHEFFIELD
                                                             ' S3 SLY                       ..   .




                  ®       External                                  FAX External

              *3?         internal £xt                              FAX internal



                                              FACSjIWILg TRANSMfS3?nM



             Dste:                     l i          2     - 9/ #

            To:                 /P
                                 'C          K '.                        UO gu<l/                       f




            For the attention or                        ± J 2 r^ P h x s /i,ts          Y        ■Ifc u /t,


           Comments:                                          '




                                   „


           Frcm:                PrQ/yI y /j,
           Number or pages (inducting this page}:                                  /l




11   FEB   "-J8       14 : 34                                                                               PAGE.001
    05   my         '98     11=08 HO F2 DIVISION 0171 273 2703                                             P. 2/2



                                                                                              4>                   ->•
                                                                                                     *        •



         y S{/PP0^                                                                                   Supptf?”
                                     Hillsborough Family Support Group

                                                   Pioneer Building
                                                    67 Dale Street
                                                  Liverpool L2 2NS
                                                 Tel: 0151 236 1919
                                                 Fax: 0151 236 1936


           May 1998


         Matthew J Pyne
         Home Office
         Operational Policing Policy unit
         50 Queen Anne’s Gate
         London SW1H9AT


         Dear Sir

         Further to my letter ot 24 April 1998, the following statements are also missing:-

         NUMBER:                NAME:


     d                                                                                          v
         30' -"L        C       Morgan 758 ~ *

         6 )                    McKay Graham
                                                                                                     S'
                                                                                                             J     1
         I look forward to an early response.


         Yours faithfully                                                            >          <                  n     '



         Ann Arlington
         Solicitor
CHAIRM AN
                                                 VICE-CHAIRMAN / SECRETARY                    treasurer
T. Hicks                                         P. Hammond                                   Mrs.       Tm ynor
Fern Hill Barn                                   21 Rosemom Road                              43 Gorsefield Road
Nev/hou.sc Lane, Long Presion                    Liverpool                                    Birkenhcud
Skipton BD2.-, 4QU                               L17 6BX                                      Merseyside
Tel/Fax; 01729-X40840                            Tel/Fax: 0151-724 5771                       Tel: 0151-652 7503
Mobile; 0973-411051                              Mobile: 0589-324121
05 MRY      '98   11:08 HO F2 DIVISION 0171 273 2703                                   P. 1/2



         H o m e O ffic e
         Operational Policing Policy Unit
         50 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AT
         Switchboard: 0171 273 4000 Fax; 0171 273 2703 Direct Line:




 To:          Ch. Insp. Chris Thompson


 From:        M JP y n e


 Date:        5 May 1998                       Time:




 Number of pages (including this one)


 M essage
 Subject:         HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY - POLICE STATEMENTS


 I enclose a letter from Ann Adlington, acting for the Hillsborough Family Support Group,
 enquiring about three police statements which are apparently missing from the ones released to the
 Group and placed in the House of Comons Library. Can you let me know whether you have any
 trace of them?

 There is to be a debate on Hillsborough in the House of Commons this Friday, so an early reply
 would be helpful.




                   IF ANY PART OF THIS FAX IS UNCLEAR
                     PLEASE TELEPHONE: 0171 273 2433
                                                          Discipline & Complaints Department
              South Yorkshire
                                                          50 Windsor Road

              POLICE                                      Heeley
                                                          SHEFFIELD S8 8 UB
              JUSTICE wi t h C O U R A G E


TELEPHONE:

FAX: 0114 296 3020

INTERNAL FAX: 3020


                             Facsimile Transmission

Date:

To:

For the attention of:          ku      WL- T>AnN5M

Comments:            ^                                                            ^
                                                                                  W        ! !--o



                  w      - M      V   '^ '1 T         ^                       ,       j,
                         t            le tt U   , ^       ^                  ..


                                                              ^(, -yA/tb't




From:                        lL                  3

Telephone Number:

Number of Pages (including this page)                     ^   ^

In the event of a poor copy, please contact:-
South Yorkshire Police - Discipline & Complaints Department
Telephone Number - Direct Line                   Internal Extension 3002
Q^^cXjsi>y^a\         r^'TMX             ro W t4 j
5"0                       Pre**~»4is*\
 4>hu



              $W


 • V W lJ lo W m ^              ^ 'g.»A‘'u llju M
                                                fc.wj        ** 1$ ^ 1#M>+*d$eA



 4"    *4<^
                                           f^i% dj’ '4 ^.       £                  £^f-m*t>m       *JU*A "4***+- n.<#            -^&s^


  A i - '- H t v      Jv * * * 5 |             p a y .4 c ^ < W          $       t% ^ A

 S^JL & i |          & * # & & & ’ <J|                              ^ U w U fc i-                     |m U -                                 &M


  gbw w *            £*                                     ^ " " ^ s — *•■■ # o * * * ...           $/




                                                                                      #m>Bi.'| mi■ii4w#<!iy^1 ^ ■ ■ ■<■11               Quiff

      tte

                                                                                                                                     Cm M

      $ Q ^ t* 4 o    & > yrd*K i              & j4 t w            s tu fr t*           Q^Aes»>Cc*fr                                               ***
                                                                                * *
       7&9*f •k& Agy                                                                          /K » * * /« 4 f      /V /3              * / £-3 V-

      Y ^0                                                ^ 4 v M !V            t^ ^ C .    *M|n»         A ^ j^ tS + e * *    -«C#*e*       c*4&x*
                          /& 9 it6 & L <             **    W o**        - ^ 5                                 Jl                            /U std e ^n g j
                     fS \ 3 o fa jo s                 *^67          ,                      v£e-»«-        yu**^nA           /^ 4 v     >4
        ■* • *         x s w , *                     -« * ,         p                                           ^
                      S* e. »»■>•                           hx~                                      p




                            f 4          a**sJL *d't(9 &n^Coi~4L                   & & f* us<*
                                              c CCc/L           f4 Qt- 4dH> - PflvM .

                                   /v\oO>i'T£0                  S££T/c*i             C O ^A A O ^             .


                                  O P ^A T to ^i                     t)ivtSf o«vi    // £ t&           fa u n

I             /)/">          (                                       -j-f\£(?£LToT-           tt-i          CMAQC.(             s£~       aj£             f°&c£

I   (Aoo^-rfcO              S£<^Vo**'                   3^         A*"'           A*S<-J££4&t,t              To          Tu(               S ^ ££^ T f nC ^T

| cPmT< OA1-,                 Q)tuafo^                        G-t                         aa/        -5 =         oay       /Ou^^ac                  ^        r«c

|   S^An CM            li                M/            >#cr            Q££?o*iS(GiLnV-t

    X          d{C,W^Ald                  &~TTtrt£>             tiJL              foCXMU-              M 4TO ffj          I*            T «(J             C aoriT ir
j
j   4 ^         ^           M/M*              fo t ,fc 6 D           )0T           Uiu-\Q<&6                 C*         t'/*« Y         OC£_AS(0**S          .      3 :


    ujM               0^          D^T/                 fo1_        77<£           PQ£\li&Oi               T'*-^o         jcAff _                            AT

    k(uti Qj-io v

I   jH o u ^ T K i               5 tC T (0 ^                                    falY (*£.         As*               fi>~,&>rcAfrr             p/$x          JD^


j T«£               o 'JtQMt-                 £p££jrr<oM                    Aiit            ohu/            cW£           ' Co^ ' /r/                 7#^-        ^ecc

    Tui         1) z/ Pl &                    /          <&          U&40            at          Ti/£             Ctoj.vO          A>2-         Thu              yiM i

    SfcM< -                              i^ia4                ^-co2£        <62-                                               •        cxJ?¥ ^
        ^2^V v© v»i                  -



I       oua           S£cf<©*                     oc            (%
                                                                 >                           u              c<3NuO£e£o                 to o           sm h * _         to


        C o9t          ui,~k               TKL                -SQ£          .<£        TV£            C ^ ^ T ro A i ■             Aj           <W                     ©tf j

        y&AflJ               ’ /Hvm.oc                       4(0 ’          U-»<XJ            ioo<;w-                   fa.o!-\
        X             «Ci£                 “ <>               gzjMC                         ^ T it l                               &2o,k             £ oT-m

        A I £ 2 -i^ /S (9 i;                                       r+oTT 1                                        To                                          o jC


        s'tq. ^ ctu          ,       Tkjf                                                        cA          Ko^a                  'De^&yto


; ij^ '                     fMA<                  1^           ^                                 ^'OM^                   &AfC<-~taY             iTATfars/               i3<viO

i       ^ 3j                                             ttPsOfiO           \THl £ /             —   i—      wA i           Ho     <            $MLTY             i_   «a

        fj^jC               D£C(Sfo*^i                               To             T tff            T o T f lC ,        fSoA^>£-iJ


!       Tw?                &(r            D £ fL-oVtb ■                    IE                         /2fS &>/•*/<($,_£     ^          Of>4C£            Ti/£-

I       To~tAC                    NoHj£4-                                           P^C(9t^                                    /^,Q_            7 ^ ^
fW             ^           T^           00/      O'           T^           /wrrc^t            x           £tC&(vvO                ^Y            ©«->o
O ^/           c/          off<3rr,o/sr^                <£064-                 ^     i/s ^                 X            Merrfo             r^ e

/2tto^w^Ot0                    0tPL&Yn(*-zt                   A&o^O                ~Hk             c^oqcmO            8^~        x          A*.©^ /(6£>

TUcI       ACco^i^C                                My            ©‘■Ui'J           &^fe2f^f4ci                   A*®           ic/siot-ot,tO<;£

tA        u^fct-/                ‘T'OooO.U                SAsTS •              M/            S4T.          £o2SG>V          W<w            <:c^ccrt0

pcA       K<A           vl(tUv/l                          To^, t~H£^L                '^ i            A^Otf-O            <jPo-A             £’*->'t-

Df^cey^tAiT -                    -Kf          ATZZk DcQ              TKc           ftANKii^C               Mct7<w<                CW

J D '49   f^ASCR                 l^s               /sr           ^^(^c'Qrco^                       A^aD *          n           «-fA^         CWA^Cf

To        iflTT^O .
RsoaduY                5P&W(/<            p'y         PfPuO/ME-jTr                                   0&J6D             oPa^x          T«(f
               pJCoaT            a-        £flMS           fWrw             To           ^         sCQOA-v       tW(f          C-SoO^O            AfiJ£>


 AS$(ST<a<,            T«£<2_                         6ifi2‘/       ! &\~ .          UJ^            /RS=>         i^cfP                     cYt
                                fu J.UC            O’
                                                    lQ&i                 SiTu,0T < ^                ^yitCH              r\i<;^-        ~£>£\iti-e,a

 A^o       ^                   « < Tw       ,- ?          ^         (T                   .

_J_       oitD             ou2.          M £ ^ / fl0 ,               Ko^                 ar           -«*                d e-m ^ r              Ui.vt

 ^ 0               ^           <wt        42ocjP                uut>               N o r r,^ //^                   <£tca&d

 Ptr*iSToi^t              /2oCUi -         N&Wc            £p       Ttfd           /MorwX.             A(Q '              Cstftc&J

 <-*o>2U£0                        Th£i2.         ow^ ,                Ttffc/         ^t^t'                             y3Co>/S04/v<<t£)                £y

^ouT«           y'oOtclfK^               /'.\0<J/^'T£'0             £p£f C<£2-$ >

fNi ((£6ty                /o           tfc&ati          !-*£i£             *>£H?<_&v'£o              cw                /%Aiar&-kd            A*xo

 UMDtU-            Tk,!          CO/-VMAfJO                   v^'           £<>7-                            (s ' y°Q.<<i^ .               S'     (tc&JfS
               4 *•              <-K£            uew ^                   <-iW£        ^ \j0           u n £>£^          7>ft          c^^'ha.m ?

o£             S^T ■           Tfteoi^S (' £ . / o ^ j ,]                  ^             ‘-‘*'1'                                           £«,c

 £koffiA/1HS                                     £ioM                    U4DJC.P/             ^«2(P4£                 S~*T( o A             A^O

TUt            U\l61foo<~                 C&VCU                     P£S2-<c<^                          •          X       MO          /I        To-tCifc,

 ©/-           4.                                               T7^ T              Cxj^y-            X       ,    ^ fX          n /                        .

Tk^                                                                       LtP# \r*&I                  UOf^t              TO%r>>iTcc.£

   DCTOf<-                                         /j         To-^k,                 ^
             {fiC,            .4T              TuJTi         t/^ 0              Ci'"      f                  ‘£| 2 o ' ~ .v O             £& 3--H                             ftf/£


    JN           A-pOiTro-vi                                          ^          4            VM[IXT<o ^                                    TVc            c/^47<o.-a^c_

    cfioea                S^T.                                  ^                                             c.o^i <Oc^tO                          T/fC                      i'oUJO


    CAfi— (212%'                    <-«=>          0>t          ^                                                     / ) , v jO              <4-        f^ 2 V ri      '■v&2£

    5u#v <           1o        ( tid-f'            £ A^r* *                2.                                 CJfc^'                 1^1            Wu&a/C              /%£S)

     At~0            2.                  i^i                                     £o0*0                  U (7 k                  yO          t-tATc (A(riC. &£(££

     CV£2_                                                            .


     All             oCA Cf-CJ                                            £ ul*l Y                                                 Pq^^o I.          ~«              ^f/Lo/<vt£rAj~

     aT         II -2 ok£J           .



     <^6        f&iAot-s\ rit,                     ACCou<^~*                     if           £              C.O/V                 oP       6'w~'i£r3         /'-14<D£          </<4

              j>jr/           Qoov                             $*-40*0 /                  f4>w           A?e(<_                    (^ 8S        ' -

£
     H o u ^ rto              Qb.-roSA~                 AJ?oo^O             TKif              CQqj^o                                      ’J ^ i C t a L .        «->I C-<C       a-vi

    ( K ^y^O cJ                      fjp^rv              ( ( - i o.         ffotoa#?                1^            Hat 1fid*                Oo£W>f          # i* jc W          %&>,

    An'O        /^?Cw^O                                 ^^bJriO .                 Ctt(-Cv£p                                                          T       O?        Act         KseicT

    (A/«Vi,ST        (r4        fSA-Ltf^/                Qocii?             O£>U2*bO                ^Oojfi             <f            uvd^fooo              &VJ          i)£?**<,«;

     o o tW               m                  utftr*          Mc^t                M .                                                    flu £*,„<;           a~        -rut
     cf'f' - LICj^ACt                          of’f’
                                                   usJiTt;      7X(?              fwO          /vtio,

     fo27«£t                                        Mu cat                 q^ d                C od,\            oC                                                  -?*“       ori

     U<£        £i©J>               v*fc£<£              £!CTS(0£                                  ^fTfiujSY1                           Sv/^^o^t'7,                  PQ in*,^

     0pTTlkS              ^               A>ttt          <!W>               Li34t€. •

     A*T         f1-3 0                  x             £n9            W                rtl^              #         S'           A4OJtVJ(0/f                o C4t<j£LS

     *—
      *ez^            b~                                       62.0 Sif                S-»T(S~                4 K,,af7^c,                   T«(f           A4£iV/k_             e/

     T«6              S'P^C('X-                 TCAM •                ,ot              4eoa~D                i'2-u.j                 /?a/

     CAi't^          T*£            Ai-0'O                T©              f^fc         iHtCT             ru sr             CuSYi^WZxH                      (_4wlr                     ^ ‘-v

     fowi-                                   C-oOCH£S f               /WO              fiyTT             ^oQCfi                 P&QMitJi,             wowi.0            /^o^-J

                                                  n/u-i(1^<                ticAf).                /rr            a   PPq ^ i /h &~clY                      tl'^S            ~u£

     Lt'ifcL^'-                  ^iC ^A -                                                                    ^ D ^ f^ /7 £ t-/                      £A£t_y -           0wi

      la-O^L . ^                fitfaotl t^J.\~Xtui                        U-CX?                                           Ti^.             ~A^(r~i            —               €^

      t~j)Aor\                 S JtS f                                    4«a0            So^^e .                       ^ ^ 4 0 u .ti)                     t «^A\             (r^ —Kg
Jut            S 5 o -» " iO .          TT                                                                                  £ i C o 2 t'


                         3T/Mi ViCZ&t-             t-“ <-'1<:                ,         (C-       i           S al+ l         S% ££                   (ol'?%             ?°&<

AfNO<T(>5N/MX'/                             i^ U i.          f 54,                A *0               ?- C          '2 3 f t » -

i^ t           T oQAtO                                    COo^O                    2«H T                  /1~                u c -p ^ i.                                               <2c^jMDw

^ijD         "Tsx*-c          ~H t                                 J             ~£>             17^^            £,£fc»->.~i 0 •

             AQ£(v//5<_                 /r r            ~ /t'           6sto-no                       fin              APP^ot* m atcls                                 I h.- 2 o

Tke'          o i^ - X            T c j'c /s i^          H&PP6 A i f D                 U lT f<               TTYi?               C e c ^ i)                    f 'A & ,T < 'r /< ,


{ •s^X o         TK £-        £<£>(?!             o -           7 k £            P l\J it-6 \- (                < ©    W              ( v j to .           S ^ c / /



                                 t->(T«                  oTHift.                 Wr<f-,£Q.\> - Ai»o7                         '              TT                 Dt~c-(c£Q                     ^ffctC j

Oe-i                                      'T o              CufcAl               Tut             ty\jc^6< Z 1                                            £*iC©u<24C£                      A ia /j


T°         ^ 0                              7 /^t                                            f               TV< I          7 (J—
                                                                                                                                j£                        /K>oo*JO                   / £4- ' i e ^

Trt&Q-t                              r^ >                Q o 6 « -t< ^ c               4~             T u t;           TbaAS.T/'c.e-J                                       <Nns         2& K -


Pqs& U ™             .        /K o i'              d=           TVoSt                                                        v « f                 S7 -^ <'="-*


TMt          £fix^c>                u-*<Ttfo«T                  Arti         Posibli^ ,                        P$ i?0>(4                  4^0                  A        /?£2-

T o £?£7k£'£                ^ (Tff                f. C      S           3^S(e>              I 2 00               ^Jjv/O                                    t-Ofc-2i£           j j f t - f l V l f ( /y| el,


                         $T                         T^2/<iT* i,t-i .

A f T e !I             I 14..3 c»           dwO                  Q iA U T                        ’T o           u r .c *          ^                T ' /1' ^             t-A C A ^            CSo^JDi


 if.         _S^PP&ZTtrU                    A ^M cO                      P,~           ~n<c L(;PPtHCy\                             C4r4]f             £*r> ,                         1      ^&Q_£

 j|siTaitic-a7£'0                 fibiO             Co~(^frQ                     Ai     '^*>           r*t'            C°Su2t<-7                                         fe td T ?            ^ t 0


 7«£             £ ,£ W 0 .               Ttffc/            U,^2£-                U.'W SU                T o                                           UjUif(2f              7 ^


 Q^tUk\              f^2-            Sfc4ti               02-           iTO,40,M<:                                      <£>2.                                                          TH£

  CoZ& t'-f              T u fio iiT ttii _                 /X-6L.           A ^ o u a /T ^                    ArJP               A >oT                 ponc£                    7)i2£<17t0


 4^o              a iiirt^ o                                        —o ^ a ^ o j                     T?/|^             cdZH a                  T ^ ^ r tu s                      a^-

   <2u(C*<c/              Tut            CQ&-1Q                  '(r^COtAtcO                 ^              v/4i*T                                              ..

               fo^^iO                  ^ '-/'i& f-               t_ ^ c 2 ^ (^ S                               TtCiJ             £ i4 « 7               £>£                              i(rPP<»!<, i


                   T o 0 ^ V i(L L 5                                    y—               L ook:                   f-a*>r-i             -cu t                   £c& b.            S^D dc ^ l /


  TVi             P ,iM           TH‘i~                   t(rAJ){                                T v i> ic                 TUlc^ kr <-(,£ %                     (]>£c<H/~n£
_i 4 ^ \ - f4<X:£o                            Us*Tt*               S ' ' fPt' 2rr^c i ■             ^                                                                       <3oi7'c

li, o>®        Ku/'^'owOti)                       /2,w7            Jj,££Aif        l      /                        (w, &>-*\                <*»       <              Ov/£-2 -

C Q ^ O i^                           Tm4T              wm                                                                                   T ('tn. £         tr        w.<h

c—i oV^irK C^                        <—n it*                P. C. S               t b Cl>(s>                Af^O            ll> °°              A 2 o /-v                            (O f


MA-            3           O'          <-ii                c^o 2^60             £s>7-          ,0            tooiC          ~ t ps\£              ~r^o                                      j

                               CuiO               ~ T A ^ r\\t* C               o*            ^ /i/k S T                                                        f>

o f-       " K t> l        ,         I~                           'tv & id d y                C& Vn^C,                  P z& 'l^ z-x I             ff7       Th£             -f& > ^ 7


ef'        Tut             ToCUST.a-i                       4^0                        Ur£L-J                   4                                   Sr7o4T/©-<                   <-o^

^tVRo^VK .                           UT            Sfto-n e~£>                  Cor4Tr /si->wSC/                            £T             A/S^ i           T«              ^rc,^

/W (^                  '             A*            T>i7>          ru t           ou*<3L                      o ^ A c t2 i          .        ^           ^ a s /to           ovJ<L

fi£Ln\                     \fi        £rsi           £ f A^TT             Ti?             caMV^'/                    o«-s£-        /'"Lt<!3*Nii r<C, f                  fWiN

CG^D                                 S ) m 9l Y                                               os              4WZ)            ure^T                          ; ^ A iU


f^i                              ,          TTliriC, i             £|/£MT«/4dcy                     StCM^e                     So           cWiO.Ceo'-iSCD

TWT7            n /                   K o ^t                  ' HoiiOQ '                       ^ U o               a               ,7 /1           ^ £ > s             wk*<


£wD                                                                Os/tA-                 ' / 1_            "Zq*-*                              Ju Q.Qe>OA/Ot>C> fS ^

 pAr* S                                    •tUt
                                          '—                 <"vilOJIPPt>0         AiL&v*f>                          Uc i          W ^tou^                  [b&OY

 LI^t              S'cuoPUQr^c                       oQ -         Ci-iAiC -          ft             .           IKfc          M oQ ji            Coo^O           < \(s t        r i& * !&


A                                    oO-                     A            r ^ c *-tf •                                                   -To        uoj^             Ki'i

 P©©T7ri4                       AS         tffc                            i-tp -r£ §               y f              Tni               CQo^O ,

■~T         u<M                   SoKtHv-*                       /W t^Q                To           T*d                L ^'                                          L(frr          l£<:

 U-O   ^           '~rfL&PPto                      Ac,a<i<!>7              4                                                             \j P q.<c M 7          o^L



  {-fU S S M                    tv k o              'i 3          o - i          « c           ^        1                                                    w a -i         C   l   6A 2l /



  i^            A-               S'(ToO.T<»-^                                        Ut             M4D                                      /V1C60                bC -fvlg


  fisiQ            ~              k?ntL~J                  ^Kt            HfMt                '-JM              fJi/L            £-Chf~\              {-iA /f /.             -L—P' M6


                       U(Cu£Ot                     diM tQ                 o0- i^krd                     Mjo\1£0                c            LfcA            X

           z£r>kLY                         ^ p Q l/e o                T«flT               W                                          ^             <«l               q Ao^ o


    ^oouO                             h t              foQ Tdt&                   HiS^O .
N)o&oOv'                                Tut                 C :Z o ^ O                                                                   in i

Ns .T k i                ©£             oo<2-               / ’u c ^ j             —        £v*M                  “"^ t                    ^ ii7 «                   &r-x-m~

CUtt- £>GfcH                     ~J~~~                  ^oiru              •~o          Cc-'T'-t          00 <               t»-             itf.£         Qt«j                  $ nO

T C t{        Tb           u o ^                   f-cu>rv                T U.£        Ct£ML             cf~        ~h£                   c<2b<-^0                   To           17

 L6^i^              S
                    .T®^               A riY ^ t             £Ut                 A&'-v                                         TKii                   (2£AiL                 ^c

THf.           '                        _          IX             ~r<Lf £0             TWO            TACT vC                        w ith                       /*-?(ak         \~x%L_


S ^c U iS           ,


  ~           c ec ~£>                 £ fi£         ~m4”                   fc         i t c/ (o        C\rS.O               13. g o                  j(a£>              4 u x w { - ')

                                                        ^                 w t2 /            —Qi.^eo                 ^>y              fe                                   S c o rr         .


 t-o t     ~TH£*-L                 S k 'o T          Tuc                  (b ^ i           (_ 0 '2 o o C ^ t            ‘X T Q o '-i                         i            /9 7


T«t                            ^            U^A/t           ^/v/D           ^ iT H              TU&          ASUi~6f^c£                                          P

  o f4 (C t£ ‘             Ttftft                £,£Te\               LtAb         /MT-»           TA't            T o Z ^ T ft£                       ATM .


7W;$          w «               A~i7Ltl!> T6D                   T o          ^L cfcV .'^T fc'             C Q ^iU l^C                        o .<        T «£


 ruC^i'Tf (.IT'S                   ^A/CIA                f\,y         NiO<— *            <j M           ? t'TV^                      QwiT£                       MAJTy

 Wfc                                        ^            |&><—0           TWi:          <~yTt-£\          f^i_           &                   C o c f Cjt                 ^


                                        1          <H£             C t & w O             (t-4           & & T £j2 jl- t / r t £ 0                   / H o * 0            —




 P&2C6.0                Ts<Zt~>

 g 0 U itri<               ~*t              faV&.i.tiHtM                    $£         ~UL            S ^ T O jIT e o ^              X                CoZf->-£o                    a


 L^nt                ^          KoO-ifcl            4c& »vl                   T<£           L£'jV tr<<j                 L 4 /^ f              /3<Tc^Ji               ££*£4- —


  60     Tii Di           cP           ( K-l        i~>Cci ii             <-J<2o«X#7            'X"0o^                                   ^      f^1              ^

 S                                 t                0           SToP             /uar«^                f^A*j{                3 ’“U'4(^i(i                Tt/f                '             ^


 ^         1—
            o oc *--^                   i (/s/^r            (                            .0 ^         )(^ (2-                 |--^                               C- (/*£ D             ^

 fr^iQ             f~2-*~'k0                A        Ovi.r^               t cf e C ( ^ c            iy^MicA-                    Si o i ' - oa y j                    o-^            >0

 T{d                C£&^0                       ^460             ^ t2 £ -          ST tcc                ^0C-2(/mC»                             .^o,-aS                      Uc-P^ifQ

  i^ N t                -r^ a L a i                    7UC

 — ,-jf e to i.                    ^ .< ^ ,^ 0-                       /)« o        ?s                                                                  ^ iT “

   / C         \                   1 'S.t                                   i£ c                                        M e4i                       T°               ^

      ^a^Q)             ^ fc             U tLD                   fi-ii.            L (I'J£ '            ——         C o O i-J                         S £■£               t Mt?


     <^y(£rs              fiw                                   /-»-^>u          w e x tM tv             '" t -     ■                ■ •             ^u/             •
7
    t^C'T'C                  U ii» 2 < C (M S             ‘   CO                                   (L k H                           t^ tC l %                 © *■*       f~^Y

    (2.1^ ^ 7           To^-i'!&£>*                     "«£               ToQ^i~( L£ i                       T(i£          c &*-*<>              ,^^3/v             To.


    TMif'i             S u K K r« -/               i~                              i . w C ^ s i i 'u t l ,.                      My            L t^ ~

    I                    Uc-Qe,'^Ci                     LAWl                    T                s-<t^           TpyiT            t—>6         K&o           c:s^f^ac'w£<?

                             Soo             <A.              S~                c^TTcC^.'W .^j.                       7*6 y           t-zt^-e            o & v .'o O i,./

    D<sra^ttf£>                    ^ 0             feoiT&arf-o                           AT        ^ T            /WrH,                               c=»      ^    £’T        'r ~


    Tu't        ~r^n- n n ( l 6 \                   P>-t                 ^j - l             HA-D Tktr^               c ^ r a m tO

              O if j^ /          T u t/              'ST&2T&0                       TUQs^-j xnC,             T«b^Jt<-v£-/                  kj*&6L.         T«i

     ucc,\             #tJO            ( ItiL ii)             ,        T n 't/                          A=2cfr«iS            TH tf+i(xs/£ j

     ^:/\CH             U&'Zi 6              <w(Tk                 /i              C^,n^tc''c                                              A>V       ~H 6 t£              o ^ -j


        ^P£7V\                 4t                                 77 "?e                  4-       j? c •            M            ^            UflMPO^e                    L~'ai

     O^/vlC               T(Yi5           L & J O iP d M tf/lb                       £r>&      ~H i          VtV/zCM."                      T tiH rk C       TfrtM.              To


        £To?                             .          f/t            (2&f;c47t-£>                Ho                                       co*ir<W «*»*.-*/                  !%v~

        m                            'lAwaOcO                      6/              W                           0 .         'TVt/                               « M V (l/

        oh                            u .^                    c£         K e ^ ti               £ ^0             (& o * i         T hQo^        h         A*iO            Oa ^

        'To        T^* .-1            Ti^t           d ifiJL             cf-          ~m              fojfi(A< f S^ov/AC                            £ £ » '-*> 0      AT

        ~f\{£          TjZA$T<l£1             ,


        (/JT        7Ui\          7t r y£                 .0       j'^V-^T£L                       di.Po.T7tD             X.               £     T«.dT        ^


        Uj.jM.3h                                3^-43^2.6^                     .£7          T^/t        TU2/>iS7Vt,£                       Nt&'Z.     T^e-         Q07c

        <V 7 H6                                         S^J.                   (      £&£               ..       x                               NOT                       ^

        Uo-M^rJ                                      TU irLi                   v-^ M           M=>             t-ofl/       of-        CjC^Tt               To        H&Q~,

        i-ovT>t         /I           |ao2.j ^ ,                   U7       ^ '»•               A'T           T'YO                                Tm£ 7             T iA6

         oCL0£<L              WM                  CtV£r<.i              'Zz>                            'Tki              <G^Tfcj      ,       JlTT       W^H              ,\o


         "D^&T                                     "T'0             S^v'£                L&ss          :/-           L<             /7T         T^f         Tua^i'7<' Lc!



            .OHO             Wi/5H       37,-4                 yH/                  offA/(c--4               —            Qu <7d                cc?^cT,



                               f ANi                2 o S ^ t0                      T « (2 eU «                                                                            L 6f '

                jt,£
             h'J"&        /0^            iN                                           i^o^(X£<l%.                T//z j               f t &/><?'£U / a Y              L&&0i

         3.        T « f^              To            T^£                   (Mci2T^                 STA^O .                             o ^ r^ if                oC         T ^

                                                                    4^0                   QeitAito                                                   A L /^ r s
                                                                                                                                                           f^ri<tD<VT6uY              ,
    $ k 'o £ r < - ;/                                  l         x                                                   ^aco                                   z r ^ io i          t   «£

    C, ■'lau JO                T o              f o L its i              O ^T-Zi^u ■                   Of*1              C < - « / ’M t MC,            c«t       S s .c t^ j


    ~r          (M ©7, c £ -0             T tff             U >£j~                S'T^r€>             T tC jiy J c tj                                    C S o k iO c O               <?,\fO


     fio fu                 ^ t'-c              S f< c u n C                      ot^T o          T hL          Pi t c i t                   &>tn<MO             T rtt              <***<--

                                     l~i bi(T7         ~               S j^ v i      'Tia                            3         P(~C!A               f M V AS I O ^ i           ~3Z-

                                              **cs                            pc^CLy£                       ' AloO.-vTT^O                                     to o ^           ^J      £tvd/""*

      ©£             S>            i^ 2 jc i               CP~o^n€>                 -%=,                                   ' o          ^


      ^ k ’o S T i- /               A P T £-i               o v J /t         A & li\i^            ,           C ^ M - 1 t& \                        Ak O         g o o ;< H

     tw t- lc                C ^h ^ ^H T                   d££           ^           7 k fc       ^ rc > f                 /J ^ o              5 £7


     /ySo^'^O                       ■         Zlc/^oi (                   /ikx              i—^bQ.£ A PfM2^»siTc'/                              E>t&0            ,di^O

     ^ T (tc             /> u ^ i             *~>& &                   sZec&t v>       •^<v            ^ 'T r ^ T , d.~>            .



      zS tH ’T J /W L 'f                               T/<£              [> U i\iS > ^            T i»         A Q s d ^ o -i                   T «4-        £>4^7 £            c-^jvvl

     ^ M o o A c tO                   x           u 'i t*-r f            ° 'JT         o '2                    ^QowNiD                       /W D        P & T a ji^ S ,


     O r;         Tf4k             U J tf+ S l                    c iJ ^            £.-0 ,            ^ S T f/v ^                       ^<7^             W             * X } g ^ j- 4 < _


      0 ,:                                        4           <2t, U m P 'r f                         <*•            ^                  n ^ A ie *

      U.M               to o                  WTM.              "|«          W(             £ ^ ' N ‘,                   rr                 N,-« i 4 t i                               cw % ■

^      [> o 7 /              /]7o o k '           £^X£i                   £^0*              A~<             Tuts                 A><m7.



       on                                         fh                   Q uH 7<^               ,^ y                   oaVi           rx ? v                                 ^7

         0 - ) Oo                   “X          C o ^ P a r<vO                     D e i/             £“7            2o-oo                   ~TmST<          k V tN tM ^ .



         0>cP^2 c             7 )o e |H C              flNO                  jOP t   H.        T f^            /V«aTCM                       fl» 7 Y         X     AmD


                        ^               x £ £(L lX j             twb^£               unD£Q.                  ii^ l               £ © ^ f- \ A^Ci                 d7


       ( H i cf-'            5 ’- <>7 '              ^O C ^rA^c^tD                                                        fo i-iC t                 C z>r*~CQjX_       _


         OfftCkfL’}                 Uj a?i^( NC                   Z5~J             t <~iA£L                 £aiO              c/-                           C^Q_c*i*iQ

         i^& ^ -£               X /^ f               g c S ^ riS t^ i.(7 /                                     T ^t            T^<=>                 S ^ e f/^ ^ ^ iP ^ T j


         I ri       CwBQ^d                "                 ^ '^ ^ i:2 (riT t.M 0 i-r-j7                                                        ^            (_hPP(dC* j


       1,M£                 t^ 0              flKO                S ^ « IJ tW S i« '                             C K A fW ^                           AT-

          ^/£f4if'r°/^t'                  QsJxD                          £r^0
                     i £ k O trS7                     u ^ 3        ^       4~ r           '(H i          C c w <QsA_.                     f 'o (     ‘          fcO O


                                                                   Cf-       ■‘CKJ—                     c£&-J                 O i f loY6& v

£.•/■)CT                L CC-AT( &r \            .      (E-CLuAtZ                  N'~t'~[*Qbl2 ^           A(J O                         ® 2tC


                                                                                                           pd/                   ^                  72^T
/V
 "?y          Cxt N c                    f c2c l /’'C(or* i



 U 2?£                                           -A               L tv C lfo ^              <**"<              c m t                      ^               ^

T tft        £Oqw>JO •                                 i~ii'tL             )/*TQfrcA'7££)                  &<J7             A*'^               f<LUttU(L./

               ’        T ’o 'i     /HAAi1/           i- ' c-2£                      |W         T^CTf          STSTif                -        P'Sotft H>/T f ^


 (\CS\ ( o a         (V/           ~ ^         v1                      ^>-4(C£-£S-

~Ti/£        C O o^O           ff’T’        T k£         '7_oO,-*i7^ cfc                 •—'t-JLd    ZEVmi f ( /J6c /                     C,& ~>0             MoM*'*'<z&Q


 <V'               Q<*L*i.y             fy .c £ ^ t                          t vif          ZM T^c             To&~:t } L£I                        ^>tit iy*Q&c(

                                                                _rlf UJ %.               ~(ML       Cdat^iO                  •—i ow<uD                   ,MO<      U£7£^

  io         A-&vic*               C/ vt»-i            iWP                           N3         Co^ct^                      /U            (U£i            fointro


 p ^ lw M P i              ( Po'L                               Sflp£“ /       /     COM ftcr                  i/           <Mt                    p6*Pa         /fr

 "7'At              A2eW                  at          Tut              fo li ■

 ~J_        ( I a wf>          M >T                                          ^~T            a /[    J /,> i£          of-            Tf/c'           C Q o ^ tM^

  I f         T^t       T o dri S7/u6^                U j^ '/            P co ?l €          tv£££           /nioT           Pa S5<                  T mQ & ^ u ,


 ~Cut          €>2-“ ^ ®           W & U > cv/            ^ tk ^ c -P              T a                                                   /H JU -


    7N W                  I)       VA                OH           /(/<£        /MCi^lv!’^f'0            (y<AfilCU                        u»*aT            UbPPt^Q
  (yvO^            Qut'                o -T S .O c        /^LC               m /             fatV&Ki i              £ ■+ ? £ £ (£ * € £ -                         tfOVt'

  Ntwt                            Stf^4                           CQ4><-j£)                /}fS6ft.&LC               S =*                L-£7t            fls£)

   '■ /vl               s wCm                l   MC£                N"    H%£z S.
                                                                 W   (^
                                                                 T > vr?
Graham McKAY

Detective Superintendent

South Yorkshire Police,Ecclesfield      Police Station




In April 1988, as Detective Superintendent at 'F' Division, I attended
a football match being played at the heme ground of Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club, Hillsborough.   The game was a Cup Semi-Final and was
played between Liverpool FC and Nottingham Forest FC.      There was a
capacity crowd and admission was by ticket only.

My remit on that day was to organise and supervise all elements of
crime prevention and crime detection.

At about 2.40 pm that day I found myself outside the ground in the
Leppings Lane turnstile area. The crowd using those turnstiles were
mostly good natured but, about 2.50 pm, there was a build up in the
numbers of people using the turnstiles and a sizeable queue developed.
There was increasing evidence of drunkenness amongst the supporters who
were all Liverpool fans.   There was a good deal of pushing and shoving
and police officers on horses were necessary to control the crowd. An
ideal opportunity for pick-pocket activity. It took this build-up of
supporters several mrnutes to clear through the turnstiles but without
problem.

On Friday 14 April 1989 I took part in a 'phone in programme with Radio
Merseyside, when I spoke with the presenter of that prograirme in
relation to the Semi-Final to take place on the following day and
passed on various pieces of advice for fans who were travelling to
Sheffield. One of the areas which I stressed was that it was an all­
ticket match and that fans who did not have a ticket should not come.

At 3.00 pm that same afternoon I gave similar advice, by telephone,
which was recorded by a member of staff at Radio Nottingham.

On Saturday 15 April 1989 I was responsible for all matters in relation
to crime at the Cup Tie Semi-Final between Liverpool FC and Nottingham
Forest PC. As it was a carbon copy of the match which had been played
before it made sense to use what had previously been successful
arrangements as the bulk of the supporters would have attended the
previous match and would be aware of the locations of the various
facilities and the various systems operating at the ground.

On the day my staff were split into two teams. A team of 12 officers,
under the canmand of Detective Inspector Towell, who were to operate in
and around the ground. Eight of those officers were to be engaged on
observations, looking out for pick-pockets.

Outside the ground Detective Inspector Scaife had charge of a team of
14 officers who were to be responsible for the prevention and detection
of street crime. Two of these officers were in plain clothes on non­
descript motor cycles and it had been envisaged that, whilst the game
was in progress, these officers would patrol the quiet streets lined
with parked cars in an effort to prevent and detect theft frcm cars.

I attended the briefing at Sheffield Wedensday FC at 10.00 am and
following this briefed my own detectives.   I was accompanied through
the first part of the day by Police Constable 2439 Booking, who was in
civilian clothes.

At 10.50 am, together with PC Booking, I went to a mobile police radio
control, who were monitoring all CID transmissions on channel 19. This
caravan was placed on land at the side of Hill foot bridge and only a
few yards frcm the frontage of a public house called 'The Owl'. Even
at that stage supporters were queuing outside, waiting for the Owl to
be opened, and at 11.00 am the bars opened.

I remained in and around that location for seme 40 minutes and during
that period,trade at the public house increased as football fans
gathered there.

The location of this public house would lead me to believe that the
majority, if not all, of these fans were Nottingham Forest supporters.
I had nothing to do with them and cannot say for certain.

I patrolled in my own vehicle with PC Bocking and at about 1.00 pm had
a meeting with Detective Inspector Scaife and seme of his staff in the
parking area for Wadsley Bridge Section Station. This lasted a few
minutes and after the departure of Detective Inspector Scaife and his
staff I was joined by the two motor cyclists and I gave them further
instructions.

At about 1.30 pm I vent to the South Yorkshire Police Sports and Social
Club at Niagara as traffic was building up and it was my intention to
leave my car in the car park there and spend the time between then and
the start of the match, on foot. Whilst at that location I went into
the Club with PC Bocking and sought out the Deputy Head of Merseyside
CID, a Detective Superintendent Baxter - a man who I knew would be
lunching at the Club with seme of his family and for when I had
arranged nearby parking. I had not met Mr Baxter before and, having
introduced myself as a matter of courtesy, PC Bocking and I left the
Club.

Whilst I was in the Club I noticed that there was a large number of
supporters of both football clubs who, I assuited, were all police
officers. It was apparent that most were dining or waiting for meals
they had ordered or having a casual drink.

About 1.50 pm PC Bocking and I went to the gymnasium at Sheffield
Wednesday FC where we had a meal and, at about 2.15 pm, we left and I
decided to spend the remaining time until kick-off outside the ground
in the vicinity of the Leppings Lane turnstiles, as I considered this
to be the most likely place for pick-pocket activity.

With PC Bocking I walked out onto the perimeter track surrounding the
ground and walked across the front of the Spion Kop, where the
Nottingham Forest supporters were gathered. There was still plenty of
roan in the Spion Kop but, nevertheless, there was a large nLrr.ber of
spectators present and there ware very few barren places.

In contrast, looking over to Leppings Lane end of the ground there
appeared to be very few spectators in evidence in the terraces or the
stand at the back of the goal.       Equally, the seating in the North
Stand was sparsely occupied.      I went down the players tunnel and
through on to the service road and car parking area at the rear of the
South Stand.   We made our way through a sterile area up to a light
portable barrier which was near to a pair of metal concertina type
gates, marked 'C' at the Leppings Lane turnstiles area.

This turnstile serves the North Stand and the West Stand and terraced
areas behind the goal.     There are three lots of turnstiles and it
immediately became apparent that the seven turnstiles, serving the
terraced area and between the concertina type gates narked 'B' and the
ones previously referred to marked 'C', were in heavy demand.

A large crowd was backed up right out on to Leppings Lane and there was
angry pushing and shoving taking place.      There were several police
officers in evidence and in particular two mounted officers who I
believe were frcm Merseyside. The officer in charge of a serial of men
was Inspector Purdy, a man I have known for a number of years and
recognised immediately. Inspector Purdy and his serial were having a
great deal of difficulty in controlling the crowd at this point. The
turnstiles A - G were arranged on the left by the gates marked 'B' set
into a high wall and on the right by a metal barrier seme 20 yards long
and at chest height, the crowd was contained behind this barrier.

It was apparent that the turnstiles were not coping efficiently with
the crowd, which was swslling by the minute.

Throughout the next 30 minutes or so I remained mostly at that location
but, on two occasions, walked back through the sterile area to *nere a
serial was employed at another barrier at the Nottingham Forest
turnstiles into the South Stand. They were having no difficulty with
the people in that area and I spoke to a man I know as Sergeant Hodgett
and told him that I anticipated that, as the crowd increased at the
Leppings Lane turnstiles, more police officers would be required and I
asked him to post an officer frcm his serial nearer to the turnstiles
at leppings Lane and in view of the turnstiles in order that he could
respond should the occasion demand.

At Leppings Lane the build-up of crowd increased, tempers became frayed
and evidence of drunkenness became more and more pronounced.

I remember at one time, Inspector Purdy standing on the barrier with
his back to the turnstiles, while in the manner of a tight-rope walker,
vainly trying to address the crowd.         He was beginning to look
frightened and, frankly, I was not surprised.

A young boy of scxne 10 or 12 years climbed to the top of the wall near
to gate 'B' but apparently what he saw on the other side deterred him
fran dropping over and he returned to the crowd on this side. I was
dismayed to realise that in this swelling ness of people there were
such young children.     There were many people standing about not
atterrpting to join the queue, (if it can be described as such) and I
wondered at that tune whether they had arranged to meet friends;
whetner they ware waiting for the rush to die down or whether, in fact,
they were opportunists without tickets.     The gates marked 'C' were
openec and closed on a number of occasions by stewards on the other
side, either to allow officials and police officers to enter or leave
the ground, or to admit people who were in distress. I remember on at
least three occasions these gates were opened at the request of police
officers outside to admit people with injuries. One of these was a
child who was carried bodily in and who had been removed frcm the crush
at the turnstiles.

At seme stage, I vrould guess at about 2.40 pm, I saw Superintendent
Marshall directing police operations in this crush. He was having to
shout to make himself heard on the radio and I heard a shouted request
frcm inspector Purdy for the gates to be opened to relieve the pressure
on the turnstiles. Even at that stage I could understand the reason
for this request. I did not see Superintendent Marshall again. I was
later to learn, in fact, that he remained there continuing to direct
operations in the area of the leppings Lane turnstiles but such was the
thronging mass of people that I did not see him even though he must
have ceen a matter of yards frcm me.

Not long afterwards I spoke to Inspector Purdy and said I thought the
gates should be opened.

At sore stage it was decided that seme large wrought iron gates which
lead out into Leppings Lane should be closed in order to prevent the
now seething mass of people in Leppings Lane from continuing to apply
pressure to the queue to the turnstiles.    This was done successfully
but it seemed to be only minutes before the gates were forced open
again and the pressure resumed. At one stage, still pre-occupied with
the pick-pockets, I moved nearer to these blue gates but inraediately
became engulfed in the crcwd and I had to push and struggle to get back
into a relatively clear space near to the light portable barriers.

During these few brief mements I was frightened for my own safety and
it made me realise what conditions must have been like in the more
severely packed area behind the barrier leading to the turnstiles. I
was getting quite concerned and remember remarking to PC Bocking that
they were going to have to open the gates.

PC Bocking was carrying my radio at this time which was tuned to the
channel designated to CID, number 19. Uniformed officers were being
directed frcm control on channel 25.

Conditions deteriorated, missiles were thrown, a beer can with a drink
spiling fran it striking a police officer on horseback. There was
another surge fran the crowd which appeared to be a concerted attempt
to unseat this same officer and the horse started dancing about in
fright.   Throughout I could hear demands over a loud speaker system
pleading with the crowd to stop pushing, to be patient.        I could
recognise the speaker as PC 1035 Ryan.
As ii_ got nearer to 3 o'clock it became apparent to everyone that it
was impossible for this vast crowd, which now stretched out of mv sight
in bcch directions of Leppings Lane, to gain access to the ground
before kick-off and I heard seme uniformed officer remark that kick-off
had been delayed for 15 minutes.

The crowd became more and more unruly a,id nasty and I could hear
officers, who were caught in the press, yelling frantically into their
personal radios.

I began to have grave fears that the situation could only end in
disaster. The crowd were beginning to swarm over the walls into the
grounc. People in the crowd were shouting and screaming for assistance
and yet the thrust frcm Leppings Lane continued.

At various times during this period the mounted police officers had
been supplemented by a number of others and I would estimate there
being in the region of 8 to 10 mounted officers in that small area.
They were, for the most part, engulfed in the crowd and unable to
contain it.

A few minutes before 3 o'clock, perhaps three or four, I heard the
message given over a uniformed officer's radio "Open the gate" and
almost urmediately the concertina doors of gate 'C' were opened. I was
standing only a few yards frcm the gate.     I should say at this point
that these gates had never been under severe pressure as the crowd had
recognised that there was no probability of entering through that gate.
The people in the immediate vicinity of the gate began to go through it
and it seemed to take the bulk of the crowd 30 seconds or so to realise
what had occurred.

The trickle of people going into the ground through this gate increased
and for a short period there was containable entry through the gate.
It was a relief to me to see the gate opened and, at this point, I
remarked to PC Bocking "That gate should have been opened ten minutes
ago".

Over the next two or three minutes the flow through this gate increased
and it was apparent to me that the situation at the turnstiles would
soon be eased.   It was about this time that I heard a roar fran the
crowd inside the ground and assumed that either the players were out or
that the match had coimenced. This surprised me, having thought that
the game was going to be delayed. This roar increased the urgency of
the people entering the ground. I turned to walk back with PC Bocking
down the service road and made my way to the south east corner of the
ground, where I walked onto the perimeter track of the pitch, behind
the Spion Kop goal.

The game was in progress and as I looked up towards the Leppings Lane
end I could see the crowd spilling out fran the terraces onto the
pitch. I could not understand this but, as there were large numbers of
uniformed officers making their way along the perimeter path in front
of the North Stand towards that area, I assumed that the matter would
be contained and I left the pitch at the north east corner.
                                                                      (6)



I walked back to the gymnasium which was being used as a dinina roan,
where I spoke to Detective Inspector Towel 1, and a few minute* later
soneone called to me that play had been stopped and that there were
injuries.

Uniformed officers were hurrying out of the gymnasium and I returned to
the north east corner of the pitch to see what was happening.

The scene was one of confusion at the Leppings Lane end with sane
people climbing fran the terraces into the seated stand above and
people continuing to spill out onto the pitch through gates in the
fencing which were now open.     It appeared to be an invasion of the
pitch which should be contained by uniform officers but, after a minute
or so, I decided to walk over. I had gone only about 40 yards when I
met Detective Sergeant 727 Lindley caning the other way and he called
to me "There's about 20 dead in there boss".

I went iitmediately to the Police Roan under the North Stand, frar. where
I contacted Detective Chief Superintendent Addis by telephone. I would
estimate the time to be sonewhere in the region of 3.15 pm. I informed
Mr Addis that I believed there were deaths and we discussed that we
would need to be thinking in terms of setting up an Incident Roan and
activating a Casualty Bureau.

I have to say that fran that time I have no clear recollection of the
sequence of events or of any time scale. I returned to the gymnasium
and my return coincided with that of Chief Inspector Beal who shouted
"We are going to set up a temporary mortuary in here, clear these
tables."

One half of the gymnasium had been set up as a dining area and there
was a temporary partition down the centre of the gymnasium.    It was
this area that was cleared and there was a rush by police officers to
put tables to one side. I believe that Detective Inspector Towell was
in the gymnasium at that time and I am certain that I was the senior
officer present.

People started arriving into the gymnasium carrying victims. The first
victim to arrive was a young man and I believe he was carried in by two
police officers and a civilian. He was taken to the wall opposite the
door and laid down. Other people were now flooding into the gymnasium
carrying victims. The first man was apparently dead and I touched one
of the officers, introduced myself, and explained to him that that body
was his responsibility and that under no circumstances was he to leave
that body. He was to ensure that no one else had any dealings with the
property or clothing or identification of that body.        These were
instructions that I was to repeat dozens of times on that afternoon.

Brought in with the dead were the injured and these were directed to
the far end of the gymnasium at the other side of the partition. The
dead were arriving in such numbers that it was impossible to try to
establish whether, in fact, they were dead, but I have to say that
every body that I saw bore what I recognise to be classic signs of
asphyxia and I am satisfied that every body that I saw and directed
into the area designated as a temporary mortuary was, in fact, dead.
Although I saw most of the bodies I have to say that I did not see them
all. Indeed they were arriving in such numbers and with such frequency
that on many occasions it was impossible to give instructions before
the officers # 1 0 had brought the body in had departed.

Seme of the bodies were carried in by members of the crowd. Sane of
these people were distressed, weeping openly, screaming, aggressive
and I saw several fights and scuffles break out in the area around,
between and over the bodies that were being deposited.

Some drunks were assisting to bring the dead and injured persons into
the gymnasium and it has to be said that they were not all causing
trouble. Officers and civilians were attempting to resuscitate sane of
the victims and I saw at least two such groups attempting to revive,
what were quite obviously to me, dead bodies.

Of the people arriving in the gymnasium many were standing around,
remaining there.   Police officers were going back out to fetch more
casualties and the scene was one of general confusion with bodies being
put down haphazardly.

At sore stage I saw Detective Inspector Charles, apparently having cone
into the gym with a body, about to leave the gymnasium. Mr Charles had
attended the match on duty in full police uniform.        I showed to
Mr Charles and when he came to me I told him that this public order
situation in the gymnasium had to be controlled and told him to get
some men and get on with it. He immediately started gathering police
officers to him and giving them instructions and I noted that he gave
priority to the gymnasium door. It was impossible to count the bodies
as they arrived, but when there were about 20 I remember thinking that
there could not be many more dead.

As the bodies were laid nearer and nearer to the gymnasiurt door
scmecne, I believe it was Detective Sergeant McSloy, said to me "If we
don't start laying the bodies out neatly we will never get them all
in". I told him to grab sane men and get on with it.

Two officers in uniform fran the Underwater Search Unit came to me at
some time. They were carrying a hand-held video unit. They told me
that they had been recording the scene in and around the area of the
Leppings Lane goalmouth but that they had been assaulted on two
occasions by football supporters and they had had to retreat for their
safety.   I recognised need for evidence gathering and told them to
start filming the scene in the gym.     I do not remember seeing them
again.

I find it very difficult to recall the events in the gymnasiim. My
overall perception is one of dead bodies arriving and being carried by
shocked and perspiring police officers; by distressed people who were
obviously friends and relatives and by drunken people, sane of whan
were shouting and wanting to fight. Injured people were arriving and
being directed to the far end of the hall and the scene was one of
increasing confusion.
Sane degree of regulation began to take place as Inspector Charles and
his team regulated the people in the gym and ejected the unruly ones.
It would have been folly to try and separate the grieving relatives and
friends fran the bodies and many, many people v^re left standing around
in the gymnasium helplessly, in all stages of distress.

On se/eral occasions I went through to the Police Room to make use of
the telephone which was in there, but the Police Roan was busy, the
telephone was in use and when I bullied my way to the telephone the
numbers I tried to get wsre engaged or unobtainable.

At seme stage I recall having seen a police officer sat on a chair by
the telephone in the Police Rocm. He had a big tear in his trousers.
He was weeping openly. He was quite obviously shocked. I had a few
words with him which seemed to me to be totally inadequate and left
him.

At a very early stage I had deputed someone to arrange for the major
incident boxes to cane fran Hammerton Road and Ecclesfield and I asked
Detective Inspector Scaife, at sane stage, to contact the Medico Legal
Centre, assess their available capacity for bodies and to ring round
the various hospitals and mortuaries in the district with a view to
establishing the available capacities for dead bodies.

I had also asked for the Coroner to be informed - which seemed at the
time to be an absolutely incongruous request.

At sane stage, I think after half an hour, I needed to make contact
with the control box inside the ground to inform them of the situation
in the gymnasium and as I was unable to contact them by telephone and I
knew that any radio message passed would be relayed over every
officer's radio in the ground, I went on foot. I am new informed by
Detective Inspector Towell that he accompanied me, but my recollection
of events is so blurred and distorted that I cannot remember him doing
so, although I have no reason to doubt that he did.

At the Police Control Box I spoke to Mr Addis and, whilst I cannot
rememoer what I said to him, I must have told him the situation in the
gymnasium. I do remember speaking to the ACC Operations, Mr Jackson,
and rrentioning that amongst other problems we would have were the
press, who were present in numbers. Mr Addis asked me to takehim back
to the gymnasium and as we left the area of thePolice Box I remember
hearing the Liverpool Manager, Kenny Dalglish, addressing the crowd and
a ripple of applause went round the ground. Other than that I have no
idea of what time it was.

On my return to the gymnasium with Mr Addis I saw senior ambulance
officials, in particular Alan Hopkins who I introduced to Mr Addis and
we discussed the eventual removal of bodies fran the gymnasium and who
would be responsible.

Mr Addis then took charge in the gymnasium and after a few minutes of
assessing the situation he stood on a chair, called for order in the
hall, and told police officers what he intended to do. The gymnasium
floor was littered with rows of bodies and I remember someone telling
me when I asked how many, "Seventy odd and more at the Ivcrthern
General".

Most of the bodies by this time had been draped with what appeared to
be white shrouds and I remember wondering where on earth they had cone
fran.    I was later to learn that they were, in fact, the paper
tablecloths which had been removed fran the wooden tressle tables, now
piled up at the side of the gymnasium.

It was about this time that I remembered that my youngest son was
somewhere in the crowd and almost all of the bodies, the feet of which
were protruding from under these tablecloths, seemed to have trainers
on identical to his. I had to resist the urge to go and look at each
of the bodies.

It was decided that I should return to Hanmerton Road, assist in
setting up a Major Incident Roan there and also arrange for the friends
and relatives to be bussed to Hairmerton Road Police Station.         I
arranged to be taken to Hammerton Road by a marked police car and
Detective Inspector Towell travelled in what I believe was the prison
bus, with anxious relatives and friends.

On arrival at Hairroerton Road I found the place under virtual!^ siege.
Liverpool supporters wsre wanting to make urgent enquiries, many were
standing around not knowing what to do and someone had put out a call
for all off-duty social workers to report to Hammerton Road and there
were many social workers. My first reaction was one of dismay at the
thought of so many social workers being directed to this area but, in a
very short time, it became apparent that they were to be invaluable and
provided a buffer between distressed relatives and fans, who had lost
contact with relatives and friends in the crowd, and the police.

I called together the Incident Roan staff, who      had arrived at the
Station to set up the Incident Roan, and briefed them as to what had
occurred at the ground and the situation there. I should say here that
I was aware that arrangements had been made for the Casualty Bureau to
be activated. I was shortly to be informed however that all numbers to
the Casualty Bureau had already gone out over the radio, jaiming all of
the lines, and as a result there was to be no police contact by
telephone with the Bureau for many hours.

Having told the Incident Roan staff what had occurred they went about
the business of setting up the Incident Roan at Hammerton Road.

I tried to make a telephone call to my hane but could not get an
outside line. I later went to an adjacent building where I knew there
was a direct outside line. I telephoned hane and established that my
son was safe. I think the time was then about 6.30 pm but all I can
say for certain is thatit was still daylight.

I was surprised to see Superintendent Sleath at Hammerton Road Police
Station in civilian clothes and he told me that he had responded to a
call for all off-duty police officers to go either to Hillsborough or
the closest police station. Mr Sleath had assumed responsibility for
relatives; liaison with Social Services and with the temporary
mortuary.

During the course of the evening there wsre three other events
unconnected with this incident, which required my attention. One was a
potential firearms situation in 'FI' Sub-Division;       another was a
potential firearms situation in 'F2' Sub-Division and the third
invol’.’ed the body of            which had been found in a
   ._____________________________ I asked Detective Chief Inspector
Addison to go to Ecclesfield Police Station and deal with the body and
deputed Detective Inspector Scaife to deal with the firearms incident
there.

I neeaed to speak to Detective Chief Inspector Addis on many occasions
during the evening but contact with him was only possible by contacting
people with him on channel 25 of the police radio and then requesting
him tc turn to channel 19, in the hope that our conversation would be
more secure.

At sane time during the evening, but not long after Mr Addison had left
for Ecclesfield, I returned to the gymnasium for a conference with
Mr Addis and found that the Coroner, Mr Popper, and the Hane Office
Pathologist, Professor Usher, were in attendance. Professor Usher said
that there was little he could do at the scene and agreed to go cr/er to
Ecclesfield to look at the scene and the body there.         I arranged
transport for him.

The scene at the gymnasium was now much more orderly. The bodies had
all been certified dead. There were a number of doctors in attendance;
there were social workers; many grieving relatives and many many police
officers, all of whan looked shocked, drawn and tired.

I believe that it was at this stage I saw a man I recognised as
Profoceoi^Ov-, Duckworth, Psychologist, who lectures  at    police
establishments on trauma connected with major incidents and, in
particular, in his involvement with police officers following the
Bradford fire.

Mr Addis discussed with me his plans to photograph, with a polaroid
camera, each of the bodies; to display these on a wall at a different
part cr the gymnasium and to have relatives brought, one lot at a time,
to the gymnasium to be shown the photographs and, if a photograph was
picked out, to have the body relating to that photograph removed fran
the hall into a temporary viewing roan and identified.

We also discussed at that time our priorities and decided that no
police enquiry could carmence that night and it was imperative that ^11
police efforts should be directed towards the situation at the
gymnasium; identification of the bodies and providing what assistance
was possible to the relatives.

I returned to Hanmerton Road Police Station and closed down the
Incident Roan, which had already came need feeding the basic
information into the system.    For example, a copy of the Operational
Order of the football match.

Durir.c the evening the relatives had been removed first to Hillsborough
Boys Club premises across the road frcni Hamnerton Road Police Station,
and then to the Church Hall on Forbes Road.

The cnly information I can definitely set a time for is at 9.00 pm when
I had a conversation by telephone with the Deputy Chief Constable,
Mr Hays, to update him of the operation.

B*requested that a conference be set, up of all senior officers involved
with a view to being able to supply the Chief Constable with a factual
accour.t of events in order that he could be properly prepared to meet
the inevitable barrage for information fran the press.

Mr H a y s asked me to arrange for all senior officers concerned to be at
the Conference Room at Headquarters for 11.00 pm. I remember looking
at my watch at that stage to assess how much time I had.

I had at least two other conversations, during the evening, with ACC
Mr Jackson to update him, but I cannot remember the content of the
conversation.

I returned to the gymnasium at Hillsborough, spoke to Mr Addis and told
him of the conference.

I decided that I ought then to have a look at the stand and terraces
where the disaster had occurred, (even though it was in darkness) in
order that I could be properly informed for the conference which was to
follow. Although the light was not good it was light enough to give me
sane indication of the devastation which had occurred.           I was
accompanied by Detective Inspector Towell.

We went frcm there through the tunnel and round to the turnstile area
and or. our way back to the gymnasium saw the Chief Constable with a
group of people at the scene.

I informed the Chief Constable of the meeting being set up at 11.00 pm.
I returned to the gymnasium.       I had a further conversation with
Mr Addis and the Chief Constable then visited the gymnasium. He was
obviously looking at the scene carefully and was speaking to as many
officers as he possibly could, offering words of encouragement.

I believe shortly after this I returned with Chief Superintendent Addis
who had not had the opportunity to visit the area of the disaster and
together we went fran there into the service road at the back of the
South Stand where we discussed the prospect of approaching the many
television crews now in attendance with a view to obtaining video
recordings taken by them. Mr Addis decided against it.

After I had returned to the gymnasium I went to Hanrnerton Road Police
Station with Detective Inspector Towell. I made arrangements for video
recordings to be available at the Conference Room at Police
                                                                          (12)

'               V   -
                    f  travelled to Headquarters with Detective Inspector
     cwe^l only to find that the conference had been cancelled for that
    nigh, and was re-arranged for 9.00 am the following morning.        I
    returned to Hammerton Road Police Station and went off duty at around
    ^ •_ld am•

    2* S 1Val+hane3. at about 2,30 3111 1 discovered that my youngest boy had
    f i ^ - UPK ^ dlstrf sed Liverpool fans, one of whan had been parted
    fran his brother, and these tvro young men were sleeping at my hone.

        ^   ^ W°rk f°r 7*30 ^ the following day and during the days
Police °statTon 1 ^ ^ Charge °f the Incident Rocm at Hairmerton Road


t e a 1 2 ' ? ! ^ °n ^JeSday 18 April 1989' as a result of a conversation I
had with Inspector Sykes, I returned to Sheffield Wednesday Football
    ub and examined the blue wrought iron perimeter gates which I have
previously mentioned. These gates had by this time been turned into a
  hrine and flowers were piled up against them and scarves tied to them.
                   one      the bolts, which secured a gate by dropping into a
    le         the asphalt, was bent and that another such bolt on a different
gate had gouged out a groove in the asphalt sane 18" to 2' long, and
                 D 3nf ge1WaS quite            recently caused. I returned to
  aimerton Road Police Station and made arrangements for the qates to be
photographed.                                                      3

At 2 30 pm that same day, at a conference between Mr Jones, Assistant
Chief Constable of West Midlands Police, Chief Superintendent Bevington
ot that Force, Detective Chief Superintendent Addis and myself, Mr
Jones formally assumed responsibility for the enquiry into the disaster
and an entry to that effect was made on the H.O.L.M.E.S. Management
Policy File.
                                                                                                           t   y »t^n iAjfS^y       ^n^ot^ ijiA.   _,“^1<UW,jM .

                    ft4mwM*U                ^ * ^ s * 4 i> N              4* N M rlt^.           —         dZt^K                         . <m*/s§hj          .......
                                ^        prwtdUtiA                       &t&& M4«/lUSe»*              ^        dUfe*^Ui^Ujt           aM?*r                  >Mkt

   £ ^ A * J L ,.t& .\     "Bo         ± _ 2 ,^ 1     ,




    ^A>>    £ tf® * J r 3 ( o l          vs    |>e-*4 ^          ’\Ue.    ^U&,                                  4%     Ht*-. ^ O               ^       ^u<

                                                . . . & X < L ................ .....



   ^rf<jLi*-** M C.^“^\ -V                                                     €lc*p(>-*—&                                            '
                                                                                                                                      i^qaaA       ^     ^W.

   (^VNJu^iXtS^- K.p#>-^                    ^OJWc^oA        4»a>         U*-/^         £}«"»&■<*** J S                o— e^-,                       dLa VvS^
    j*tik VvV& *^4-C                t^''AS<^f>»> ^                                     ^IkiM*,    Vnr                C, t                               ^(Cm.

_._"^Ky^ci^'*^f?>-...V^-r.                                           "H a -                       .(                                               Ck /^r»r
    '^JL                            s^^fW-.'^VS. M&-S*                                                %J$^JtKM&k,                    __ _____




                          !« W          ^       ^SWjAi^             t^_      UsxA                Ss            K ^(V          ....



                         C t-                             CtA^                         )i^J»f**Ai,«-4$            ( K __


                ^|^bfcf'MM»-a                  tjev         ^U^tjF^               "" *x€>             'r         ^              Gx^jy^



            O     .*"> .             CXA        c ik * ^



                 C flte j                           ^       ....C-^.4



                                       ^v-^iw              vj)
                                                             t\V1aa           Gk^Jll         ^         ^@^2                 jflfi

            4      ^        ..._Mi>M              q u        y...    g    ^ ' -'* *4
7   MAY       ’ 98   12:25        FROM       S.Y.P.   CHIEF.DEPT       PAGE.001


                       S o u th Y orkshire
                       POLICE
                       JUSTICE        with    COURAGE




                                      FACSIMILE TRANSMISSION

     Date;                                   ? M ay 1998

     For the attention of                    Chris Thompson
                                             Discipline & Complaints

     From:
                                             Secretary to ACC

     T e l:                                  0114 2523405
     Fax:                                    0114 2523481




                             ^ O ts


                                  'for                 .v     i' \



                                                                cW P

                       Police Headquarters
                       SnigHiil
                       Sheffield S3 8LY
                      Tel: 0114 220 2020 Fax: 0114 262 3248
    7 MAY   ’98   12:25      FROM S.Y.P.      CHIEF.DEPT.                                         P A G E .002




                                                                Ian Dairies.      b a (H ohs>D»p.Ed.
                                                                      Assistant Chief Constable




       Ref ACC/ID*

       7 May 1998

       Matthew J Pyne
       Operational Policing Policy Unit
       Home Office
       50 Queen Anne’s Gate
       London
       SW1H9AT                                                    BY FAX




       Dear Mr Pyne

       Hillsborough Scrutiny * Amended Statements

       I refer to your facsimile letter of 5 May 1998 enquiring about three statements made by
       three police officers. This reply has been prepared in some haste as you ask that a
       response be forwarded before the debate in the House of Commons on Friday 8 May.

       Police Sergeant John Morgan’s details were entered onto the HOLMES computer system
       twice, an operator error, this resulted in him being allocated two nominal numbers N13 and
       N434. The statements he provided were also registered twice, also resulting in them being
       allocated two document numbers, R30 and R267. Both these numbers refer to the same
       report, a copy of which should already have been placed in the House of Commons.

      I           will forward by post the statements of Superintendent Graham McKay and Inspector
^     Hand-Davis. At 20 pages in total they are too lengthy to send by fax. They were not
W     supplied earlier due to an oversight. In our vast amount of Hillsborough Disaster related
      material, some items are occasionally mis-filed for short time.

       If I can be of any further assistance please do not hesitate to telephone me.

       Yours sincerely




       fan Oaines
       Assistant Chief Constable
                                                                                     <-TrC~-
                                                                                                   W-



                                                                                                        4 i-




       C              f    j   r    /fc#-c                                     & r< ^ I *      .




                A* J               y*-C\a4f       A ' # ^ t /U\M \J ^ t o^ -        C—   C/         k& ^ tfr-4r



 tk c a *       d o d /u ^ + J '                               h ae^         Q j* * t^ e U p ^           s ^ 3 k \/J



[fcfiJ/         (k.        prRjt#(A*rt         CVli*                     '



   H t>


            —   0^   **-       S ^ Z a J / 0 * * * -tA s fc         fa       ^K .                          cr-»



  f^U0«_-                                                                        /* f c o      /U        C /l/tr “ tt^



      ^               p ^ - f y                                          s /£ -


                                                uvi      •                                                             j,   pv
       ®                                                                                                 * “           (!w
                                                                                                          l| 5 | ^
06-MAY. ’ 9 8 (WED)     15 : 4 5                                               TEL:0114     2963020                P. 001




 **   CONFIRMATION        RE P OR T   **




 TRANSMISSION
 TRANSACT I ON<S)       COMPL ETED




  NO.    D A TE/TIM E          DESTINATION                           DURATION         PGS      ST A T US   MODE


   553   MAY.   6     15-34                  0114   2523481   8481   0 “ 1 1' 0 7 ’   023      OK          N ECM
12 MAY * '98     09:27 HO F2 DIVISION 0171 273 2703                                 P. 1/4



       H o m e O ffic e
       Operational Policing Policy Unit
       50 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AT
       Switchboard: 0171 273 4000 Fax: 0171 273 2703 Direct Line: 0171 273 2433




 To:           Chief Inspector Thompson, South Yorkshire Police, Complaints and
                Discipline
 From:         M J Pyne


 Date:          12 May 1998                    Time:      10:02


 Fax Nfi:

 Number of pages (including this one)


 Message
 Subject:       HILLSBOROUGH - POLICE STATEMENTS


 I enclose a copy of a letter from Ann Arlington of the Hillsborough Family Support Group
 enquiring about a number of the police statements relating to Hillsborough. Can you let me know
 whether the statements are available and if the other queries raised can be answered.

 Many thanks.


                                                                  r \



 % V * to Va/\
  OCOiA   \o              k
 Hp refers O a ^          d/CoCl&M



                                              £       '>l£ '

                              a K A f
                  IF ANY PART OF THIS FAX IS UNCLEAR
                    PLEASE TELEPHONE: 0171 273 2433
                                                                         Oi?.123tl'B3to      Pg?-




                                     Pioneer Building
                                      67 Dale Street
                                     Liverpool L2 2NS
                                    Tel: 0151 236 1919
                                    Fax: 0151 236 1936


24 April 1998


Matthew Pyne
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London SW1H SAT

Dear Sir

Hi)l?l?giQ»slLQfl&Mm £ptaiiQa

I acknowledge receipt o f 11 boxes of recollections/reports/statements o f South Yorkshire
Police Officers who had some involvement in the Hillsborough disaster. A preliminary trawl
shows the following to be missing:-

Mi                     Name;

R126 }             V
R126A \        ^       CHAPMAN, David Christopher Peter
R126B }            /

R129       y           BENNETT, John Joseph

R221                   FISH     ^
R231A          y       TW1GG, Richard

 R232 y                MURRAY, Bernard Dean

 R233   X              MARSHALL, Roger

 R239 K                DELANEY, Graham

 R244      V           BURNS, Robert
                                                            /
 R266                  JACKSON WW
      ‘ ‘l2 m r                 09:28 W F2 DIVISION 01?1 273 ~
                                                                                                                                          P. 3 / 4
is *9p 16:03       01512361936                     HF S 6                       «>(                8151236193b               Pg. 03




                                Maiafii

    |R267a         X
                                MORGAN, John

    R26E                        DAY, Roger Martin

    R292       y                SMITH, Peter

    R293     X                  ILLINGWORTH, David

     R296 y                     GUTCHER, David

     RS33 \
     RS33A*                     SPENCER John Frederick                              pA^vC^,        dh     V<-0i       ...

     R533B}

     R539          y             ROOK

     R566D                       BROOKE, Ronald                                        ^     rv ^ c ^ U i l    ^    U-^u

     QORS9                       SANDERSON             -        £ Z cA          ^      ^

     QOR63 ^                     HOLLAND, Christopher D

     QOR84             y         PC WILD (amended version sent rather than original) ^
                                       VUtAA^/ V>                              v'>KvC-L U-V^                                .V.W*
                                      law s   cA            ^                       dt/'M-'V. ^
     QOR89                       PC NIELD

     QOR93                       Unsigned * therefore it is impossible to say who the author is. Further,
V                  >/            it appears to be incomplete '“H'tt- (rw ^vo^ Co 0-0 Ao^vcgX C-h ' J,£< hO-f&vS
                                                           CyS^ Cl         p'                      P'C-c^.^ j
     QOR9S                       CROPLEY PF - Final page appears to be the amended version and not
                                 the original.                     “*■      €Xj-4^ O® j2.                     €h>*Ah~'

      QOR96                      Unsigned - therefore it is impossible to say who the author is. Seems to
                       v/
                                 be incomplete,             <*> ac*^.^ a*.               -* ^             ^                                          »
                                                                f s c j,* ,.,          ,•                                                            j
      QOR145 v                   DRABBLE, Kay (amended version sent rather than the original)
                                                  CT5, ^2-/ <5>jC>'/2 <R !T
      QOR417               *✓    McCOY, Andrew - Final page incomplete

      QOR497               ^      JOHNSON, S e e ­

      Finally, can you please supply me with the identity of the author of QOR86. ^                           Q/> r
                                                                                                                   ft-X             i c

      I trust that the above material can be forwarded as a matter o f urgency together with the

                                                      page 2 Of 3
         ,12 MAY'    '98   09=28 HO F2 DIVISION 0171 273 2703                            P. 4 / 4


07/C 5 ’ 98 16:04   015(2361936              HF S G              ~>t       01512361936   Pg.   04
   4




       remainder of the outstanding documentation

       I thank you for your assistance.


        Yours faithfully




         Ann Adlington
         Solicitor




                                                                       /
                                                      Page 3 o f 3
 Incident     110      210598 OP931           DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                         OFFICERS REPORT NUMBER      R221

                                                                                    Station

 Surname               FISH

 Forenames             P

 Age                                              Date of birth

 Address


 Occupation            POL PC2878

 Telephone

dumber      of Pages

 Dated                 020589                                                          Signed


            On Saturday,      15 April,   1989 (150489) I started duty at 7.30am (0730)

             at Doncaster in order to attend the briefing for the FA Cup Semi

            Final at Niagara Sports and Social Club at Sheffield at 9am (0900)

            prompt.        I travelled to Sheffield in company with PC 1333 Smith, also

            a Doncaster Dog Handler.

            At the briefing I was instructed to team up with P           C     1        a

            West Yorkshire Police Dog Handler and patrol from Fox Hill Road along

            Halifax Road outward giving attention to coach parks.             Also to liaise

            with PC 2699 Allen (Dog Section) and pick up coach escorts at the

             Crown Public House on the A61 at High Green and escort the coaches to

            the coach parks at Claywheels Lane and Halifax Road.             We were to take

             over main meal break at        3pm (1500) or as soon as possible afterwards.

            Not long after the commencement of our patrol         PC Galvin and I drove

             along the A61 as far as        the Ml motorway where we saw several Police

            motorcyclists parked at         the roundabout.   I asked them about the

             escorting of the coaches and they said that there were no plans to

            escort coaches this year, although there had been in previous years.

            After this we patrolled the A61 as instructed and ’bas e d ’ ourselves

            at the Crown Pub (the car park that is) and ate our packed meal sat

             in the van.
                                                                       PAGE
                                                                       R221

Traffic began to build up around late morning and into lunch time

until by early afternoon it was often ’stop start’ even as far away

from the ground as High Green.

It was about this time on one of our mobile patrols along the A61

that we were near High Green in a line of ’stop start'      traffic

heading towards Sheffield that we saw a mini coach of the type that

seats about 10 or 12 people stationary in a lay by at High Green.

Some of the occupants appeared to be standing on the grass verge.

As we got closer they saw us and most returned to their coach.         When

we got to the lay by we got out and found they had been urinating.

We warned them as to their conduct but because we were so far away

when they had been urinating we did not take the matter further.

They had obviously consumed    a great deal of drink and insisted on

shaking our hands in the manner of drunken people caught in

embarrassing circumstances.    There were also a number of empty beer

cans in the lay by.   This was the only verbal contact we had with

supporters before the kick off.

As 3pm (1500) approached we travelled towards Niagara,       We were

monitoring the radio and were aware of difficulty some officers were

having with the crowd.   We heard mention of having to open a gate.

We went to Niagara unsure of whether we should start our meal because

of the obvious difficulty which was being encountered at the ground.

I told PC         to wait in the van outside the club while I went in

to see if the other 3pm (1500) meal men      were inside.   They were so we

joined them.   As we started   our meal we   heard a call for bolt

croppers and the radio was now in almost continuous use.       We could

tell there was some sort of    troublewith crowds but not exactly       what.

About 3.20pm (1520) or so a message was passed that a temporary

morgue would have to be set up.    At this the club fell quiet as we

had not up to this point realised how serious the incident was.          Many
                                                                           PAGE
                                                                           R221

         did not finish their meals.     PC        and I left the club and parked

         near to Leppings Lane roundabout in the absence of any instructions.

         Shortly,   1 saw Insp. Phenix coming down the road in the congested

         traffic.   I went to him and asked him for instructions and he said to

         just stand by at the end of our area nearest the ground.     There was

        nothing we could do.    We went and positioned ourselves near the car

         park of the Gate Public House close to a Cenotaph.

         Later on crowds began to leave and one group of noisey supporters
m
^        shouted across   'murderers’.   This was about the time we learned that

         there had been several people killed.    Apart from this group the

         crowds were silent.   We eventually returned to Niagara where we were

         stood down and returned to Doncaster.

         I would add that the mini coach of supporters were obviously from

         Liverpool.

END OF REPORT
 Incident       110      210598 OP931         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                         OFFICERS REPORT NUMBER    R533

                                                                                  Station

    Surname               SPENCER

    Forenames             JOHN    FREDERICK

    Age                                          Date of birth

    Address


    Occupation           POL INSP

    Telephone

^^Jumber of Pages

    Dated                060689                                                     Signed


              I have this date compared the contents of the following documents:

              a)      Anacapa chart prepared by Det. Sgts. Priestley and

              Carr (South Yorkshire) - This is based mainly on Police

              Officers reports and supplemented by video recordings.

              b)   Anacapa chart prepared by DC Albutt and

              (West Midlands) - Based on 4 video recordings only.

              c)   D13 prepared by DCC Hayes (South Yorkshire) - based on
m
w             video recordings, viewed on 160489.

              The analysis by the officers involved follows a similar thread.

              I have not found any area where their analysis differs greatly.

END OF REPORT
 Incident       110     210598 OP931             DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                            OFFICERS REPORT NUMBER    R533A

                                                                                     Station

    Surname             SPENCER

    Forenames           JOHN     FREDERICK

    Age                                             Date of birth

    Address


    Occupation          POL INS

    Telephone

^fcumber of Pages

    Dated               130689                                                          Signed


              On Thursday,     8th June,     1989 (080689) at 11am (1100) I watched a

              compilation tape of the Hillsborough event and video.

              The tape was number             2/R and at a point marked 1200 on the tape

              which came up on the screen, the scene was Leppings Lane turnstiles

              and was showing a crowd situation crushing to get through the

              turnstiles.      When the view moved across to the other side of the area

              showing a group of fans not taking part in the efforts to get into
m
^             the turnstiles, a voice clearly said ’’W e ’ve just got here” .        followed

              shortly afterwards by a voice with a north-western accent saying

              "We've got to get in there at the turnstile.          W e ’ve got to get in

              there".    The inflection of the voice appeared to be more of an

              instruction than a comment and in my opinion it was someone talking

              to a group of persons and giving them a specific instruction as

              opposed to advising them.

              The video then panned to another area.

              The footage concerned ran from approximately 1200 to 1216.

              Det. Inspector Gunn was present.          I played this video and after

              playing it through a few times we were then joined by Detective

              Inspector King who also watched it.

 END OF REPORT
Incident    110   210598 OP931              DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                          OFFICERS REPORT NUMBER    R533B

                                                                                   Station

Surname               SPENCER

Forenames             JOHN     FREDERICK

Age                                              Date of birth

Address


Occupation            POL INS

Telephone

 umber of Pages

Dated                 190689                                                         Signed


           I have this date,       19th June, 1989 (190689) analysed a compilation of

           BBC Television video tapes 1-9 relating to the Hillsborough Disaster

           of 15th April,       1989 (150489).   I make the following observations:-

           14.38.50     Fans at the front nearest the perimeter fence

           in Pen 3 appear comfortable yet there is heavy

           surging towards the yellow       balloon.   Fans    in the

           area of the balloon appear       to go down.

           14.40.11     There is surging    down Pen3 to the      right of the

           balloon as viewed from the       monitor. Fans

           remain comfortable at the front of the pen.

           14.40.41     Fans bottom left of picture near to the perimeter

           fence appear comfortable with sufficient space.

           As camera moves back we see movement in the centre

           of the pen.

           14.41.50     Still ample room at the front of Pen 3, bottom right

           in particular.

           14.45.18     Here we see youth in white shirt standing on barrier

           holding onto youth in brown suede coat.            Still

           ample room in Pen 3 towards Pen 2.

           14.45.43     Surge in crowd behind youth on barrier from rear
                                                                    PAGE    2
                                                                    R533B

of terrace.

14.45.52     Further surges, appear to be confined to the centre

of the pen,    little movement in area of tunnel.

14.46.13     We now have a close-up of youth on barrier holding

onto left hand of youth in brown suede coat who

has his back to him.     This youth is at the rear of

the barrier,    turnstile side.   There appears to be

space around this youth.     No doubt his antics are

keeping neighbouring fans at bay.

14.46.14     To left of youth in brown suede jacket we see stocky

male full head of black hair moustache white shirt

dark jacket.     To left again and slightly to rear is

a youth with short fair hair, blue jumper and

natural coloured jacket.     As we follow him through

the sequence we see him appear to step down, his head

goes down,    then head and shoulders, he goes out of

view.   A youth wearing spectacles behind him follows.

A number of youths to the right of these particularly

one wearing a green, white and red hat and a youth

with ginger hair are looking down.       There appears

to be something underfoot that attracts their

attention and causes the others to stumble.

14.46.21     Same two youths manage to regain their original

position pulling back and leaving space behind

the youth in the brown suede jacket.

14.46.41     Camera pans back to Leppings Lane terrace as it does

so we see youth in white shirt climbing back onto

barrier.     Youth in brown suede coat is definitely

to rear of barrier,    turnstile side.   He is holding

his left hand with his right as he assists the
white shirted youth back onto barrier.

14.46.42     Camera pans back into Pen 3.   We see surging

still taking place in the centre of that pen.

14.46.45     BBC Commentator identifies that outer pens are

not being filled, makes comparison with Pens 3

and 4 suggests some form of segregation.

14.47.05     Shot of Pen 4 shows youth wearing white shirt

back to camera waving arms in the air, space

around him, fans appear to have plenty of room.

14.47.10     Pans across to Pens 1 and 2.   few fans in this

a re a .

14.47.24      This shows fans on fence separating Pens 2 and 3.

14.47.29      Youth in the white shirt still bouncing up and

down on the barrier holding hand of youth in brown

jacket, who is still behind the barrier.      There

is surging in the centre of Pen 3.

14.47.33     We see area of activity to rear of white shirted

youth on barrier below left hand end of Presto

boarding.      Youth climbs on barrier towards rear

of terrace, seen punching air with     right fist, he

appears unsupported.

14.47.34     Piece of white coloured polythene appears bottom

right of screen as it is thrown to our left.

14.47.36     This youth falls forward from barrier into crowd

causing those in front to surge down terrace.,

Youth in white shirt remains on the forward barrier

holding onto youth in brown suede jacket with his

left hand.     This white shirted youth is looking

towards the rear of the terrace and continues to

bounce on the barrier.
14.47.37   Youth jumps from Pen 3 into Pen 2 at the same time

piece of polythene thrown from right to left landing

to rear of white shirted youth on barrier.

14.47.40   Youth who had fallen off rear barrier reappears

on the same barrier and falls back into the crowd.

14.47.42   The white shirted youth on the forward barrier

appears to be falling forward towards rear of terracing.

He still holds onto the youth in brown suede coat

with left hand.

14.47.43   White shirted youth manages to stay on barrier pulling

himself upright.

Heavy surge to left of white shirted youth on barrier

down towards the barrier itself.   Surge appears to

stop due to presence of barrier, does not affect fans

standing at front near the perimeter fence.

14.47.44   Piece of polythene again appears from crowd behind

white shirted youth on barrier and is thrown towards

rear of terrace.

White shirted youth still on barrier twists to his

left still holding right hand of youth in brown suede

coa t .

14.47.45   As white shirted youth on barrier twists to his left

we see youth in brown suede coat falling forward

apparently through the central section of the barrier.

(This may indicate that the white shirted youth is

standing on the outer section of the barrier.)     The

white shirted youth reaches down with his free hand to

take hold of his colleague in the brown coat in

what appears to be an attempt to stop him falling.

Whilst this is taking place we see the piece of polythene
being thrown from right to left in the crowd.

14.47.46   As youth in brown continues to fall through area of

barrier he pulls the white shirted youth forward off

the barrier (at this stage a you t h ’s head passes

through the screen).     We then see both falling into

the crowd forward of the barrier.

View on screen is then blocked out by youths passing

in front of camera.

14.47.48   This youth appears again on the rear barrier punching

the air with his fist.

14.48.02   Piece of polythene again appears in crowd being waved

by fan.

14.48.03   Youth in brown suede jacket jumping up and down

punching air with fist.     There also appears to be

free movement in the area of barrier which may

indicate that central section of barrier has

collapsed.

14.48.21   It appears that the piece of polythene      is again

being thrown around in Pen 3 towards rear    of

terrace which indicates that the fans in that

area were moving freely.

14.48.59   Again we see the piece of polythene being thrown

about by the fans from right to left.

14.49.08   This is a long distance view of the Leppings Lane

terrace.

14.49.31   Man with grey hair slightly to left centre of screen,

by following the sequence through this man appears

unhappy as he is carried with the surge.

14.49.33   The grey haired man goes out of   view of camera.

14.49.37   Red right arm appears front centre of screen pointing
in overhead action - attention drawn to round faced

youth in grey jumper and youth in navy blue jumper.

They appear concerned,   there is much movement amongst

the fans in this area, they are agitated, uneasy,

there is something wrong.    By their actions the answer

lies underfoot.

14.49.42    Shot of fans climnbing from Pen 3 into Pen 2.    Each

one climbing over same section of fence.     This may

be the end of the barrier.

14.49.52    To the bottom left hand of screen whirlpool effect

appears in the crowd to the front of a youth in

navy shirt with white collar.

14.49.53    Youth with torn shirt over Liverpool strip climbs

to his feet from the centre of the whirlpool.     There

is a white shirted youth to his left.     They both

stand back looking down.

14.49.55    Youth in black jacket and white shirt appears to cl

to his feet from the same area followed by at least

3 others.

14.50.00    Camera moves to left of Pen 3, bottom right of

screen we see fan in blue to his left is an elderly

man who appears concerned.

14.50.02    Youth in brown suede jacket comes into view (this i

the same youth who was holding onto the white shirted

youth on the barrier).     He is looking towards rear

of the Pen 3 terrace punching air with his right fist.

14.50.04    We see youth in white looking down towards his feet

This is in front of elderly man with spectacles.

14.50.05    Top of screen youths have arms outstretched,

they appear to be pushing away from something
                                                                           PAGE    7
                                                                           R533B

         underfoot.

         14.50.08     Shows surge   Pen 3 - camera pans away.

         14.50.10     Same youth,   brown jacket, can be seenat the

         bottom of    the screen,   right arm in the air.

         14.50.14     Youth, brown jacket, appears bottom right of

         screen punching air with right fist facing up

         terrace.

         14.50.19    Same youth appears bottom centre screen punching

         air with fist facing up terrace, movement of fans

         from perimeter fence back up the terrace indicates

         that the centre of the barrier is no longer there,

         as we can see free movement of fans through that

         area whilst fans at the outer sections of the

         barrier have restricted movement.

         14.50.25    Same youth in brown jacket appears to be forcing

         his way back up the terrace towards area of the

         barrier (again confirmation that he came through

         that barrier at 14.47.46).

         14.50.27    There is a heavy surge towards bottom right corner

         of screen towards the area of Pen 3 trackside gate.

         This surge travels across left to right of screen

         through area of broken barrier.

         14.50.29    Youth in brown jacket goes down, swamped by fans in

         a surge.

         14.50.30    When the screen is viewed in slow motion, one can

         see a number of fans in the surge going down.

         They do not reappear.

         14.50.32     Youth in brown suede jacket comes to his feet.

END OF REPORT
m /z                                                                                               4^+~t
                                         f *
t4a^< c
                                                    fbi/sC O } U sf& £

                                                                                                ©3li       K-A-m



        sSut      H   _




                  S w      ,
j   }                              ’




F u ^ - f ^                     -4a                                      ^                „    , . ..            t+ jc U * *   [S ju ^ ,

                  # c          o ic ^ f c m ^ k      fif   I'ld K   -r* 2 ^         4^         ^        t€ ^ L J M ^ d




                                                  O'UC^O   fiG ^ o b u -^ jd         t-A       V^c     ,1|V*tA4,..   S)

                          to te f K & u *                  d m jm l                                          a ’S ^ M     <>*..*&*

        C&4v^to^>                           \sXkfitot      ChpfbljaJ SWect                                 ^4,^®,tJt tfpQ (\&*MJ i^ ^ g J
        f^ h ;    4 1 ,4                                        \a&iy          ?,H>-f
                                                                               ,» *H -. ^ *.

                                                                                                       T                       ^




            ■Jj
                                                                                                             I                                   MW



                           ^UijUV^ P&U'fiji^ CUut

$0      (L^U.^            (Weo             <^Xe                                                        1^'                 <^ 9 .Sf.........

U o ^ oCbmv

Suii H- °\ vvr


fSLsLO-'/ ^ W



                                     Sc^-v/XvC.t^             " ^^Aaca, \ V^X4^A*t»*C^A



     ) No|^v 4>a                                                                    1*2 (WAvf >4^ |f                                                           <X *Vv»v*«-»-/

       pSVce                                  m    JLJGv*^ -k^                          <icS



     Sov\jl      Si ''■$'*.                            yv\4y»-5Xo^>* i        \»-&*>-c_. cWfc^C                  (S&M-n £yA         ^A. '~^?W fcf ««A*Ht                            4-a

     ;(W ^ v                      <5^ v^«. -|^fct f>N4-f<iK,^-c^                                                    **■ M f a p ^           o) |3s3u.a.#                                  ^

      &/-y^       eAA«»a          4 i0      ^ ri^p^H M B B kSE M r^               _ ^ t* JA»*'i~«^u-~--'^~-              ^ n e s^ a i^ c A ^ ^                                  •«-•■.
                                                                                                                                                     " " ' - ‘i!- t : ' : : ^ A [



                                                                         ^APvv^- '\&'*~                                                    —     vsa-V 4^s~oi<„




         '^Q-JSl                                      Os/t'*-C_ &*J O^JL&XkJ^. C**-&^'~                  OvW<_.
        c^ <        e^ce-pCu^                  ^                              ^              0 C 23, A } £ 3^k^4^.*..i^v*L <;* ^ s (foM*-*




         (S ^ O f^        S ' ^7         J\&r*akA*<t 0»*v            v*ac^»    0&-&0 v e .$ ;v« £ t~ "< V .        O-a       ^   E t»                <5* a.W-jO U o - C j

          oLaOu^vC,*.^ 44<4_ IcJXl^.                          l&wv^-e^                            't*w r^oXu^hJ pcCu. oLti '                          ^ 3* «SS S6¥A^k^
           S.      c & ji*y S )     w 4*-eX        s k ^ ld          tdU*a.-J+)      /*>.»•••■'   & < uu*. p l f r u M        ><y~^&. Hr ^ C              lib tL Q .


         <3,0 ^ Stf- Uiu2.&i j 4& l                             (4^fr^u^vt                ^£$*vupU^ {-^ * ^ C S 1                                          j        £*/>-o SM*

           & +'C ^i\*J             mW>. C-i* M rs       ■“'H ' h-^gtjy\£,,r>Jd^,^ A*Vi4stsoi4je/,                * C&jQtj Q          % ik j/t^ ,    is\




         &0£           H f, *4- & 0 /£ ^ 4                           \j£a, cua^o*^                 ^     % ***.          oS^teT*M»^^4              a^»* <>* a^«'*-<‘
                                                                                                                                                                   -^'/’

          c5 A                fi£..f<s*-t*'t" ^ t i J t X     0* £       0& * ^ p k iL , f ^ H . £***■■            A«. J u ,* -^ t< y i Q e tf x j          ■’.? h ^ s
(j LO            ^                         +>               \                    aW    ,   $ o Js-&iA^     cp® + q

                      ^   0 ^ -c ^ A ji^     co p u la    c»*-t- £K t^Jr-« $ /                 a \.o^                ^&*A

    O p t-..tt\,& X junJk . .     os&Lt-gA      T«       .4" .7.S 5     •              ...........
    s ' '■
         '    "' ?

&Otf          v n         M t Co3          Tt*.                    z*       C^-yoU-fcfe V ^ W <    G^*jQ   A«




              j3tz>       ^-t. Ow»s&ts*       Ij          iWIi^uvA^r         U"> a/5              ®^*v t^ui



                      W            c**<v^.jylif^t aC@ --^gSy*


•      ?
                                                       Ian Daines,       BA(Hons) Dip. Ed.
                                                             Assistant Chief Constable




Ref: D&C/KG         HD114

29 May 1998

Matthew J Pyne
Operational Policing Policy Unit
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London
SW1H 9AT




Dear Mr Pyne

Hillsborough Scrutiny - Police Statem ents

Further to my letter of 7 May 1998 enclosed please find the statements of Fish and
Spencer as requested.

With regard to your facsimile letter of 12 May 1998 enquiring about a number of police
statements relating to the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster of 15 April 1989, some of those
statements were used as part of the police discipline enquiry and have been retained within
the archive although not back in their original files. The statements are available and are
enclosed herewith, with the exception of R221 Fish, R533 A B Spencer and R566 D Brooke
which will follow shortly.

QOR59 Sanderson was also registered as R306 and is a duplicate document, the latter
forming part of the material provided to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny, acopy of
which should already have been placed in the House of Commons Library.

QOR84 Wild - the statement provided to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny wasthe
original which was subsequently amended, a copy of which is attached hereto.

QOR93 and QOR96 - the authors of these statements are as named on the reports which
are complete. There are no further pages to the reports.

QOR95 Cropley and QOR145 Drabble - in both cases the original and amended copies are
attached together and form part of the material forwarded to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
scrutiny.
QOR417 McCoy - the report is complete, there are no further pages.

QOR86 - the author of the statement is as named on the report.

If I can be of any further assistance please do not hesitate to contact me.


Yours sincerely




Ian Daines
Assistant Chief Constable
               S o u th Yorkshire

               POLICE                                   Ian Daines,       BA(Hons) Dip.Ed.
                                                              Assistant Chief Constable
               JUSTICE      with      COURAGE




Kef: ACC/ID^         fHD179

2 June 1998

Mike Hall MP
MP for Weaver Vale
House of Commons
London
SW1A OAA




Dear Mr Hall

I refer to your letter of 26 May 1998 concerning Constable Illingworth and the Hillsborough
tragedy.

We gave Lord Justice Stuart-Smith every co-operation in his scrutiny of reports that new
evidence had been uncovered in relation to the Hillsborough Disaster of 1989.

That co-operation continued when his report was published in that the Chief Constable
agreed to place a large volume of archive material in the House of Commons Library.
Constable Illingworth’s statement is amongst that material. To assist you, I attach a copy of
the officer’s statement (he made only one statement).

Yours sincerely




Ian Daines
Assistant Chief Constable




                Police Headquarters
                Snig Hill
                Sheffield S3 SLY
                Tel: 0114 220 2020 Fax: 0114 252 3243
                 M   ik e   H a ll, M em ber    of   P a r l ia m e n t   fo r   W e a v er V a l e




                                    H O U S E OF C O M M O N S
Our Ref: MH                               LONDON          S W 1 A OAA


PC Ken Greenway
Complaints and Discipline Department
South Yorkshire Police
Windsor Road
Sheffield S8 8UB

26th May 1998



Dear PC Greenway,

I have been advised by Home Office Minister Alun Michael MP to write to you for copies o f the                  .
unabridged and abridged statements made by PC Illingworth concerning the Hillsborough tragedy,

I look forward to receiving the statements in the near future.

Yours sincerely,




 M ik e H a ll M P




      e J X f r jtM .c A     M.pU.6} >




                                                                          '/QiAa       Q-vA*/




                             Office 8, C astle P a rk , F ro d s h a m , C h e sh ire W A 6 6U J
               Tel 01928 735000 • Fax 01928 735250 • e-m ail: m ic h ae l.h all@ g e o 2 .p o p tel.o rg .u k
           S o u th Yorkshire                 kW        ,


           POLICE                             V ix J U ^        cJ j L l   L J   a   a tC L U U U J
           JUSTICE       with    COURAGE
                                               OJViL                        \cxjv             JpS'
                                                         cfo     Cti^CA.C^k.         ^ V o S sl J&Su J }


Wi t h   C o m p l i m e n t s                aJ^ k.          pr^sE   -


                                                  I k jK ^ K ^ /)
           Ian Daines B,A, (Hons,), Dip Ed,
           A ssistant Chief Constable
           Police Headquarters
           S nig Hill
           Sheffield S3 8LY                    Direct Line:

           Tel: 0114 276 8522
                         J - f to -L               (a J                                                           Y.*-~           I ^                5

    tbo-ovD'*-. ^
                                ^                                                                                   I                                ( &£ ■{

     S        M .1A                 &




       $          M sj& f--             'b         ,) f a ^      'itJ X e r               0/        *?&          H'V^              /^<T                               -^a,-.       ^
      ^ C \S m ^&V'&s                        t^ ,o * sA ^      4H               ^>-            Q h l^ % ^ » i4 - i                        o & r-^ .js.* *'^ *)   He
■   *^4f

^                                                              <*          :'^» ^hJfc&**A </Jj
       sj                                4$          ^v<V'?                           ^ -4 ^ J ^ C               $>liw «ufc*°*A*f* d o * Jxk&<\
       /v                           M ~ o * '- $ t        \j   C o     M 't A A v V           / 1 k > /& f(s j     jk f          y h           0 ^ M     *

     S , \*',.‘? ^ * , *“ 1    '*“£ © # * '* - *                _*~h         ^< S -    t S a’ - v                         ■''" A j^ r i      0*4*4                    /< >   \*+X& r*e~t   ^
                      ..y                                                                                                          ^

     r

                /             c^*'’*/«^

    ®          At-c
J}      & \.(X e * *■      fS4.                 ])       ^                        $   /*£     5(/h-
   .                                   V   J    I    A         .                  '
r € > '‘   '-■/r-x ^ A ,                                      H h ^M .   A...-0             i t £ *< *$ .


t,i \                             £j           tS^j~tsc«c*/
                     M   ik e   H a ll, M em ber   of   P a r l ia m e n t   for   W eaver Va le




                                       H O U SE OF CO M M O N S
Our Ref: MH/                               L O N D O N S W 1A OAA

PC Ken Greenway
Complaints and Discipline Department
South Yorkshire Police
Windsor Road
Sheffield S8 8UB

26th May 1998




Dear PC Greenway,

I have been advised by Home Office Minister Alun Michael MP to write to you for copies of the
unabridged and abridged statements made by PC Illingworth concerning the Hillsborough tragedy.

I look forward to receiving the statements in the near future.

Yours sincerely,

        Li      iA




M i k e H a ll M P




                           Office 8, Castle Park, Frodsham, Cheshire WA6 6U]
             Tel 01928 735000 • Fax 01928 735250 • e-mail: michael.hall@geo2.poptel.org.uk
                                           'I f 111.A FOSTCOBf? ']
                 House q 1   o m m o n s
         8                                 I f l 6 - « S 111112, J




  o x
       $
Recycled Paper
                                                          Ian Daines,     BA(Hons) Dip.Ed.
                                                              Assistant Chief Constable




Ref: D&C/KG^        HD114

8 June 1998

Mr Matthew Pyne
Home Office
Operational Policing Policy Unit
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London
SW1H 9AT




Dear Mr Pyne

I refer to your facsimile letter of 12 and 22 May 1998.

I can confirm that I have forwarded to you copies of the statements as requested and
responded to the queries raised by Ms Adlington in your letter of 12 May 1998.

I can advise you that all the officers reports including R1 to R93 were forwarded to Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith as part of his scrutiny and authority was given for copies of the same
to be placed in the House of Commons Library.

The abbreviations QOR and FIO refer to Questionnaire Officers Report and Force
Intelligence Officer respectively.

Yours sincerely




Ian Daines
Assistant Chief Constable
       MAY     '98   03:37 HO F2 DIVISION 0171 273 2703                                      P. 1,



          H o m e O ffic e
          Operational Policing Policy Unit
          50 Queen Anne’s Gate, London SW1H 9AT
          Switchboard: 0171 273 4000 Fax: 0171 273 2703 Direct Line: 0171 273 2433




    To:         Ken Greenway, Complaints & Discipline


    From:       MJPyne


    Date:       22 May 1998                       Time:       10:12

A   Fax NA:

    Number of p a ges (including this one)


    Message
    Subject:     HILLSBOROUGH STATEMENTS


    I enclose a copy of a further letter from the Support Group about the police statements. Can I ask
    you to inquire into the points raised and come back to me with an early reply?




                     IF ANY PART OF THIS FAX IS UNCLEAR
                       PLEASE TELEPHONE: 0171 273 2433
        dd. P1HY 'yb Wy^di'           HU h d             0171
                                               D IV iblO N              ?7^{ ? 7 P R .         „       U1f. i i. io 19 36     tt3■ cL/ cL
/lib 'Vo u:Zt unujoiyjo                         1 1 rrl- j «



                                                                                                                     •. *


             syppO^
                                   Hillsborough Family Support Group
                                                         Central Buildings
                                                       41 North John Street
                                                         Liverpool L1 6RR
                                                        Tel: 0151 236 1919
                                                        Fax: 015! 236 1936


             21 May 1998



             Matthew Pyne
             Home Office
             Operational Policing Policy Unit
             SO Queen Anne’s Gate
             London SW1H 9 AT

              Dear Sir

               1 refer to previous correspondence and in particular my letter* of 24* April, 28* April, 1“ May
               and 6* May. i should be gratefbl if you would supply me with a copy of the statements
               referred to therein as a matter of urgency

               Further, the index of the documentation previously supplied and entitled “Officer Reports
               Master Number Form”, begins at R94 It would appear therefore that I am still missing
               statements R 1 to R93 Could you please provide me with a copy o f the same.

                Also, I am still awaiting a response to my letter of 7thMay.

               Finally, could you please ascertain from South Yorkshire Police what the abbreviations
              1“Q.O.R” and “F.I.O.” stand for.
                                                                                "4^ A*
                 I thank you for your assistance

                 Yours faithfUHy                                                                                            'fX %.

                                                                                                                             V-


                  Ann Arlington
                  Solicitor
                                                                                                   /
                                                             VICE-CHAIRMAN I S E d ffiU R Y                            TRK A SU RER
    CHAIRMAN                                                                                                           M«». J. Tuynot
                                                             P. Hammond                                                43CorwftildSwi
    T. Hicks                                                 9A fttiMMMUVit R * » d
     P « ( t t M iU
                                                             Liverpool
                                                                                                                       BlrkrabNd
     Newhoutt Une, Long Pw*mi>                                                                                          Merseyside
                                                             L176BX
     siuptMson 4QU                                                                                                      Tel: 0151-452 7S03
                                                             Tel/Fax; OlJt-72* 5rn
     TeWFsa: 01729-840*40
                                                             M o b i l e : 05 S V -32A ! 2 t
     Mobile. 057V 4! i 051
(2 >€j»n/                      ........

                                                                                         11 \ ......

sJ        Sft^rfL .i*»         '^»w..                                ............^             p X M A v y { Q G l S ... ..;,..1___



&         C#^                                   ^ .. Q j^ * * ..^ ^ v o e ^jo^-g^'-.?^si_."-^a-v*-.. ucipCtt^.^

                               K-^^j wMt-*a^gLaA                               ^»<>.■^•jiA^^tLJ&t'-..     *^s........ . Oj (At4L^*%A^j

 ^ovm^q^         -                                               w    ... ........ (a<tfc2-T.^                .. (2~ ........ tA ? t k


 C^        G~COv\         QkoAaj U2-4?          (Sup ^*                         _ (yJlS^.,.
                          fi   /        -As    ^     «)?

  &0                 Sj    ^Cv9     3 C ^^'C 'i-^'j                                            .. W*<3...

    £^j VAft        l
                    O#VVML         4.         ^Lt    ^ O ovt-6 a/        A                                   ^ ............. jf^/,



                & 4A +~£* j <&Ms+ ^                 (% LQ /L .        0 < oS        /^ /o               J^ L ^ JU      >^p_

      .                                                                                ... +*K,p*t'          jf?~&CSLr_.
    22 MAY     '98   09=37 HO F2 DIVISION 0171 273 2703                                      P. 1/2



          H o m e O ffic e
          Operational Policing Policy Unit
          50 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AT
          Switchboard: 0171 273 4000 Fax: 0171 273 2703 Direct Line: 0171 273 2433




    To:         Ken Greenway, Complaints & Discipline


    From:       MJPyne


    Date:       22 May 1998                       Time:       10:12

®   Fax

    Number of p ages (including this one)


    M essag e
    Subject:     HILLSBOROUGH STATEMENTS


    I enclose a copy of a further letter from the Support Group about the police statements. Can I ask
    you to inquire into the points raised and come back to me with an early reply?




                     IF ANY PART OF THIS FAX IS UNCLEAR
                       PLEASE TELEPHONE: 0171 273 2433
    2?,M9Y                     H0 F2 division 0171 273 2703


                                                                                         vS»»oa




                             Hillsborough Family Support Group
                                             Central Buildings
                                           41 North John Street
                                             Liverpool L2 6RJR
                                            Tel: 015.1 236 1919
                                            Fax: 0151 236 1936


      21 May 1998



      Matthew Pyne
      Home Office
      Operational Policing Policy Unit
      SO Queen Anne’s Gate
      London SW1H 9 AT

      Dear Sir

       1 refer to previous correspondence and in particular my letters of 24* April, 28th April, 1“ May
       and 6th May. 1 should be gratefbl if you would supply me with a copy of the statements
       referred to therein as a matter of urgency

       Further, the index of the documentation previously supplied and entitled “Officer Reports
       Master Number Form", begins at R94. It would appear therefore that I am still missing
       statements R1 to R93 Could you please provide me with a copy o f the same.

       Also, 1 am still awaiting a response to my letter of 7th May.

        Finally, could you please ascertain from South Yorkshire Police what the abbreviations
      ! “Q.O.R” and “F.LO ” stand for.

        I thank you for your assistance.

        Yours faithfully

                                                                                        ■*C *•
                                                                                    QOfc

         m m m m iig iu n
         Solicitor
                                                                        /
                                                VICE-CHAIRMAN / SECRETARY                   TREASURER
c h a ir m a n
                                                                                            Mf*. J. Tnyaof
                                                P. Hammond                                  4 3 O o rw /U ld Hoik!
T.fBcki                                         £5fkmHMVtMtfcoa4
f«il» Mill #*«'                                                                             BSrlccnlwKl
                                                Liverpool
Ntwhouit Une, Lo*f Preston
                                                U 76B X
                                                                                            Merseyside
Skipton BD23 4QU                                                                             Tel: 0151*652 7S03
                                                TcWFix: 0151*724 5?7l
Tel/Fax: 0172^840840
Mobile: 0973411051
                                                Mobile:05!tfM24!2i
                                                                                                                                                                             J



                                   V ’
                                                                                                                                                                              i
    Gary West

    Police Constable

    Woodseats Police Station#
                                                                                                                          F .L S ^

                                                                                                                                             Q     *             Xj2~^3ugu~
                                                                                                                      yGj-a                             L
                                                                                                                                                      ' 1 -         /A                                &M o
                                                                                                                                                        — 9 '°-
                                                                                                                                                        ■V z ? . '
                                                                                                                      O -to ^ tu ^         /c -L o jz     /* ■€ . o,
                                                                                                                       <&cJ~                     c            9                                               tzi*2~


                                                                                                                                                                                   -s^Lv-c                   iX w O O


                                                                                                                                (/.J<SLs-Q-                                      O4_o/


                                                                                                                      /■/O-^-iL. / € COiLctfc                        /<<&.-                    ™4L.
                                                                                                                      Zc-ozl'                                         <l'X




                                                                         1
                  i                           r-i r v \                 r _                   V A        . rr,              C r >      ^ V        \c \n                    ~ l- ~ Z - l ..._ _ .

         -H               i-4                                      d                V r-A            A '.i'- 't               ^ « A i C_£..........                                                    ---



                                                                                                                                                  1nil !■        i
                                                                                V -+ 5 ifiK > jrr' _ .                        _______                  \ j. . r r * r w i


                                         f - w A *
                                  -------,---^                         \ Q C- ~> —
                                                                                 A— r                 . \                     r £ £ \_ c r V c - r l                   '                   r
             1 _4_
                                            r,4 ~                       ( . ^ i c ^ r L - ^ O C i_ t °                     ____ & r

         r jv T tf e r .                   l r\
                                                                              ............                                                                                                 fV~\

                                                                                         ; "A .V L                         rA r.^ a                    e A ^ i J f L ....... C J ± L jL E C S _
                                                                 v __^\
     '   \                                 ^ ' a/ '•                          W r . A ' . i ' .11 f tQ . CI                                                 \\.\v      V; c . ^ . ',o r , U


                                  ^ .1 1                                      l..     : .'\--\                V > ^U < )rV                    \                      V ..\.

                                                                                              \                                      1 —%
                                  c \ —. ' r                           V'                V i'. <'y » /-■•                         r ' l / . j > , n /"i          ___ Li. »
                                                                                               V }
                                     - v. ' ^ 3                                 ■" ^ irL         y --H -.t                                             (-1 .           C         t k /!.
                                                                                 «                                               1                ^   e=—
                                                                                                                                                        =>   ",  I|
         <cr    <-,           ,      - ^                   i                        U [ ; U / voo /-n                            W a vj i>r rte xJ___ !w_sl*^^CjcJJL_
                                                                                         A,   ?\                      \
                          W           .                r . /■i r l                      1\        i f •- - 1~, n r<   hr_Ja£X _

                                                               s~ \                                     ' —4                            vV                   ^    v \ \ e V . f ■ c C :t's.C i\\___
                                                               1 \r \                    r v .T- r ! v : r ^ \ _....... ___
                                                               r                                                                                                                                  V   ')


n             S ia n sd   .                                                                              Sifnstur® witnessed toy .
0 4 - JUN. ' 9 8 ( T H U )   08:57                                                  TEL-0114     2963020                P. 0 0 1




  **    CONFIRMATION           REPORT   **




  TRANSMISSION
  TRANSACTION(S)              COMPLETED




    NO.      DATE/TIM E             DESTINATION                           DURATION         PGS      S T AT US   MODE


    72?      JUN.     4      8:57                 01709   832252   2252   0" 0 0 ' 3 0 ”   001      OK          N ECM
   |E | Office of H.M. Coroner
                     The Medico-Legal Centre, Watery Street, Sheffield S3 7ET

HM Coroner:                                                         South Yorkshire (West)
Christopher P. Dorries                                                   (0114)273-8721



                                                                                 02 July 1998
Your ref: HD180
Our ref:

Superintendent David Foss
Discipline & Complaints Department
South Yorkshire Police
Windsall Road
SHEFFIELD
S8 8UB




Dear Mr Foss
Hillsborough Disaster - Release of Statements
Thank you for your letter of the 25th June 1998 concerning the release of a statement by
Mr George Jacob.
Mr Hallxplainly does not fall within the provisions of Rule 57 of the Coroner’s Rules 1984
as a properly interested person but one assumes that he is the representative of
somebody who does. As ihe majority of my papers do not yet seem to have been returned
by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s enquiry, I am not actually sure what part Mr Jacob played in
the matter and thus cannot say whether his statement was a document'tendered in
evidence'which might bring it within the requirements of Rule 57.
However, I feel the proper attitude to be adopted is one of openness even though Mr
Jacob’s sums it up rather neatly in his letter by referring to parties “whose motivation may
be other than the final resolution of the relative’s distress”.
In summary, I am not sure whether I have a right to object to the release of Mr Jacob’s
statement. If I do, I choose not to object.
Thank you for giving me an opportunity to comment.
Yours sincerely______________

                                                  SOUT!

C P Dorries
HM Coroner
                                                      HEADQUARTERS
                                                   discipline & c m m m




                                                                                    CJA6733I.DOC
                        o


        ^ j -OsA a^ ^   *e-
                        ' w j v-M
                               -^Q k-v _.
                 "3                      ft*'Ife

                 <2>r dc«-^<^ -&v-ct Sr:

Lfijt

            (SO^



                              %c     3




              — (L}Cf*+-rk ^ ^TU 2)
               { ({'^‘(2? '£•'*   ^
                ^| K I W ^ .
                 "p'V*1 cxe-^ Z-tlbf^ V
                      wvjle^ ©-©if
                 QUaj8 ^ f>«_ s5^^'8'-— ^
OFFENCE(S) AND LEGAL AUTHORITY: (Continue on   j


   COURT CODE




Tim e, day. date and place com m itted

D EC ISIO N




D ate of H earing

GEN/28 (Revised February 1996)
          SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE MESSAGE FORM

Rec'd:                                                    No:
Phone:
Location:                                                 Sub Div:
Type:
Source:


Detail:                           _____________
Tag req'd:     YES/NO                                     Level:
Link:


                                      INCIDENT LOG
IDENT:         TIME:
             ,cs© . HRS               DATE:                           RECEIVED




                          <SLO.



                          .   T    . . i   .vTS. ?;


                                        .             ."Icrvf.,?v.9 V*.
                              ^      2-ief^-.                       .V^ .T T T yS


                                     .................................
        RC                                   w                        ___—

Gen/21
                                INCIDENT LOG
IDENT:   TIME:
             HRS                 DATE:............ ............................... RECEIVED




         «**••••                                      .................. . / / . ...............
                                                /                 v j '[ b
                   .............. C    **

                     ............................... .......................................................



                                                                                        ...............




                   ............................................................                   #




   RC
OFFENCE(S) AND LEGAL AUTHORITY: (Continue on   j


   COURT CODE




Time, day, date and place com m itted

D E C ISIO N




D ate of H earing

GEN/28 (Revised February 1996)
Mr C Domes                                                  Your Ref:
HM Coroner
Medico Legal Centre                                         Our Ref: D&C/DIF/KG/         HD180
Watery Street
SHEFFIELD                                                   Date:       25 June 1998
S3 7ES




Dear Sir

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - RELEASE OF STATEMENTS

Mr Mike Hall, Member of Parliament, has asked to be provided with a copy of the statement
made by Mr George Jacob, Consultant Surgeon.

I have written to Mr Jacob seeking authority to release his statement to Mr Hall. He has agreed
to its release, however, he feels that the ultimate decision has to be made by yourself.

I enclose a copy of his letter for your information.

Please find enclosed a stamped addressed envelope for favour of your reply.

Yours faithfully




D I Foss
Superintendent
Discipline & Complaints

Encs




                                                       The person dealing with this correspondence is:
                                                       Chief Inspector Thompson
                                                       0114 296 3011
                                                                                                             Doncaster Royal Infirmary,
                                                                                                             A rm thorpe Road,
                                                                                                             Doncaster,
                             The Doncaster Royal                                                             D N 2 5LT
        ■ m                  & Montagu Hospital                                                              Tel. (01302) 366666
                                                                                                             Fax.(01302) 320098



          GJI

          18 June 1998

          DI Foss
          Superintendent
          Discipline & Complaints
          Windsor Road
          Sheffield
          S8 8UB

          Dear Sir

          Re:       Hillsborough Disaster - Release of Statem ents

          I have no particular objection to my statement being released to Mr Hall. However, the
          statement was made at the request of the coroner and I feel the ultimate decision has to be
          made by him. As far as I am aware there is no statutory obligation to release our statements
          to interested parties whose motivation maybe other than the final resolution of the relatives
          distress.

          Yours sincerely


                                                                                                            °{9
                                                                                                       jc            ^
          MR GEORGE JACOB MBBCH MCH FRCS
          CONSULTANT SURGEON




                                                                   |SCill“H¥0RKf*




                                                                                     . V-.r. , •   V
                    Awarded for excellence
                                                                               ■x & tA itrr*


Part of the D oncaster Royal Infirm ary & M ontagu Hospital N H S Trust                                                            WZL004
Mr G Jacobs MB, BCH, MCH, FRCS                        Your Ref:
Consultant Surgeon
Doncaster Royal Infirmary                             Our Ref:    D&C/DIF/KGj     HD 180
Armthorpe Road
DONCASTER                                             Date:       11 June 1998




Dear Mr Jacobs

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - RELEASE OF STATEMENTS

I refer to your request to be provided with a copy of your statement to assist you in deciding
whether or not to release it to Mr Hall, Member of Parliament.

Please find enclosed a copy of your statement.

Yours sincerely




D I Foss
Superintendent
Discipline & Complaints




                                                 The person dealing with this correspondence is:
                                                 Chief Inspector Thompson
                                                 0114 296 3011
          SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE MESSAGE FORM

Rec'd:                                             No:
Phone:

Locati°n:                    f< 3 *7 *r6 .         Sub Div:

Typa;              I   17/        I
Source:       2*


Detail:
Tag req'd:   YES/NO                                Level:
Link:


                         INCIDENT LOG
IDENT:       TIME:
J.§-. O tS ^    HPS      DATE:.                               RECEIVED




                                        tr
                                        .
                                          ?C\ .w*.
                                              7 .
                                      < c r^ j S



                                               4«i

                                                     T   z




Gen/21
                                  INCIDENT LOG

IDENT:           TIME:
............................HRS   DATE:............ / ............. / ............. RECEIVED
Mr M Pyne                                         Your Ref: SW1H9AT
Home Office
Operational Policing Policy Unit                  Our Ref:   D&C/DIF/KG]      HD 180
50 Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON                                            Date:      4 June 1998




Dear Mr Pyne

HILLSBOROUGH STATEMENT - DR JACOB

I refer to your facsimile letter of 28 May 1998 seeking release of the statement made by
Dr Jacob.

I have written to Dr Jacob seeking his agreement to release his statement and once I am in
receipt of his response, I will contact you again.

Yours sincerely




D I Foss
Superintendent
Discipline & Complaints




                                             The person dealing with this correspondence is:
                                             Police Constable Greenway
                                             0114 296 3068
Mr G Jacob MB, BCH, MCH, FRCS                             Your Ref:
Consultant Surgeon
Doncaster Royal Infirmary                                 Our Ref:    D&C/DIF/KG/    1D180
Armthorpe Road
DONCASTER                                                 Date:       1 June 1998
DN2 5LT




Dear Mr Jacob

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - RELEASE OF STATEMENTS

Mr Mike Hall, Member of Parliament for Wearer Vale has asked to be provided with a copy of
your statement which was produced after the Hillsborough Disaster. Before I release this
document I think it only proper I seek your view on the matter.

Please accept my apologies for raising this issue at this time, but I trust that you will appreciate
my reluctance to release a document which carries your details, without first seeking your
approval.

I enclose a pre-paid envelope for favour of your reply.

Yours sincerely




D I Foss
Superintendent
Discipline & Complaints




                                                  The person dealing with this correspondence is:
                                                  Police Constable Greenway
                                                              West Midlands Police
                                                     STATEM EN T OF W ITNESS
15   22                                  (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s. 102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)
16   23
17
18
     24
     25     Name             yjZ L                           C &a/Q te
19   26
20   27     Age                      Z . I (yrs)                  Date of Birth ................
21   28
            Occupation                    0.^:?
15   22     Home or business address                                    X > /^ r                <$.. rr y /? .(6 < 1               .. J t e f r %        .
16   23 :   and telephone number
17   24 ;                                                               ................... /tC ciy    f i t r. . J.~ (*h irfi.O
18   25
19   26
20   27
21   28



15   22 :
            This statement, consistingI of c-----
                                               .         2
                                                      page(s) each* signed by me, is true to the best of my knowledge
16   23 :
            and belief and I make it knowing that, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I
17   24 :   have wilfully stated in it anything which I know to be false or do not believe to be true.
18   25
19   26
20   27     Date                                         dav of
21   28
is [
            Signc                                                                              Signature witnessed by

                                                                                               Officer's Name

                                                                                               Rank



            fl .0 .        f i ' r M j .f t                f t . ? 1 . . <r9crJ. .2 . . .                              _ ..         y               d
                                                                                                      .. JtJL jb tft               JL

                                                                                                        n      ...........................
            .       .... Th ...^/jr./ .                                                                                              . M*.          ...
                            .   . M v<~.. . . *vJr..                                      .7. Z o .                                . sty d x ?*»<***...
                                                                                             . . -ffrZ^VrrrP-d.                                              .




                                                                    '                                           i -M < u *                    i Jyf

            r^ p y yy^ .’...(/ .                            ..ffyr ...                                                                        ....
                                                                                                       . .S&-. . rtfv-tiJJi. .
                       .   ,c7                                                                        /y?4?. /fi-.
            % h-. .              ...<*-. ..                                                  .^C^T^Gryy<0rer * ^ ,7 j


            .cl.                                             .-djL&s?!. ...                              ^       (ty f. .S ru rit. M * J . . s§ . .„ .
                                                   . U * . .                                   . 3 . J^ ryM *.. . ,'TTJ. .                 .*&S. .'M mJ.

                                 . . r v d . . .-^ S t ..                      . . .c). . J rp jl. . .                                                   ,
            i k . .sK « J        .                 , .   ^ 4 - V tW          . . .




                                                                                          Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                                                                      WG 413
                                                                                                                                                                (Amended 9.87)
                                                                        West Midlands Police
                                                               STA TEM EN T OF W ITNESS
                                                     (C.J. Act 1967, s .9; M.C. Act 1980, s . 102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


             Continuation of statement of . . . .                            . ...                                       ........... ( 2 )     ...................

              •                                                       . . ..<■*. ...f      ../ f . r            . . /Vl-f/. .'*p& yyri.
              Jrfi** ■ ■ •                                                                          . . A**?.                                              ......
                                         . . . J i i . ..       . . . /^vyy©rvr-^<i»y4..


                                                                            ^JAx^yy^A^df +(*.                                     .   rP-
                      . .i i . . .Ah?*A.. . . f».® .*...$ . . s h t i k . .                  ■ ■■&> ■ ■              ..<??stfryL A*J*: . .& l. to**..
             JL.°k$*...                                    ... .^?... ,-M*                              tjb r* .. V
                       3-                                        . .J f^ r A . (*.9.. ./*cA.. /9^/*t//y2* ( . . " ? . .

             '*rr*h . .                               . .*tdL. . Mod. . ..A fy^jbr& f. . .HTr'Wdr. . .                                         * ............................

                                    <?f. .<^y V^t A .. .4t .
                                                           -                                                                  .       .. / k     j4&.       .      .-jh y d t
             ■                                                                                                               •.. ^                                        ..



                                 {.. . ^ u y ^ r . .  (rf~.. ,<**rd.. sJfrrth.. .^'sA*roA/>.-. ,«3 /* h t.
                             .4SA*CJft . X ^ . . &J&- A r * y . . H/6^y. . |                     .
                                                                  t r :
'J   r   t
                                                       ^         . ,    4       1                                                                 A...
             iXtPTrddCty-
                                            . .M+J. . ,^<Vrv....                                                                    ^            .
             ArcJ&Y?Wf. . . .                               .. .■AJrY^f. ...... ................................................................
             .................. .   s^yW^yrA..               / r ..                     . . yVffc^ .            .■^ ^ rc ^ x c ..                         ................

                                        .h& nk. (s.s... . ^ w / . . <9 .^ c r ^ e M J . .£*.. MjC ^. If I.,...........
                                           -a y ..

             .                    . . .-r*j| . .                      . . rrr^A. . .                       ......
             /CHW&ted............( t       Jr°$?4vJ*. . . . . j k t v      £ . '.          d j. .-#L& . K**h
              ^tx. /yyfJjL roJrQtjk' A:*?. -ty/r+O.. . JsL4j ^Ai^.. sijbit. X*.iyPHj. .A'/®).....
             .<TTv^tfrnohv(.. r ^ n / .. ,^*?\...                                                                                                           t .<£<....
             . P t.v& T .ft... Af<?o                         --v7^4(W ..-. .t^.. ^<vtrw v y J ..                    .. jft/i.6J.*. C /tAr.\...........
             .                      . .hr*1*?. . .'drdjT T e'ri. . *nr. . . .             . >r. /& $■       ycL kJ^ ^ tt°r^ .». .^ p ...........
             . Av^»... / ^ 9 y y r « J . .. r P ^ L .                                   .. a-^. .                                 .- h ..-^v..w * t f ...
                            $ .                  . . fib . .J& d d * }. . . -rf4~. .                . . ,f\ .          ■ ■ c)- ■ *k4 j . , - ^ W ^ y
                                                 . . .■& - . .<0W^. . . JrhCVfpS. ./td L & ls . . *c*r\ . :                                                 f $.
             jd t* .. .                                . . .~Jl*-. . .sti&Cidl. . ,y jfrr. . . tL. . / K ^ y v y v V .




             Signed                                                                     Signature
    ► ,28 MAY     '98    15:17 HO F2 DIVISION 0171 273 2703                                 P. 1/1



                H o m e O ffic e
        IIP     Operational Policing Policy Unit
                50 Queen Anne’s Gate, London SW1H 9AT
                Switchboard: 0171 273 4000 Fax; 0171 273 2703 Direct Line: 0171 273 2433




        To;             Ken Greenway, Complaints & Discipline, South Yorkshire Police


         From:

         Date:          28 May 1998                    Time:      15:31

«
         Fax Na:

         Number of pages (including this one)                      *


         M essag e
         Subject:        HILLSBOROUGH STATEMENT - D R JACOB


         We have been contacted by the office of Mike Hall MP, who is attempting to obtain a copy of the
         statement made by D r Jacob following Hillsborough. We believe that the request is being made on
         behalf of M r Spearritt. Can you let me know whether the statement can be released?




                                                                VU- Li,



                            IF ANY PART OF THIS FAX IS UNCLEAR
                              PLEASE TELEPHONE: 0171 273 2433
15 JUL      ’98    15=53 HO F2 DIVISION 0171 273 2703                                   P. 1/1



         H o m e O ffic e
         Operational Policing Policy Unit
         50 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AT
         Switchboard: 0171 273 4000 Fax: 0171273 2703 Direct Line: 0171 273 2433




 To;              Insp. Bob Lawton, South Yorkshire Police


 From:

 Date:            15 July 1998                    Time:      1544

 Fax Nfl:

 Number of pages (including this one)


 M essag e
 Subject: HILLSBOROUGH

 We^spdkeabouj: further requests for information a l !              c>n Hillsborough.

 I understand from Ms Adlington that she stillRequires ^at^mer^tsJ1566D Brooke, R109 Wallace and
 R336 Huckstepp and the original version of R293 Illingwortn’s statement. I believe we are,also
 committed to providing her with the original version of PC2909 Wild’s statement (QOJ* 84). I have
 the three page version of the statement which I understand is the amended version.          5 " .

 Miss Adlington had also queried the meaning of the QOR, etc references and the relationship
 between the Q O R and ORMNF files.

 There is an outstanding request for disclosure of the statement from D r Jacob. Can you let me
 know whether or not he has given his consent to its release.

 Thank you for your assistance.

                                                   V v—




                     IF ANY PART OF THIS FAX IS UNCLEAR
                       PLEASE TELEPHONE: 0171 273 2433
23 JUL     '98    12:00 HO F2 DIVISION 0171 273 2703                                P. 1,-1



         H o m e O ffice
         Operational Policing Policy Unit
         50 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AT
         Switchboard; 0171 273 4000 Fax: 0171 273 2703 Direct Line: 0171 273 2433

                                                               f-ziv




 To:             Inspector Bob Lawton


 From:           M JP y n e


 Date:           23 July 1998




 Number of pages (including this one)


  M essag e
  Subject: HILLSBOROUGH - POLICE STATEMENTS

 CvxALuf Vi                                   ^


  I have received a request from the House of Commons Library for a copy of the statement^) by PC
  Bromley. Can you let me know whether you can supply this.


                                                  \JUi<   \.




                     IF ANY PART OF THIS FAX IS UNCLEAR
                       PLEASE TELEPHONE: 0171 273 2433
                                                      Ian Daines,       BA(Hons) DiP.Ed.
                                                            Assistant Chief Constable




Ref: ACC/ID-

3 August 1998

Matthew J Pyne
Operational Policing Policy Unit
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London
SW1H 9AT                                                        BY FAX




Dear Mr Pyne

Hillsborough Stadium Disaster

I refer to your recent fax to Inspector LAWTON on the above subject. I attach a copy of a
fax I have today sent to Ms Adlington, Solicitor to the Hillsborough Family Support Group.

Yours sincerely




Ian Daines
Assistant Chief Constable




Enc




                            0114 2523405
                                                     Ian Daines,       BA(Hons) Dip.Ed.
                                                           Assistant Chief Constable




Ref: ACC/ID

3 August 1998

Ms A Adlington
Hillsborough Family Support Group
Central Buildings
41 North John Street
LIVERPOOL
L2 6RR                                                  BY FAX




Dear Ms Adlington

Hillsborough Stadium Disaster                                               (

I refer to your recent requests of statements and information, some made direct to South
Yorkshire Police and some made to Mr M PYNE, Home Office Policing Policy Unit.

You began private prosecutions on 26 June 1998 for alleged offences concerned with the
disaster. The Director of Public Prosecutions is reviewing the case. I am awaiting legal
advice on whether I should release information.

I will write to you again as soon as practicable.

Yours sincerely




Ian Daines
Assistant Chief Constable




                            0114 2523405
           H o m e O ffic e
           Operational Policing Policy Unit
           50 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AT
           Switchboard: 0171 273 4000 Fax: 273 2703 Direct Line: 0171 273 2433

                                                                       Our reference:    PW/98 110/145/2

                                                                       Your reference:

Ian Daines Esq                                                         Date:             1 September 1998
Assistant Chief Constable
South Yorkshire Police
Snig Hill
Sheffield
S3 8LY




HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY

When the Home Secretary announced the outcome of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny of evidence,
he undertook to release as much of the material considered in the course of the scrutiny as possible, by
placing copies in the House of Commons Library.

Two of the documents in question were letters from Peter Metcalf of Hammond Suddards Solicitors to
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, dated 11 November 1997 and 20 January 1998, copies of which I enclose. Mr
Metcalf has indicated he has no objection to the release of these letters, but that permission for the
disclosure of the documents attached to them could only be granted by his clients, namely South
Yorkshire Police and Municipal Mutual Insurance. I should therefore be grateful if you would let me
know whether you are content for these documents to be released. I should also be grateful if you would
confirm Municipal Mutual Insurance have no objections to the disclosure of these documents. If either
you or Municipal Mutual Insurance have any objections, it would be helpful if you could let me know
what they are so that we may advise the Home Secretary accordingly.

On a related issue, your letter of 3 August to Ann Adlington indicated that in view of the private
prosecutions brought by the Family Support Group, you were awaiting legal advice on the disclosure of
the remaining statements made by police officers. As you know, the vast majority of statements have
now been placed in the House of Commons Library. I should be grateful if you would let me know
whether you foresee any difficulties in fulfilling the Home Secretary’s undertaking in respect of the
release of material considered in the course of the scrutiny.

Yours sincerely
      \




M J Pyne



F:\OPPU\COM PI.NTS\M ISC\M JW -0370.DOC
             S ou th Yorkshire

             POLICE                                   Ian Daines,       BA(Hons) D ip.Ed.
                                                            Assistant Chief Constable
             JUSTICE        with   COURAGE




Mr Peter Metcalf                                               Ref: ACC/ID/____
Hammond Suddards Solicitors
2 Park Lane                                                    9 September 199
Leeds
LS3 1ES




Dear Peter

Hillsborough Stadium Disaster

I attach a letter dated 1 September 1998 from Mr M J PYNE, Home Office and my reply to
it. His letter covers two topics;

a)    Release of two letters which you wrote to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. Mr Pyne says
      you have no objection to their release but you need my permission to release them.
      I am content for them to be released unless you advise against. Mr Pyne says that
      the permission of Municipal Mutual Insurance (MMI) will also be needed. Please
      contact MMI on my behalf to determine their wishes.

b)    Release of statements made by police officers. At the time of the publication of
      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny report, the Chief Constable agreed to place in
      the House of Commons Library those statements of police officers which had been
      amended. Some were in our possession, some with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
      staff. Some had not been placed in the House of Commons Library by the time that
      the private prosecutions were initiated.

       On 3 August 1998 I faxed to Ms Adlington the attached letter and sent a copy to Mr
       Pyne. Mr Pyne now asks if the remaining statements are to be released. I think we
       should stick to the policy of non disclosure, per the DPP’s advice. Putting them in
       House of Commons Library is the same as releasing them. Ms Adlington chose to
       initiate prosecutions before they had all been released.

       I have advised Mr Pyne that I am awaiting your advice. Please telephone when you
       have had time to consider this.

Yours sincerely
                  ____________



Ian Daines
Assistant Chief Constable

             Police Headquarters
             Snig Hill
             Sheffield S3 8LY
             Tel: 0114 220 2020
                                                          Ian Daines,          BA(Hons) DiP.Ed.
                                                                   Assistant Chief Constable




Mr Peter Metcalf                                                      Ref: ACC/ID/
Hammond Suddards Solicitors
2 Park Lane                                                           9 September 199
Leeds
LS3 1ES




Dear Peter

Hillsborough Stadium Disaster

I attach a letter dated 1 September 1998 from Mr M J PYNE, Home Office and my reply to
it. His letter covers two topics;

a)    Release of two letters which you wrote to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. Mr Pyne says
      you have no objection to their release but you need my permission to release them.
      I am content for them to be released unless you advise against. Mr Pyne says that
      the permission of Municipal Mutual Insurance (MMI) will also be needed. Please
      contact MMI on my behalf to determine their wishes.

b)    Release of statements made by police officers. At the time of the publication of
      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny report, the Chief Constable agreed to place in
      the House of Commons Library those statements of police officers which had been
      amended. Some were in our possession, some with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
      staff. Some had not been placed in the House of Commons Library by the time that
      the private prosecutions were initiated.

       On 3 August 1998 I faxed to Ms Adlington the attached letter and sent a copy to Mr
       Pyne. Mr Pyne now asks if the remaining statements are to be released. I think we
       should stick to the policy of non disclosure, per the DPP’s advice. Putting them in
       House of Commons Library is the same as releasing them. Ms Adlington chose to
       initiate prosecutions before they had all been released.

       I have advised Mr Pyne that I am awaiting your advice. Please telephone when you
       have had time to consider this.

Yours sincerely




Ian Daines
Assistant Chief Constable




                            0114        Direct Fax: 0114 2523481
                                                           Ian Daines,      BA(Hons) Dip.Ed.
                                                                Assistant Chief Constable




Ref: ACC/ID/

9 September 1998

Matthew J Pyne
Operational Policing Policy Unit
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London
SW1H9AT                                                             BY FAX




Dear Mr Pyne

Hillsborough Stadium Disaster 1989

Thank you for your letter of 1 September 1998.

I am arranging for Municipal Mutual Insurance to be contacted to determine their wishes in
relation to the letters to which you refer. As soon as I hear from them, I will contact you
again.

In relation to the statements of police officers, I do see a difficulty. Ms Adlington initiated
private prosecutions against two former police officers on 26 June 1998. The Director of
Public Prosecutions (DPP) is reviewing the case to see whether she intends to take over
the prosecutions. The advice of the Crown Prosecution Service was that the Chief
Constable may wish to make no voluntary disclosure of material while that review is in
progress. I have followed that advice. However, I am conscious of the Home Secretary’s
position and I have asked for further legal advice. As soon as I receive it, I will write again.

Yours sincerely




Ian Daines
Assistant Chief Constable




                            Tel: 0 1 1{     Fax: 0114 2523481
             Sou th Yorkshire

             POLICE                                       Ian Daines,       BA(Hons) Dip.Ed.
                                                                Assistant Chief Constable
            JUSTICE       with    COURAGE




Ref: ACC/ID-

9 September 1998

Matthew J Pyne
Operational Policing Policy Unit
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London
SW1H9AT                                                             BY FAX




Dear Mr Pyne

Hillsborough Stadium Disaster 1989

Thank you for your letter of 1 September 1998.

I am arranging for Municipal Mutual Insurance to be contacted to determine their wishes in
relation to the letters to which you refer. As soon as I hear from them, I will contact you
again.

In relation to the statements of police officers, I do see a difficulty. Ms Adlington initiated
private prosecutions against two former police officers on 26 June 1998. The Director of
Public Prosecutions (DPP) is reviewing the case to see whether she intends to take over
the prosecutions. The advice of the Crown Prosecution Service was that the Chief
Constable may wish to make no voluntary disclosure of material while that review is in
progress. I have followed that advice. However, I am conscious of the Home Secretary’s
position and I have asked for further legal advice. As soon as I receive it, I will write again.

Yours sincerely

                  ___________




Ian Daines
Assistant Chief Constable




            Police Headquarters
            Snig Hill
    TtAoc   O I "7 !   -2 ”7 3   'T f Q




»
           ** TX C O N F I R M A T I O N   REPORT   **    AS OF      9 SEP      ’98   13:07    P A G E . 01

                                                                   S.Y.P.       CHIEF. DEPT.




         DATE    TI ME            TO/ FROM               MODE     MI N/ S E C   PGS     STATUS
    01    9/ 9   13:07     90171273£703                  EC — S    00" 30       01        OK




♦
                                                            Ian Daines,     BA(Hons) Dip.Ed.
                                                                Assistant Chief Constable




Ref: ACC/I D,

9 September 1998

Matthew J Pyne
Operational Policing Policy Unit
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London
SW1H9AT                                                             BY FAX




Dear Mr Pyne

Hillsborough Stadium Disaster 1989

Thank you for your letter of 1 September 1998.

I am arranging for Municipal Mutual Insurance to be contacted to determine their wishes in
relation to the letters to which you refer. As soon as I hear from them, I will contact you
again.

In relation to the statements of police officers, I do see a difficulty. Ms Adlington initiated
private prosecutions against two former police officers on 26 June 1998. The Director of
Public Prosecutions (DPP) is reviewing the case to see whether she intends to take over
the prosecutions. The advice of the Crown Prosecution Service was that the Chief
Constable may wish to make no voluntary disclosure of material while that review is in
progress. I have followed that advice. However, I am conscious of the Home Secretary’s
position and I have asked for further legal advice. As soon as I receive it, I will write again.

Yours sincerely




Ian Daines
Assistant Chief Constable




                            Tel: 0114       Fax: 0114 2523481
                                                                                                                           2      Park Lane
H ammond S uddards                                                                                                         Leeds

               s o l i c i t o r s
                                                                                                                           LS3 1ES
                                                                                                                           Telephone (0113) 284 7000
                                                                                                                           DX No. 26441
                                                                                                                           Fax (0113) 284 7001
                                                                                                                           Peter.Metcalf@HammondSuddards.co.uk



Ian Daines Esq
Assistant Chief Constable
South Yorkshire Police
Police Headquarters
Snig Hill
Sheffield
S3 8LY


Our Ref:                                                                             Your Ref:                                                                            Date:
PCM                             J.57-9                                               ACC ID                                                                               14 September 1998



By Fax & By Post



Dear Ian

Hillsborough Stadium Disaster

Thank you for your letter o f 9 September 1998 with enclosures.                                                                                                    I refer also to our telephone
conversation today.

MMI have indicated that they have no objection to documentation from our file being released as
proposed by The Home Office and having carefully re-read the documents I can see no reason to
advise the South Yorkshire Police to object either

Whilst it is the case that these sort o f documents are not prepared with a view to their being
published, I do not think there is anything in any o f them which reflects ill on the South Yorkshire
Police.

 So far as statements made by police officers are concerned I am concerned that any release o f
 statements at present could be seen as a breach o f the policy adopted by the Chief Constable in
 relation to the Hillsborough archive.

 Clearly you will wish to assist the Home Secretary to fulfil his undertaking but it seems appropriate
 for this to be deferred until the conclusion of the CPS review. If the review results in no
 intervention or an intervention followed by discontinuance then I anticipate that you

 Offices also at:

 7 D e v o n s h ire S qu are              T rin ity C o u rt                         P e n n in e H o u se                    S u ite 68 8 L lo y d 's                           A v e n u e L o u is e 2 5 0
 C u tle rs G a rd e n s                   16 Jo h n D a lto n S tre e t              3 9-45 W e ll Street                     O n e L im e S tre e t                             1050 B ru s s e ls
 London                                    M a n ch e s te r                          B radford                                L ondon                                            B e lg iu m
 EC 2M 4Y H                                M 6 0 8H S                                 BD1 5N U                                           7HA                                      T e le p h o n e ( 0 0 ) 3 2 2 6 2 7 76 7 6
 T e le p h o n e ( 0 1 7 1 ) 6 5 5 1000   T e le p h o n e ( 0 1 6 1 ) 8 3 0 5000    T e le p h o n e (01274} 7 >4 7 um       T e lep h o n e (0 1 7 1 ) 3 2 7 33 8 8 /3 3 9 9   F a x (0 0 ) 3 2 2 6 2 7 7 6 86
 F a x (0 1 7 1 ) 655 1001                 F a x ( 0 1 6 1 ) 8 3 0 5001               F a x ( 0 1 2 7 4 )3 0 7 2 3 9           F a x (0 1 7 1 )6 2 1 1217


 A list o f P a rtn e rs can be v ie w e d a t th e a b o v e address. T h is firm is reg ula te d by th e / .mv S*»oKt\ in th e c on d uct oi in v estm e n t business.
                                                                                                 2
                                                                               14 September 1998
                                                                                    Ian Daines Esq
                                                                         Assistant Chief Constable
                                                                           South Yorkshire Police

will wish to provide more general disclosure of documents to interested parties and this would of
course subsume the request to deposit further statements in the House o f Commons library.

O f course if the DPP elects to intervene and continue the prosecutions then you will no doubt wish
to obtain guidance from the DPP before taking any action.

I would suggest that you reply accordingly to The Home Office.

Yours sincerely




P C METCALF




                                                                                chi.057-0009.syp. 1409,pcm
                                                                Ian Daines,     BA(Hons) DiP.Ed.
                                                                    Assistant Chief Constable




Ref: ACC/ID/

21 September 1998

Matthew J Pyne
Operational Policing Policy Unit
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London
SW1H 9AT



Dear Mr Pyne

Hillsborough Stadium Disaster 1989

I refer to your letter of 1 September 1998 and to my acknowledgement dated 9 September.

Municipal Mutual Insurance are content for Peter Metcalfs letters to be released, so is Mr
Metcalf and so am I.

In relation to the statements of police officers, I do see a difficulty. As indicated in my letter
of 9 September, I have taken legal advice and my reply is based upon that advice.

Immediately prior to the publication of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny report, the Chief
Constable agreed to place in the House of Commons Library those statements of police
officers which had been amended. That process was continuing when, on 26 June 1998,
Ms Ann Adlington, solicitor to the Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG), initiated
private prosecutions against two former police officers.

The Director of Public Prosecutions is reviewing the case to determine whether she will
take over the prosecutions. The advice of the Crown Prosecution Service is that the Chief
Constable may wish to make no voluntary disclosure of material while that review is in
progress.

Accepting that advice, I have declined requests for material from:

a)     various people representing the HFSG

b)     solicitors representing each of the two former police officers

c)     the Football Association

d)     numerous requests from individuals.




                            Tel: 0114 2523405   Fax: 0114 2523481
A parallel case may be of interest.         When the Home Secretary announced the
establishment of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny, I suspended the release of material
from the South Yorkshire Police Hillsborough archive until I had asked Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith’s permission. He told me that he was content for me to continue to release material
so I did so. This is analogous to the present position.

When the DPP has made public her decision on the Hillsborough prosecutions, I will return
to the question of releasing the officers statements. I hope this reply will meet the
requirements of the Home Secretary. If it causes any difficulty, please do not hesitate to
contact me.

Yours sincerely

              _________




Ian Daines
Assistant Chief Constable
                                                                                                                                2       Park Lane
H ammond S uddards                                                                                                              Leeds
                                                                                                                                LS3 1ES
               S O L I C I T O R S
                                                                                                                                Telephone (0113) 284 7000
                                                                                                                                DX No. 26441
                                                                                                                                Fax (0113) 284 7001
                                                                                                                                Peter.Metcalf@HammondSuddards.co.uk



Ian Daines Esq                                                                                                                              ^                                  1 L / 1
Assistant Chief Constable
South Yorkshire Police
Police Headquarters
Snig Hill
Sheffield
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Cm
S3 8LY


                                                                                                                                                                                                    c c
Our Ref:                                                                             Your Ref:
PCM                                 57-9                                             ACC ID                                                                                    21 September 1998



Dear Ian

 Hillsborough Stadium Disaster

 I had a call from George Croston on Friday.

 He says that the HFSG are blaming CPS guidance for the temporary moratorium on placing further
 statements in the House of Commons library. Obviously he wishes to write to the HFSG stating that
 he has given no such guidance.

 He is certainly right in the sense that we did not ask for and he did not give any guidance specifically
 relating to papers considered by Lord Justice Stuart Smith.

 Nevertheless those papers are also papers which form part of the Hillsborough archive and the
 agreed policy has been that there should be no disclosure to any party from that archive until the
 CPS review is complete and the decision of the DPP made.

 There is, I suppose, the potential for this issue to be raised with you directly either by way of letters
 from Ann Adlington or through the press. The line of attack would be that the South Yorkshire
 Police are holding this material back for their own purposes.

 My own view is that this is a correct and defensible policy formed in the light of guidance from the
 CPS about the Hillsborough archive even though it would be correct to acknowledge that the CPS
 were not asked and did not give any specific guidance relating to the Scrutiny documentation.

 O ffices also at:

 7 D e v o n s h ire Square                T rin ity C o u rt                          P e n n in e H o u se                        S u ite 68 8 L lo y d ’s                           A v e n u e L o u is e 25 0
 C u tlers G a rd e n s                     16 J o h n D a lto n S tre e t             39-45 W ell Street                           O ne L im e Street                                 1050 B ru ssels
 London                                    M a n ch e s te r                           B radford                                    L ondon                                            B e lg iu m
 E C 2M 4Y H                               M 6 0 8H S                                  BD1 5 N U                                    E C 3 M TR A                                       T e le p h o n e ( 0 0 ) 3 2 2 6 2 7 76 7 6
 T e le p h o n e ( 0 1 7 1 ) 6 5 5 1000   T e le p h o n e (0 1 6 1 ) 830 5000        T e le p h o n e (0 1 2 7 4 ) 7347 0 0       T e lep h o n e (0 1 7 1 ) 3 2 7 33 8 8 /3 3 9 9   F a x ( 0 0 ) 3 2 2 6 2 7 7 6 86
 F a x ( 0 1 7 1 ) 6 5 5 1001              F a x (0 1 6 1 ) 8 3 0 5001                 F a x ( 0 1 2 7 4 )3 0 7 2 3 9               Fax (0 1 7 1 )6 2 1 1217


 A lis t o f P a rtn e rs can b e v ie w e d a t th e a b o v e address. T h is firm is reg ula te d by th e L aw S ociety in the c o nd u ct o f in v e s tm e n t business.
                                                                                                    2
                                                                                  21 September 1998
                                                                                      Ian Daines Esq
                                                                            Assistant Chief Constable
                                                                              South Yorkshire Police




Please telephone if you would like to discuss this further.

May I mention at this stage that I will be out of the office from and including Friday to Tuesday. I
will have my mobile phone j                 and I will be switching this on from time to time to check
for any messages. If anything of urgency crops up in my absence please therefore use this number as
a contact point.

Y o u rs sincerely




P C METCALF




                                                                                   chi.057-0009.syp.2109.pcm
m         H o m e O f f ic e
          Operational Policing Policy Unit
   (3T    50 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AT
          Switchboard: 0171 273 4000 Fax: 0171 273 2703 Direct Line: 0171 273 2433

                                                                      Our reference:    P W /98 110/145/3

                                                                      Your reference:   A C C /ID /

Ian Dames BA(Hons) Dip.Ed.                                           £>ate:             j October 1998
Assistant Chief Constable
South Yorkshire Police
Police Headquarters
Snig Hill
Sheffield S3 8LY




Dear M r Daines

H ILL SB O R O U G H

I refer to your letter of 21 September and our telephone conversation yesterday about the release of
material from the South Yorkshire Police Hillsborough archive.

I explained that I was concerned that your decision to defer any further release until after the CPS
had concluded its review of the criminal proceedings would place Ministers in an invidious position,
given the Government’s earlier commitment to place all the relevant statements in the House of
Commons Library. The issue would be brought to the fore later this month when Maria Eagle MP is
due to ask a Parliamentary Question about the material in the Library.

I indicated that, having discussed it with George Croston at the CPS, there did not appear to be any
legal constraint to fulfilling the Home Secretary’s commitment and that this should be regarded as a
separate issue to the disclosure of material by South Yorkshire Police to other parties.

I would be grateful if you could confirm that you will provide the outstanding statements, a list of
which is attached behind, at your earliest convenience.

I am copying this to George Croston for information.

                                            Yours sincerely




                                            M J Pyne
                                                               Annex A




     R566 Brooke

^ R109 Wallace         ^   R fV ?              4*) C k & U .

\ / R336 Huckstepp

     R293 Illingworth (original version)

\ / Q O R 84 Wild (original version)

     R516 T Higgins (versions R516A & R516B)

s tPC Bromley

    -We also have an outstanding request from an MP
V    for a copy of a statement by a D r Jacob.
                                                          Ian Dames,           BA(Hons) DiP.Ed.
                                                                   Assistant Chief Constable




Ref: ACC/I D/

7 October 1998

Mr Peter Metcalf
Hammond Suddards Solicitors
2 Park Lane
Leeds
LS31ES




Dear Peter

Hillsborough Stadium Disaster 1989

I attach the letter I recently sent to Matthew PYNE, Home Office Police Unit, about the
amended statements of police officers. Mr Pyne telephoned me on 6 October 1998 and
told me that he had discussed this with George CROSTON, Special Caseworker CPS. Mr
Pyne told him that a Liverpool Member of Parliament, Maria EAGLE, has tabled a question
asking why the Home Secretary has not honoured his promise to place in the House of
Commons Library the amended statements. Miss EAGLE is close to the Hillsborough
Family Support Group (HFSG) and I suspect she knows the answer to the question. The
question is due for answer in a few weeks when the Commons reconvene. Mr Pyne feels
that the Home Secretary’s promise should be honoured because it predates the
commencement of the private prosecutions. The Home Secretary gave that undertaking
when Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny report was published (February 1998) and only
gave that undertaking after the Chief Constable had agreed.

Mr Pyne says that Mr Croston has no objection to the release of the statements. If that is
the case, then I wonder if I can, or should, continue to withhold them.

Please advise me as soon as possible.

Yours sincerely




Ian Daines
Assistant Chief Constable




                            0114        Direct Fax: 0114 2523481
             Sou th Yorkshire

             POLICE                                                 Ian D ain es, BA(Hons) Dip.Ed.
                                                                             Assistant Chief Constable
             JUSTICE       with    COURAGE




Ref: ACC/I Di

7 October 1998

Mr Peter Metcalf
Hammond Suddards Solicitors
2 Park Lane
Leeds
LS31ES




Dear Peter

Hillsborough Stadium Disaster 1989

I attach the letter I recently sent to Matthew PYNE, Home Office Police Unit, about the
amended statements of police officers. Mr Pyne telephoned me on 6 October 1998 and
told me that he had discussed this with George CROSTON, Special Caseworker CPS. Mr
Pyne told him that a Liverpool Member of Parliament, Maria EAGLE, has tabled a question
asking why the Home Secretary has not honoured his promise to place in the House of
Commons Library the amended statements. Miss EAGLE is close to the Hillsborough
Family Support Group (HFSG) and I suspect she knows the answer to the question. The
question is due for answer in a few weeks when the Commons reconvene. Mr Pyne feels
that the Home Secretary’s promise should be honoured because it predates the
commencement of the private prosecutions. The Home Secretary gave that undertaking
when Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny report was published (February 1998) and only
gave that undertaking after the Chief Constable had agreed.

Mr Pyne says that Mr Croston has no objection to the release of the statements. If that is
the case, then I wonder if I can, or should, continue to withhold them.

Please advise me as soon as possible.

Yours sincerely




Ian Daines
Assistant Chief Constable

             Police Headquarters
             Snig Hill
             Sheffield S3 8LY
             Tel: 0114 220 2020 Fax; 0114 252 3243
                                0114 2523405      Direct Fax: 0114 2523481
             Direct Dial No:
                                                             Ian Daines,      BA(Hons) Dip.Ed.
                                                                  Assistant Chief Constable




Ref: ACC/ID,

21 September 1998

Matthew J Pyne
Operational Policing Policy Unit
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London
SW1H 9AT



Dear Mr Pyne

Hillsborough Stadium Disaster 1989

I refer to your letter of 1 September 1998 and to my acknowledgement dated 9 September.

Municipal Mutual Insurance are content for Peter Metcalf’s letters to be released, so is Mr
Metcalf and so am I.

In relation to the statements of police officers, I do see a difficulty. As indicated in my letter
of 9 September, I have taken legal advice and my reply is based upon that advice.

Immediately prior to the publication of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny report, the Chief
Constable agreed to place in the House of Commons Library those statements of police
officers which had been amended. That process was continuing when, on 26 June 1998,
Ms Ann Adlington, solicitor to the Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG), initiated
private prosecutions against two former police officers.

The Director of Public Prosecutions is reviewing the case to determine whether she will
take over the prosecutions. The advice of the Crown Prosecution Service is that the Chief
Constable may wish to make no voluntary disclosure of material while that review is in
progress.

Accepting that advice, I have declined requests for material from:

a)     various people representing the HFSG

b)     solicitors representing each of the two former police officers

c)     the Football Association

d)     numerous requests from individuals.




                            Tel: 0114        Fax: 0114 2523481
A parallel case may be of interest.         When the Home Secretary announced the
establishment of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny, I suspended the release of material
from the South Yorkshire Police Hillsborough archive until I had asked Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith’s permission. He told me that he was content for me to continue to release material
so I did so. This is analogous to the present position.

When the DPP has made public her decision on the Hillsborough prosecutions, I will return
to the question of releasing the officers statements. I hope this reply will meet the
requirements of the Home Secretary. If it causes any difficulty, please do not hesitate to
contact me.

Yours sincerely




Ian Daines
Assistant Chief Constable
            Sou th Yorkshire

            POLICE                                                  Ian Daines,     BA(Hons) Dip.Ed.
                                                                        Assistant Chief Constable
            JUSTICE       with    COURAGE




Ref: ACC/I D/

9 October 1998

Matthew J Pyne
Operational Policing Policy Unit
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London
SW1H9AT                                                                     BY FAX




Dear Mr Pyne

Hillsborough Documents

Thank you for your letter of 7 October 1998.

I have contacted my legal adviser, Mr Peter Metcalf, to ask for fresh and urgent advice.

I do take your point about honouring a previously given undertaking. I will get back to you
as soon as I can.

Yours sincerely

             ________



Ian Daines
Assistant Chief Constable




            Police Headquarters
            Snig Hill
            Sheffield S3 8LY
            Tel: 0114 220 2020 Fax: 0114 252 3243
            Direct Dial No:    Tel: 0114            Fax: 0114 2523481
. ■*       **    TX   CONF I RMAT I ON   R E P ORT   +*    AS   OF     9   OCT   ’ 98   14:£2   P A G E . 01

                                                                      S.Y.P.     CHIEF.DEPT.




         DATE     TI ME             TO/ FROM              MODE       MI N/ SEC   PGS      STATUS
       1 10/ 9    14: £ £   90171 £73£ 70 3               EC — S      00"£5      0 1        OK
            South Yorkshire

            POLICE                                                  Ian Daines,     BA(Hons) Dip.Ed.
                                                                        Assistant Chief Constable
            JUSTICE           with   COURAGE




Ref: ACC/ID/

14 October 1998

Matthew J Pyne
Operational Policing Policy Unit
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London
SW1H9AT                                                                     BY FAX




Dear Mr Pyne

Hillsborough Documents

I refer to recent correspondence and telephone calls between us on the above subject. I
have now had the opportunity of discussing matters further with my legal advisor. I am able
to tell you that we will resume the release of the amended statements of police officers.

It may take a little while for the process to be completed because a lot of material was
handed to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s staff and returned to us in bulk, it has not yet been
possible to file it all in proper order. However, we should be able to send some more
statements almost straight away.

If I can be of any further assistance, please do not hesitate to contact me.




Ian Daines
Assistant Chief Constable




            Police Headquarters
            Snig Hill
            Sheffield S3 8LY
            Tel: 0114 220 2020 Fax: 0114 252 3243
            Direct Dial No:     T el:1              Fax: 0114 2523481
       **    TX   CONFIRMATION   R E P ORT   **    AS   OF     14   OCT   ’ 98   10:£S   P A G E . 01

                                                               S.Y.P.     CHIEF.DEPT.




     DATE     TI ME          TO/ FROM             MODE       M I N / S E C PGS     STATUS
01   10/14    10:£5   90171£73£703                EC--S      00"£ 9       01         OK
                                                   Discipline & Complaints Department
             South Yorkshire                       50 Windsor Road

             POLICE                                Heeley
                                                   SHEFFIELD
             JUSTICE     with    COURAGE
                                                   S8 8UB



TELEPHONE: 0114

FAX: 0114 252 3855

INTERNAL FAX: 3020


                          Facsimile Transmission

Date:                     lit-   ■ /a   ■ <*8

To:
                         O fiz r t/lr tc r u fa       fn tc /A y C   P & t-/C Y   uasi~7
For the attention of:
                         M A      aj.S '.   P f v Z
Comments:




From:

Telephone Number:

Number of Pages (including this page)                 S

In the event of a poor copy, please contact:-
South Yorkshire Police - Discipline & Complaints Department
Telephone Number - Direct Line 0114 252 3861 - Internal Extension 3002
                                                    Our Ref:      D&C/AMHj
Oriel Room
House of Commons Library                            Date:         14 October 1998
LONDON
SW1A OAA                                            Recorded Delivery
                                                    No RT 0793 3144 3GB




HILLSBOROUGH EVIDENCE LODGED IN THE MEMBERS' LIBRARY

I refer to your fax message of 2 September 1998 regarding the above and apologise for the
delay in responding, whilst legal advice was sought over the further release of amended
statements.

Taking your fax in order the present position is as follows:-

1   To date I have not traced any additional statement made by the ten named officers.

2   Copies are enclosed of the original statements of those named below:-

     Chief Inspector Beal         R317
     PC Gilmour                   QOR 393

     Inspector Sykes           R109
     Also enclosed is a computer printed supplementary statement of this officer, R109A.

     In the case of Sergeant Crawford, R170A, I have found a computer printed copy of this
     statement and enclose a copy of that.




                                                   The person dealing with this correspondence is:
                                                   Mr A Hepworth
                                                   (0114) 296 3084
3    Copies of the following missing or illegible pages are also enclosed:-

     PC Cran                     QOR259           page 2
     Sergeant France             R343             page 3
     PC Sapsford                 QOR173           page 1 (please note correct name)
     D/Sergeant Lindley          R174             whole statement
     PC Hooson                   R198             page 3
     Inspector White             R215A            pages 1 to 3
     Inspector Purdy             R217             whole statement (please note correct name)

     Chief Inspector Beal        R137
     There is no such statement in existence, please see item 2 above where
     Chief Inspector Beal's statement reference, R317 is enclosed.

4    Copy of amended report of PC Hood, R317. This is the reference for Chief Inspector Beal,
     see items 2 and 3 above. PC Hood, R427 amended report is enclosed.

5    It will be a lengthy process to check all 91 officers listed between R476 and R566 and to
      date, I have been unable to do so.

6    A copy of the statement of PC Paul Bromley is enclosed, although it is not an amended
     one.

The quality of some of the documents I have copied is very poor.          Where possible I have
enhanced them, but cannot improve them further.

I will contact you again when I have further information on items 1 and 5 above.




A M Hepworth

Encs


                                                  The person dealing with this correspondence is:
                                                  Mr A Hepworth
                                                  (0114)296 3084
1 4 - O CT , * ’ 9 8 (WED)      16 =59                                     TEL:0114    2963020             P. 001




  **   C O N F I RM A T I O N    RE PORT   **




  TRANSMISSION
  TRANSACTION(S)                COMPLETED




    NO.      DATE/TIME               DESTINATION                  DURATI ON PGS           STATUS   MODE

    515      OCT. 1 4        16:58                 901712732703   0* 01* 0 5 ’   003      OK       N ECM
                South Yorkshire                                  Discipline & Complaints Department
                           -----------------------------         50 Windsor Road

                POLICE                                           Heeley
                                                                 SHEFFIELD S8 8 UB
                JUSTICE     with    COURAGE



  TELEPHONE: 0114 296 3002

  FAX: 0114 296 3020

  INTERNAL FAX: 3020


                              Facsimile Transmission

^D ate:                   <2 J -/& * 9<5>
  To.                                                       a

                          O                                /* 0 z /o * r t >   r d z /c * ?   u r f iT

  For the attention of:        H . "J7 /^ v U ^

  Comments:               A t : H /U .S 6& 4& ( 6 //                       /)& :u /r£ * rra




  From:

  Telephone Number:

  Number of Pages (including this page)                           2

  In the event of a poor c o p y , please contact:-
  South Yorkshire Police - Discipline & Complaints Department
  Telephone Number - Direct Line 0114 296 3002 - Internal Extension 3002
2 1 - O C T . ’ 9 8 (WED)     16.32                                           TEL;0114     2963020             P. 001




  **   CONFIRMATION              RE PORT   **




  TRANSMISSION
  TRANSACTION(S)               COMPLETED




    NO.     DATE/TIME                  DESTINATION                  DURATI ON PGS             STATUS   MODE

    566     OCT. 2 1        16 : 3 0                 901712732703   0* 0 1 ’ 1 6 ’   003      OK       N ECM
M J Pyne Esq                                     Our Ref:       D&C/AMH/
Operational Policing Policy Unit
Home Office                                       Date:         21 October 1998
50 Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON SW1H9AT


                                                  Recorded Delivery Number
                                                  RT 0793 3156 2GB




HILLSBOROUGH

I refer to your letter of 7 October 1998, addressed to Assistant Chief Constable Ian Daines about
the release of material from the Hillsborough Archive and your enclosed list of outstanding
statements. I am pleased to forward copies of the majority of the documents you requested as
detailed below:-

R566 BROOKE - Detective Chief Inspector Brooke did not make any statements in respect of
the Hillsborough Disaster. It must be appreciated that the HOLMES computer system is both an
investigative and a management tool and as such both statements and reports can be given a
reference number on the system. R566 in a report dated 19 November 1990 by the above
named officer, which does not relate to events of the day of the disaster. It is not a statement
nor an officer's report about the events at Hillsborough and therefore does not fall within the
criteria for being placed in the House of Commons Library. A copy is enclosed for your
information only.

R109 WALLACE - R109 related to a statement by Inspector Gordon Sykes, which has previously
been forwarded to the House of Commons Library, not to a statement by an officer named
Wallace. The nearest statement I can find to this is R127 by Inspector Brian Wallace and I
enclose a copy of this in the event that it may be the one required.

R336 HUCKSTEPP - A copy of the original recollection of PC 3066 Allison Huckstepp is
enclosed.

R293 ILLINGWORTH - To date I have only found one version of PC 417 Illingworth's
recollections and a copy of this is enclosed but I have printed a copy of his original statement
from the HOLMES computer and forward this too.




                                                The person dealing with this correspondence is:
                                                Mr A M Hepworth
                                                (0114)296 3084
Page 2

QOR84 WILD - A copy of the original version of PC 2909 Wild's statement is enclosed. (I am
concerned that the address and telephone number of a person giving him information is clearly
shown in this version.)

R516 T HIGGINS - Again I am unable to locate R516 A & B, but a check on HOLMES indicates
that former Sergeant Trevor HIGGINS made two statements and therefore there would not have
been a 516B. A copy of the two statements printed from HOLMES is enclosed.

PC BROMLEY - A copy of PC 2220 Paul Bromley's two statements have been forwarded to the
House of Commons Library, further copies are enclosed for your information.

Dr JACOB - Authority has been sought from Dr George Jacob for the release of his statement,
but he deferred that decision to HM Coroner, who was in turn approached and agreed the
release of the statement. A copy is therefore enclosed.




Mr A M Hepworth

Encs




                                              The person dealing with this correspondence is:
                                              Mr A M Hepworth
                                              (0114) 296 3084
                                                    H   h     P y /te


                                                                                    /'
                                                              A                     '1                               'crfij            -y t'T
                                                        f - "7K
                                                                                                                      /




..'■Jc




         P-.                                                                                      .11G.1 V xGu cl                e i s oe

         m 1 V r*7 ; c *>O I          • .ih i ;      r -±'   U; i\ t"d   d nc       r r d n S C t Ip L-o ■     F U t 1.)I

         official          poi ice v;,ceu bo mao'vr avai                       a d Ic      tor   viewing.

         Conferred          with     Cruet        o u o e r :n t e n a e n t    Wain        on   these m a t t e r s , it was

         'qtecicled in at A n d r e a         Add I emari w o u l d            oe        g i v en one     of   the_Phillips

         Reoort          cop'.es    for     her    persona 1 u s e .                The      statements         and       transct ipft*

          to be      supplied when            In quest         warnings             received           on a r e g u l a r     basis

          (P o l i c e    Constable         0 reenway        to a c r a n g e ).

         Officers          would     have     zhe       opportunity             to see           their     statements            and

         transcriots           at    an y    time,       out      not    to be            removed       from    r o o m 159.           Tne

          Hillsborough             video     would        al so    be    available               for    viewing       in r o o m       i59.

         Discussed with              Paul     Middup         and     Police              Constable        Ba rnes,        they    agreeo
                                                                                                       /i.»_________
                                                                                                                                                              ft I t ?




            pu r.y ■ -
            u«.*>✓*.«••* w   ■<
                                  - .'.in
                                    - -\ r r*--<j   '^ o t
                                                    x        —•
                                                                 T"’ v p - '^ T f Q
                                                              •-L; >_ ' r —- j i V i'. }
                                                                                            * ^ * 1i    tp-
                                                                                                       ^ 0^1
                                                                                                               '~>s —T 1; —•
                                                                                                                          r jri W
                                                                                                                                r ^t   f
                                                                                                                                            i ~.»>t   'iq ry rp
                                                                                                                                                      uaJL T




1»    At S.50aai on Saturday 15 April 1939 1 reported for duty at Hackenthorpe
      Police Station, supervised the embusoing of the *E* Gub Division contingent
      of m e n , and. then went in a convoy of one 3YT double decker bus and two
      marked police transits to Hillsborough Football Ground.                                                                              Vie arrived at
      the ground about 9 .15aw, obtained cups of tea, etc and were then told to
      take our places in the Worth Stand for 10am briefing.
?.    I was in charge of serials 61 to 6^ which were mobile transit patrols,
      none of those serials comprised any officer from ’2* 1 Sub Division and I
      therefore made my way to row 55 to liaise with my serials.                                                                               I made my first
      contact with some of those officers about 9 .5 0 am as they began to take
      their seats.

5.    After the main 10am briefing by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and other
      senior officers I arranged for the four sergeants in my serials to be
      briefed by me:                 this consisted of reminding them of their geographical
      areas of responsibility, checking that they all had wide previous experience
      of policing the ground - which they had, and instructing them to pay
      regular attention to licensed premises in their areas.                                                                           They were then

      told to brief their own serials.

If.   I had be^n fully briefed by Superintendent Chapman and Chief Inspector
      i-rice at the special briefing which was held at 10am on the day before
      and it was only necessary for Hr. Chapman and I to have a very brief
      conversation on the Saturday morning.                                                I can hardly recall what we said
      on the Saturday morning but I think it centred on checking public houses.
      He had told me to remain with serial 62 (call sign.TANGO EIGHT).

5.    At 11.15a.-n on Saturday 15 April I went on patrol covering the Southey. Green
      area with TAiJGC ^IGHT and visited various public houses in that area.                                                                                      We
      were responsible for Nottingham Forest fans but were not sent to any., incidents
      of violence or disorder created by them.                                                    As time wore on It was obvious
      that a reasonable proportion of fans v/ere becoming under the influence of

      drink out they were all good-humoured.
      Ao out   c , ' - - . .   pm 1 begs.r. to n o t i c e t;_.s. t r^-ny o.   the f a n s ./ho list: coen m th e


      ground.                  :4uitc s. iV.v >;:j r e ua^er t h ,• influence of alcohol -jug noisy but not
      overly disorderly:                   to have tried to ^rrect any ac this stage would have
      b:.en countor-productive in that it could neve been the catalyst for a major
      disturbance caused by other fans trying to prevent arrests.                                  Because the
      f a n s were in a good mood I felt it the better alternative to 'jolly' then: along.

      About Z.kypn] , or possibly slightly later, I was sitting in ray transit
      vehicle in. Kerries Road, near to Herries Drive when we began to hear radio
      messages that indicated that the officers in the Leppings Lane were
      experiencing difficulties with the crowd and they (the police) wanted a gate
      opening, 1 believe they said Gate 'A'.                          Numerous messagesj.weg|^gassed asking
      for the gates to be opened that it became the subject of/comment by the officers
      in the transit and myself.                       Comments such as " D o you think someone wants
      a gate opening?"                  ‘'I get the distinct impression someone wants a gate opening.1'
      I seem to recall saying words like "I can imagine someone making 'T' shirts
      with 'Open the Gate' on them.”                       The whole matter became a big joke at this
      time -
           vclearly we were not to know what was to happen later).

8.    About 2.30pm or slightly later I was still in ray transit on Herries Hoad
      when Inspector Bateman, 'C'2 Hub division, walked past me towards the ground,
      he too, made jocular comment, about ‘'Do you think someone wanted a gate opening."
      Again the situation was the subject of humorous comment by us all.                                    He then
      continued towards the ground.                         i cannot recall whether the gate was- in fact
      o'oened but 1 seem to think there/a”*racLio message from Control giving permission

      for that to happen.

9»    About 3.00pm I seem to recall an officer, possibly Superintendent Marshall,
      saying words like "We're losing it.11 and asked for more manpower.                                  I recall
      an officer, possibly Inspector Sewell, saying that he had 100 men in the
      gymnasium and that he would send 5 serials.                              A voice then said "Send everybody."
      I then thought that there was a serious disorder situation and decided to
      take ray serial into Penistone Road'North.                               I did not inform Control because
      the radio was very busy,                      ie parked the transit on that road and I took my
      men into the ground to a position between the North Stand and Spion Kop and

      near to the gymnasium.

TO.   Once inside the ground I saw there were a nunjfer of                            police officers standing in
      a state of readiness.                     I also saw a large number of dogs and handlers,
       together with some mounted officers.                          I saw either Inspector Sewell or Chief
       Inspector Sumner, informed the officer how many men I had with me and; asked
       for instructions.                    We were told to remain where we were and to await
       further instructions.

11.    ...i'ter a couples of minutes 1. decided to K l k on so the pitch ares bstv;esn
       tha forts           and ^pio.i fop,    I looked towards the Lsppings Lane end
       and saw   2   larpe c.'ov/a of supportsrs on trie pitcn.     m e gas.e was not in
       progress.       I believed id was a pitch invasion sni considered we hau potentially
       a vary serious public disorder situation on our hands, although i coula not
       see any fighting,      f then returned to ay men.

12.    shortly afterwards, a senior officer, I think it ,/as Juparintendent
       Chapman, told me to bring all the men behind me - approximately 75 to 100
       officers, onto the playing area and to form a cordon           along the frontof    the
       Uorth stand.      1 told the men to form a cordon and also indicated this by
       holding out my arms horizontally to my sides in the correct PS'J fashion.
       As I did this i 'was hit by several coins which were thrown towards us by
       the crowd in the riorth stand.         The crowd were very hostile and kept indicating

       towards the Leppings Lane end.

13.    I then saw people being carried out on stretchers and hoardings and I think
       that ooth police and civilians were doing this.            Owing to the hostility of
       the crowd is the North Stand I felt that our presence was aggravating the
       situation, which at this time I thought was one of public disorder which had
       caused injuries, I radioed to Control to explain the situation and saia that
       we should move.      I was instructed to remain in situ.

“\b»   A fev; minutes latex1, bscause by now the crov/d in the i'J0rth otana were
       shoutins obscenities at-us, were becoming far more hostile and agitated,
       ana shouting things like       Get over there and help.” , I again radioed to
       Control and saia that I was taking the cordon away because we appeared to be
       seriously inilading the situation.         Control agreed and I indicated for the
       cordon to move away and towards the ha Ifviay line.          At this point I was still
       not really aware o„ the full enormity of the situation.            As we moved away
       towarus the halfway line the crowd in the N Qrth Stand cheered us.

15.    We began to form 3 loose cordon along the. halfway line and as we did so, a
       large number of people, whom I presumed were Liverpool fans, began to run
        towards us from the Leppings Lane end.        Tney ran through our loose cordon
       towards the Spion Kop (the Nottingham forest end)and were shouting obscenities
        such as "Kill the Bastards."         "fucking kill them, its their fault.1* Police
        officers ran towards the Spion Kop and prevented the Liverpool fans from
        trying to climb into the Kop.        ,.;e managed to get the fans back towards the

       halfway line by both force and persuasion.
15,   Chief -uperintendeno *-ie?foit then joined us and or-erea s cordon across tne
      full width of the pitch.        _ the a gave the cora.jand for that to occur.
      Pa then slowly moved the cordon towards the centre of the pitch and remained e

      che half .ay line,   3y this time, such was the number of officers who had
      trickled onto the pitch, Mr. Nsstit ordered'a double cordon, which ±
      arranged.     3y this time there were about TOC to 150 officers involved m
      the cordon.

17.   It appeared to me that the whole football stadium could have erupted and
      I was very concerned.        I was still worried that the major police problem
      was one of potential large scale public disorder and it was only slowly
      that the realisation aawnea on us all that it had been a crushing incident
      which had caused the injuries.        Slowly the rumours began to spread that
      people were dead and the numbers continued to inflate.         I was first told
      by a police colleague that       'People were dead", then "five are dead", then
      Twenty" and so on.         I do not think that any police officer in the cordon
      believed that such a high figure of dead was true.

18.   As we stood in the cordon, still expecting trouble, a number of drunken
      fans kept running up to individuaiofficers or groups of officers and
      shouting obscenities such as "YOU'Vi} fUOKlNG KILsaJ ‘
                                                           KM*!, YOU BAoTaiiDb."
      "IT’S YOD-t TUiCIrfO ITTJLT." ana so forth.      They were obviously distressed
      ana I gave instructions that people should not be arrested unless absolutely
      necessary as I feltthat any display of force 'could have caused the
       crowds in the stands to have created       further violence.I was so concerned
       that larhe scale violence would break out, either directed at opposing
       fans or at the police, that I asked Chief Superintendent Nesbit to consider
       seeking implementation of1Operation K.A.i.Is.i. '       i was convinced that
       there would be mass violence towards the police as it was obvious that a
       lot of fans believed we had been responsible for the injuries/deaths.

19.   I becaxe aware that someone was speaking over the public announcement system,
       I -oresume it was messrs DALGLISH and CLOUGa. because the crowds hushed when
       they spoke ana they        seemed to have a calming effect on the crowds.   I would
       have preferred this        to have happened some time earlieras I am sure it
       would have allowed the police, particularly my cordon, to have participated
       more actively in rescue rather than public disorder prevention.         I would
       add that earlier announcements over the public address system had in the
       main been ineffectual and hardly audible, either because of the quietness
       of the individual using the system, or the actual poor quality of the system.

20.   After the calminginfluence of hr. DAiiGLISH, x felt i t     was safe for aie,
       qualified first A i d instructor, to leave the cordon and do what I could
       for the injured.      I   went t o some Liverpool fans, who were^.wandering ..
       aimlessly about and told theai t c grab a 'hoarding stretcner’ and follow me.
11.   I v'slked ainongst          3   large number o   people who ..are lying         Vac ground
      a n d b e i n ;• treated by polios officers, ambulance personnel- both local
      authority an! jt. John, lirexer: and civilians, out was inf or;",led by                   3   senior

      _.olice officer, poe-ibly sr. ins.- jctor, :hat there were sufficient
       -ikr-tchers and       3   11 casualties were b e in   looked     fter.    I thankc-d the fans
      w ho    h s i   accompanied me, asked chon: to pat their hoarding to one aide, bold
       the,;; ;o sit around the perimeter, an.> returned to ray cordon.

22.   A short time later, an announcement was made over the public address system
      t_„at the game was not to be played anu fans were requested co remain in
      the "round for the time be-in;:.              However, fans started to leave the Spion
                                                       o
      Kop from each end ana I was instructed by Superintendent Chapman, who
      had been near the cordon for most of the time, to take half the cordon
      outside the ground and to form cordons across Penistone Road North to
       control opposing fans.              I took approximately 100 to 15C officers out onto
      Penistone Road N 0rth via the'gymnasium entrance' and we formed various cordons,
       both along the length and width of that road.                   I helped to supervise
       crowd control but we did not experience any disorder in this area.

23.   Whilst supervising the remnants of the crowds who were leaving the ground
       I heard a call that fighting was taking place in Hillsborough Park.                          I sawnearby
       one of the transits from my serial call sign TANGO T3N with PC 7^8 Pont as
       driveraccorapanied by PS 2737 Hallett his serial sub commander.                       I collected
       a number of officers who were standing near me and together with the above named
       officers I attended that particular incident, which had cleared by the time
       we arrived.           We then remained on patrol and attended a further call to
       Hillsborough Park but again all was quiet on arrival.

2k,   We also attended the Bassett public house, where the front windows had been
       damaged by,it is believed,Liverpool fans who had tried to get the licensee
       to open up so they could use the telephone.                He refused and they broke the
       windows along the length of the pub frontage.                  A crime report w a s submitted

       but they are no useful lines of enquiry.

25.   At 6.55pm we attended the North stand for de-briefing but were sent out to
       an incident at the N Qrthern General Hospital where it was believed that
        relatives were causing problems to staff.                 Other    officers    had    arrived

       before us ana it was ascertained that the Press had been harrassing relatives
        which had caused them to take issue with the Press.                     No arrests were made
        and the matter was dealt with sensitively by the police.

26.   .ie    continued                trol and eventually went off duty at 8.40pm at

        Li&n©•
mostly concerned with duties outside the ground.    I have
considerable experience of dealing with large football crowds
in the city centre when I was the '5th Inspector' at West Bar
in the late 70's.    I also have considerable experience of

large crowds in industrial diputes.

During the Hillsborough incident I did not handle any bodies.

1 am not awars of the time that the turnstiles were unlocked.

I did not witness the actions of any stewards.

My general feelings about the day are that the pre-match briefing
on the Friday morning 1^- April was excellent, all senior officers
present that day were given the opportunity to familiarise
themselves with the ground, particularly those who had not
worked it before.   Host officers were taken around their areas
of responsibility unless they regularly worked the football

ground.

The briefing on the day of the match was equally well run and the

logistics were very good.

My one criticism is that I would have preferred to have been in
charge of my own men, for they would have known my face and
capabilities and vice-versa.   As it was I was in charge of a
transit full of men, some of whom I had never seen before.    In
normal circumstances, because we were all together in one van it
would not have mattered but because of the events of the day, we
very quickly became detached from one another* despite me making
great efforts to get them to follow me wherever I went.      As it
was, 3ometirR3S they were behind me and then they had been moved
elsewhere.   3y the end of the day I had a combination of one
of my transits and a smattering of officers from foreign serials
 (partly my fault - paragraph 23).    Had I been with my own men

     I would like to think that there would have been more cohesivenes
                            for -.ost o .: .'a -,   d I :,3c on t h e pitch I v:as very

                            eoncernec. thae the crowds would invade it and start
                            fi -h ,in~ with the- police a n d one another.      The antipathy
                            and hostility towards the police of the fans in both the
                            dorth otand ana Leppinea Lane was frightening ana I was
                            very surprised that extreme violence did not occur,
                            especially when they left the ground.




A


L iio        uyi


IE C K 0 i l Z i’iOiT p 6

:::< li
- ^ • i • p
          k->,jo
 ALLISON HUCKSTEPP POLICECONSTABLE3Q66_____ HACKENTHORPE POLICE STATION   D GROUP

At 8.20am on Saturday 15th April 1989 I paraded for duty at Hackenthorpe police station
where I and a large number of other El and E2 officers boarded a hired SYT double decker
bus and from there went to Hillsborough football ground arriving there at 9.20am for the
briefing at 10am in the north stand.
I was previously aware that I was part of serial 16 and PS 1288 Payne was our serial
sergeant. After the main briefing we held a smaller briefing with our serial Inspector
giving us more detailed duties.
After a packed lunch we took up position on the Leppings Lane end turnstiles.

At 12.05pm approximately 3 of the turnstiles comprising of A-G were opened and I was
doubled up with another officer on one of the turnstiles were we were searching all the
fans prior to them going into the ground.
The fans who came early were happy and well controlled and presented no problems.

At 1.40pm a female                         of                            Liverpool
was searched upon entering the ground (attemting to enter the ground) and was found to
have cans of lager in her handbag. She along with her boyfriend who was most abusive and
who refused to be searched were arrested. The female by myself and the male by PS 1288
 ayne. These prisoners were walked to the police room along with DC Evans (El) and PC 620

«ates (El) who assisted us.

After the female was booked in at the police room I was told that I would have to sit
her in a cell on the prison bus and remain with her on the bus for the transfer later to
Ecclesfield Police Station. I got onto the bus with the girl at about 2.15pm and as 3pm
 neared the bus began to get near full and the other officers on the bus were expecting to
 be given the word to continue the journey to F2. However this was never gioven which
 surprised the officers.
 By the sound of the roar that we heard at 3pm it was obvious that the match had begun
 a short time later we noticed that injured supporters were beginning to drif in towards
 the gym area accompanied by ST John's ambulance officers. They were all walking wounding
 and did not appear to be too badly injured however within a few more minutes more and more
 supporters were being brought to the gym area.
 Neither of us officers on the prison bus were in radio contact with thecontrol room and
 we did not hear any radio transmissions whatsoever.
 I was sent to go and see what was happening and I looked at the pitch towards the
 Lepping Lane End. I could see a mass of people on the pitch at that end and a cluster of
^offricers’ behind the goal mouth. It appeared to me that there had been a pitch invasion
 knd so I returned directly to the prison bus.

No sooner had I got back I saw officers and supporters alike running with injured people
on makeshift stretchers . Soon there was total chaos inthe area.The obviously dead and
seriuosly injured were littering the floor and were then being carried off into the gym.

I got off the bus and rendered what first aid I could to a number of people. I did not
handle any of the dead bodies.
In the meantime I kept returning to the full prison bus and found that the prisoners
were extremely agitated and rocking the bus. They could see many dead fans through their
windows and this was obviously making the situation more and more volatile.
I saw fans fighting over dead relatives, many were so distraught they literally collapsed.

I saw one ambulanceman get punched in the face by a supporter who wanted him to see to his
relative and the punch'caused his glasses to smash in his face.
The prisoners on the bus continued to scream and bang their fists againstthe cell   walls
The chaos continued for at least an hour and a half and at the end of this time most of
the prisoners were allowed to go with a verbal caution.

When my prisoner had been released I made m,y way onto the pitch and joined the police line
across the centre of the pitch. Later we helped to clear the west stand of supporters and
eventually went to the North Stand for a de brief and then by bus to El retiring from
duty at 7 -30pm that same day.

                                                                                n
                              PC 3066
Incident,             IDS        211098 OP6002                   DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                                                                STATEMENT NUMBER        S873

                                                                                                                      S t at i o n

b'u r name                        ILLINGWORTH

Por e names                       DAVID        ALFRED

Age                               41                                    Date     of birth

A d. d f p     s                  S. YORKS PO L I C E
                                  H A M M ER TO N RD PSTN

*0 c c   u pa -
              i, :i. o n          POL P C 417

Taleph one

 1C                               He i ght                              Build

Ha i r c o 1o ur

Hair         type

 Eye s                                                                  C om p l e x i o n

Facial             hair

6 J.a.s s e s                     0 1r>0                                Accent

Number             of Pages

   ited .                         04 Q 5 S 9                                                      D .A . I LLINGWORTH Signed


                    During my service with S outh Yorkshire Police and S h e f f i e l d and

                    Rotherham,             I have    been to many       large      football       matches at 8.W.F.C.,

                    and.      during my time at West Bar                did many duties at the L e p pings Lane

                    end       of the ground.

                    In Sep t e m b e r       1987,    (000987)    I started serving wit h the Com m u n i t y

                   Const a b l e s at F.1 and have               been on duty at the m a j o r i t y of matches.

                    At all       these games          I have    been on Serial               1 (the   track)   and   I have

                    placed myself              behind the goal      near       to gate         number 5, and PC       1285 S mith

                    has       been near gates          either 3 or 4.

                    I origi n a l l y        took up this       position as there was                 less m a n power at

                    t h a t    end of the ground.              I have     never      been d e t ailed any particular

                    po s   i t,i o n o n t!h e t ra c k .
\u\\   o ci >; u r u . d y y    i     n   Mp r l i    1707 ' ,   It ju h o ? ^    j.    c.-j."r r i V h ' u     k*    iiiw    *-» r u u   1u
                                                                                                                                          1     &   *./ -? „ n.j-

am     (0945)          and went             into      the    North Stand                for        the         briefing            at      10 am.




                                                                                                                                                    PA fab.
                                                                                                                                                    B8?o

(1000)          Ins p.              Darling was            in control            of our sector and PS C h a p m a n was

in charge              of Serial             1.       After       the briefing                  from Chief Su p e r i n t e n d e n t

Ducken fie 1 d and Supt iiurray 'J! had a packed meal                                                          in the North S tand but

received no other                         instruction             regarding my duties                                for     the day.

I collected a stool and                               placed        it near            to gate 3.                     At most             games         I

sit at this                    position as            it    is d i r ectly between two sets of                                            ra i 1 ings

on the terrace and often fans                                     climb up on to and over                                    the     railings and

gives        easy access                  for     climbing         the    perimeter                   fence.               (Two Liverpool

fans       s caled the                perimeter            fence at the start                         of the           1988        (000088)                 semi

final and              ran onto            the       pitch.        1 detained one as                           he a t t e m p t e d             to get

back       in the              crowd.        The      other       one get back                  in but was                   later         taken out

by St.            Johns with a leg                     injury,         caused whe n he fell                                from the fence).

The      fans        began arriving at                      the Leppings                Lane          end before                 IE.00          (1200)

and. I stood on the                        track, behind the goal                         with PC Smith.                           The         newt

officer           on the track was PC                                                  who was                near         the small                gate       in

the North Stand.                          I d o n ’t, know where                 the      next officer was                           in the

opposite            dir e c t i o n        (South g t a n d )

There were               very few Liverpool                       fans    :i.n the ground but                              the     ones         near PC

S mith and me were                        sober and well               behaved.,                I'm not, sure                    of the time

but about              1 pm          (1300)       I heard a radio message                                from PS Chap m a n                     ('the

radio was              on talk            through)          to the effect                 "I'm taking                      half my serial

for meal             before           it gets         busy"        Reply         "Roger".                     I then saw a group of

officers             on the track,                   near        the     players             tunnel leave                  the track                via the

North S tand                   obviously going               for their meal.

About        half an hour                  later       I saw PS C h a p m a n back near                                the       players

tunnel          and a s s u m e d he had had his meal                                  and      1 was a n t i c i p a t i n g a radio

message           to go for mine.                      At 2 pm          (1400)          I had            received             no     instruction

regarding a meal and wa l k e d                                  over    to PS Chap m a n and asked him                                        if PC

S mith and             1 could take                  our meal,,          He said O.K.                          On our way to the
canteen a message             came    over      tne    r a d io    "The       c a n t e e n will    close       :i.n




                                                                                                                 P Atafc
                                                                                                                 SS73

20 m i n utes"     On our arrival              at the        canteen we found                it was       closed and

one of the       ladies said          " W e ’re closed for the next                      twenty m i n utes"                  PC

S mith arid I then stood              in the queue            until       they      re--opened at approx S.,

SO. (1420)       We were          served and. returned to the track about 2 . 4 5 - 2 . 5 0

pm,    (1445-1450)           PC    Smith went         to the toilet             I w a l k e d onto        the

Leppings Lane       end where             I found PC 700 Helliwell                     was    standing          behind,

the goal.        I saw the          centre     pen     (CN & CS)          was     very full         but    the         two

outer    pens were       only about          half      full.           This    s u p rised me as          I ’d never

seen the fans       so badly distributed,,                        At    first     there d i d n ’t appear                   to

be a serious       problem the fans were                     swaying          back and forth and some

were    climbing from the             pen ma r k e d N on the map                   into     the stand above.

This    is a common occurrence                 at     large matches,,              The     swaying and           pushin

became muc h worse            to the extent            that       females were           screaming and farts

were    beginning       to    panic.        I put over a radio message                        to the effects                     "

There    is a serious             crush down here            it is serious".                 I d o n ’t know            if :i.

was    received or not as             I was      unable       to hear my            radio     due    to the

no i se . At this t ime> I was              near      gate    f our and         it was       obv i ous     that

people against          the fence were               in serious          trouble.          There was           only PC

S mith and me at this               section and         I think          he was      near     to Gate 3.                I

opened gate 4 and a s s i s t e d the                 first       injured man who             I saw onto the

track.    The    fans    began to spill               out.        I a s s i s t e d this man with a leg

injury to the St -Johns at the                       corner       of the North Stand.                    All    the         fan

who were     spilling         onto the track and the grass                          I was attem p t i n g              to ge

them back on the terrace                   through gates 5 and 6 w h i c h                    1 opened.            At

this stage       I was       j o i n ed by a n o th e r s e r iaI w h i ch ar r i v e d f r om t h e

direction       of the N orth Stand.                  The    first       body     I saw was         on    the     terrac

just, behind the fence.                   I cannot      describe          this      person as        I could            see

little    of him due          to    the    crowd      but    he was m a 1e » white and                   laid flat

out with fans       standing          on    h im .     It was          impossible at that stage                        to gs
to     h   j.it*   ..     W e* w 6 r 0     d r -ag g i n g t’& n $ o u % o f                 g    t-e 4 3,$ cju i.c k j. y 3.s             p   o s s i u ±e




                                                                                                                                                    PAut,
                                                                                                                                                    S c.5/c*

They were                     climbing           over       the     fence           o nt o       the    track       and        o v er     the     rail nigs

into         the N o r t h Pen.                       The      f an s     began        pushing              the    dead        and       injured

through                 the        gate.         Officers           began           resuscitation                  on       the     grass,          I

assisted                   in      pulling        a     l arge      fat m a n          from gate              4.        He     was       about      blS

years              of age.               I think         bald/greying,                    wearing            a green           j ump er .         He w a s

with         his          s on a b o u t         CSC) y e a r s     he     had       b l a ck       hai r     and       a black           moustache.

He     seemed                 uninjured            but      very         distressed.                   I carried              his    f at h e r     onto

the        grass              but      I thought            he w a s       dead        as        he w a s n ’t b r e a t h i n g           and      wasn't

conscious.                         X began         to    give       hi m       heart mass age                 but       it     didn't          appear          to

have         any          effect          but      I continued and                     he        began       to    breath           for    himself.

A Police                  Officer          who        I don't            know       but      I think          he w a s         either          from

Barnsley                  or W o o d s e a t s          was     near          by s a i d         "make       sure        he    doesn't           swallow

his        tongue"                  I turned            hi m    o nt o        his     side        and       after       a few m i n u t e s             he

regained                   consciousness.                      By    t hi s      time        an a mb ul anc e               ha d a r r i v e d      and

w as       parked               n ea r    to     the     goal.            I carried               this       man       by     his    arms       an d      a

civilian                   had      h i s 1 e g s t o the a m b u l a n c e .                       In s i d e t he a m b u 1a n ce t her e

was        a body on the bench and one or two on the f l o o r .                                                                   We had        to put-

the        casualty                 down and            t ake       the       bodies         out       of    the       ambulance           then         put

hirn i nside.                       He    wa s     st i l l      breathing             and         conscious             and       his    son was

w i t h hi m .                  I o b t a i n e d n o d etai Is a n d d o n't, k n o w w hat                                   h a p p e n e d to h i m »

I don't                  know       how       long      I stayed              with      this        particular                casually           but,

whilst                  I. w a s    reviving            him      on the          g r as s        many       more       bodies        had        been

b r o u g h t fro m Ga t e 4 a nd w e r e c o v e ri n g the                                           g ra s s .        A t s o m e s t a g e I sa w

the        first              officer,           he wa s         Inspector             Harper.               I said           to    him     "can't, we

get         rid          of     these         bodies".              He    replied                "Bodies?"         with        disbelief.                 It

a p p e a r e d t o me                   t ha t o f f i ce r s w e r e be i ng                     directsd            t o t hat         en d    o + the

ground                  who     ha d     no    idea w h a t          was       taking             place.          At     s o me     stage         I endeu

up at G a t e                   3 where          the        crush        to    g e t 'out wa s              enormous,              several         fans

ha d        fallen              over       the     s m al l      wal l        and were             trapped          by      their        legs      and        the
crush behind them and as a consequence                      they began to             pile      up.        I thin




                                                                                                           PAGfc,'
                                                                                                           SS/li

it was at       this    stage    the fans    began to pull at              the fencing which

started to       rip away       I together with other             officers,         fans,      ambulance

staff    began to kick at the           bottom of         it,    sufficient         gave wa y so we

could get the          fans under     it.

I did several          journeys    carrying       bodies and       injured on ad v e r t i s i n g

boards,    at    first    to the amb u l a n c e    station.        I first         remember seeing

about 6-10       bodies    or    injured on boards on the floor                     outside        the      gym,

I made another         journey and on my return with a body the whole                                  floor

outside    the gym was          covered.     I made' another          journey and            on returning

this    time    I saw the       bodies were       being    taken    into the          gym    itself.            I

followed suit.           I d o n ’t know    how many trips I made,                 the descriptions

o f t h e bo d i e s or w ho      I was w it h during       t h i s t im e .     T he o n Iy

r e c o l lection of staff        in the gym       I have       is an officer           shoutings           “

Someone must       stay with the bodies".

After all       the dead were       in the    gym and the          injured had gone                I was

informed we should, all            go to the N orth S tand where we were                         de-briefed

by Chief       Inspector Beal.        After       that    I was asked          by Inspector Calvert

to sit wit h      fans on a S.Y.T.          bus    in Penistone Road.                 I went with PC

700 He lliwe 11 and 2954 Morledge.                  The    fans were         in fact missing

friends and       relatives.        We obtained          their    details and descriptions                       of

persons missing.           After    this was       completed a coach arri v e d                  in

P e n istone Roa d and we         put the    relatives          on the     coach w hich          I was

informed was       to take       them to    H a m m e r t o n Road Police Station.                    My

overall    feeling       of events    of    that day are that at the height of the

disaster       no one seemed to take          control.




                                                                         D .A . I L L I N G W O R T H S I G N E D
 Q I n I C H C.1M I   I M ft t i 4
                      PLACES

                      TIME:          DATE   040589

 WI TIMESB TO S I G N A T U R E s

 OFF IC ER S SIGN A T UR E s

END OF REPORT
                                                                                                                            R 293


 DAVID ALFRED ILLINGWORTH




 POLICE CONSTABLE l»17




 SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE HAMMERTON ROAD POLICE STATION



  During my service with South Yorkshire Police and Sheffield and Rotherham, I have beer,

  to many       large        football         matches        at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,                   and during my

  time at West Bar did many duties at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

        September 1987, I started serving with the Community Constables at FI and have beer,

  on duty      at     the majority of matches.                    At all these games I have been on Serial 1 (the

  u'ack)     and      I have       placed myself            behind      the       goal near to gate number 5,              and PC 128^

  Smith has been near gates either 3 or 4.

  I   originally            took   up       this    position     as     there      was   less manpower       at    that    end    of the
                                                                                                             i

  ground.         I have never been detailed any particular position on the track.

  On Saturday          15 April 1989, I arrived at the ground at 9-^5 am and went into the North

  stand     for     the briefing at 10 am.                    Inspector Darling was in control of our sector anc

  PS Chapman          was     in charge of Serial                1.     After the briefing           from Chief Superintendent

^^jck e n f i e l d    and     Superintendent               Murray       I    had a packed     meal      in the    North    Stand     but

  received no other instruction regarding my duties for the day.

      collected         a    stool          and    placed   it   near        to     gate 5*    At    most games      I sit       at   this

  position as it              is directly between two sets of railings on the terrace and                                   often fans

  climb up on to              and over the Tai l i n g s and gives easy access for climbing the perimeter

  fence.       (Two Liverpool                 fans scaled the perimeter fence at the start of the 1988 semi

  final     ran ont^> the pitch.                   I detained         one as he attempted           to   get back in the crowd.

  The    other        one     got back        in but    was      later       taken out    by                     with a

  caused when he fell from the fence).

  The fans began arriving at the Leppings Lane end before 12.00 and I stood on the track

  behind     the goal with PC Smith.                        The next officer on the track was PC                                       who


                                        i
was near the small gate in the North Stand.             I don't know where the next officer was

in the opposite direction (South Stand)

There were very few Liverpool          fans in the ground but the ones near PC Smith and         mt

were sober and      well behaved.      I amnot sure of the time but at about 1 pm I heard         £

radio   message   from PS Chapman       (The    radio was on talk through)      to the effect   I ■

taking half my serial      for meal before it gets busy" Reply "Roger".          I then saw a group

of officers on the track, near the players tunnel leave the track via the North Stanc

obviously going for their meal.

About half an hour later 1 saw PS Chapman back near the players tunnel and assumed h<

had had his meal and I was anticipating a radio message to go for mine.               At 2 pm I ha.

received no instruction regarding a meal and walked over to PS Chapman and asked hii

if PC Smith and I could take our meal.               He said OK.   On our way to the canteen

message came over the radio "The canteen will close in 20 minutes".               On our arrival a

the canteen we found it was closed and one of the ladies said: "We re closed for th

next twenty minutes"       PC Smith    and I then stood in the queue until they re-opened         a

approximately 2.20.        We were     served and returned to the track at 2.45-2.50 pm.          P

Smith went    tothe toilet I walked            onto the Leppings Lane end where I found PC       70

Helliwell was      standing behind goal.         I saw the centre pen (CN & CS) was very fuil    bt:

the two outer pens were only about half full.            This surprised me as I ’d never seen tb

fans so badly distributed.           At first there didn't appear to be a serious problem tfc

fans were swaying back and forth and some were climbing from the pen marked N on t l

map into the stand above.       This is a common occurrence at large matches.            The swayir

 and pushing became much worse to the extent that            females were screaming and fans wei

beginning to      panic.   I put over a radio message to the effect:             "There is a serioi

 crush down here     it is serious".           I don't know if it was received or not as I wc

 unable to hear my radio due to the noise.             At this time I was near gate 4 and it w«

 obvious   that   people   against    the fence were    in   serious trouble.     There was only I

 Smith and ne     at this section and I think he was         near to Gate 3-     I opened gate 4 ai
 assisted the first injured man who I saw onto the track.                  The fans began to spill out.

 I assisted         this man     with a     leg   injury   to the St Johns at the corner of the North

 Stand.        All the fans who were spilling onto the track and the grass I was attempting

 to get them back on the terrace through gates 5 and 6 which I opened.                   At this stage I

 was joined by another serial which arrived from the direction of the North Stand.                   The

 first body I saw was on the                terrace just behind the fence.       I cannot describe this

 person as I could see little of him due to the crowd but he was male, white and laid

 flat out with fans standing on him.                   It was impossible at that stage to get to him.

 We were dragging fans out of gate 4 as quickly as possible.                    They were climbing over

^^ie    fence       onto the track and over the railings into the North pen.             The fans began

 pushing       the dead    and injured through the gate.            Officers began resuscitation on the

 grass.        I assisted in pulling a large fat man from gate 4.              He was about 50 years of

 age, I think bald/greying, wearing a green jumper.                   He was with his son about 30 years

 he had black hair and a black moustache.                    He seemed uninjured but very distressed.     I

 carried his father             onto the grass but I thought he was dead as he         wasn t breathingand

 wasn't conscious.              I began to give him heart massage but it didn t appear to have          any

 effect but I continued and he began to breath for himself.                      A police officer who I

 don't know but I think he was either from Barnsley or Woodseats was near by said "make

^^ure     he    doesn't   swallow     his    tongue”       I turned him onto his side and after a few

 minutes       he    regained    consciousness.        By this time   an ambulance had arrived and was

 parked near to the goal.              I carried this man by his arms and a civilian had his legs

 to the ambulance.              Inside the ambulance there was a body on the bench and one or           two

 on the floor. We had to put the casualty down and take the bodies out of the ambulance

 then put him inside.              He was still breathing and conscious and his son was with him.

 I obtained no details and don't know what happened to him.

 I d o n ’t know how long I stayed with this particular casualty but whilst I was reviving

  him on the grass many more bodies had been brought from gate 4 and were covering the

 grass.        At some stage I saw the first officer, he was Inspector Harper.              I said to him
"Can't    we   get   rid    of   these    bodies".   He   replied:   "Bodies?"   with   disbelief.     It

appeared to me that officers were being directed to that end of the ground who had no

idea what was taking place.              At some stage I ended up at gate 3 where the c.ush to get

out    was enormous,       several   fans    had fallen over   the small wall    and were trapped bj

their legs and the crush behind them and as a consequence they began to pile up.                        I

think     it was at this stage the fans began to pull at the fencing which started               to rj.p

away     I together with other officers, fans, ambulance staff began to kick at the bottom

of it, sufficient gave way so we could get the fans under it.

I did several journeys carrying bodies and injured on advertising boards, at first to

the ambulance station.           I first remember seeing about 6-10 bodies or injured on boards

on the floor outside the gym.              I made another journey and on my return with a body the

whole floor outside the gym was covered.              I made another journey and on returning this

time I saw the bodies were being taken into the gym itself.                I followed suit.      I don t

know how many trips         I made,      the descriptions of the bodies or who I was with during

this      time. The only recollection of staff in the gym I have is an officer shouting.

"Someone must stay with the bodies".

After all the dead were in the gym and the injured had gone I was informed we should

all go to the North Stand where we were de-briefed by Chief Inspector Beal.                          After

that     I was asked by Inspector Calvert to sit with fans on a S.Y.T bus in Penistone

Road.      I went with PC 700 Helliwell and 295** Morledge. The fans were in fact missing

friends and relatives.           We obtained their details and descriptions of persons missing.

After this was completed a coach arrived in Penistone Road and we put the relatives on

the coach which 1 was informed was to take them to Hammerton Road Police Station.




 END OF REPORT
                   X             a p o W e ,                                                                2 ^ 0 ^ v\iv\c\                   in            ~tW
      S o a \in           W orksV>.re                        p o lic e                 -p o r c ^              a t             p resen t

       a t             D o^ocxsbsc.
                  A t            ^                              S d t^ r A a v ^                 is th         f)p n \            \c \g ° \             \

      o r\        c ^ o tx a .            cxk               ^ o . ^ G u cr f c e r              p oW o.                'jU W n                                            <2.

      S e . ^ i - - p ‘^ u \            ~ fc c ^ c A \\                M a tc U                    b e ^ K je a n                 £ i\/e c p o o \                a /iA

      N c ^ tin c ^ r* * ^                  F o re st.                               -\k e r\           le £ t                ~Po<            sln Q -ff» elA

      \iv A ^       c o      <a c V>            o n A              ext               ^ A S c in                    w e            V >aA            c\       W ie fU a

       »n        " - |^ i£             f\J o r lK             ‘S i l c t / ' i A *       J -            V vjeo^ ,         ex           r'lQ rvy\ o <l t            crp

£    S e rtc \         2 S                 vmV><cV>                C o .n f c * » ''e A                     p S        2 k 4 0          P e rru >

                2^0 0            S ./w s                ,    pc        2 2 ^<b P ^ r u i s                      >      p c . T 2 tk            S / v ^ ?

     p c                         E n v jn c ^ t ^                 p     c     2 S V 7             G     iU     q o        ,    p c ^ G 7 7 W eek^.

       cvnA            p         c        \o < M          F o s t e r .

                                         “\ ^ Q -           W i e p m c*                 c \t          \o                         a.               p a c k e A                  .

    Vva.^cV>           wjca^                   p rovJi       A eA                 v ^ h /c h            w e.        V >aA           »^>- H »                S     p        ­

                 a t          \ \ a n                 <S g , o < a \        2 S           a n A             ^ Q jic s i          2^-          w cA W edJ^

     t o           A-Ai A A \q.o0 0 6 >c\                        CL) ca A -              V\iO-              W £J’£.            S'Gpcvj'i^W A                      »tI i^

    p a T 'S .         cx^ A » a 's tfu c W A                      4 o               c o a c .r                     M v A A W jo o A                        r d

     A u n c to n                    H r < x A ( W lA              roc^cl                 o n A             “t i          p ^ to \             " t^ Q ^

                o ro u \     K             P   re c   m                a s        -f^ r                ov^         -l^ a           o \A         & L *

    ( lc ^ \\          p u t> \ic               V > o^se                    “f o r              p > Jo lic               o rd er          re a so n ^

     o n A        ~ to                 ^ ) r e v ( 2 ^ |r             \o o tr u ^                 -p r o r -i              ^ lo o p s ,                 ftp

                     ~ t i /v » e               \           W a ^                 \A           C c ^ p c v /J U               V m tI^              p -c " 3 C fT 7

    V je e k ^ .                                                                                                   ^
                   U pon                ovAf           cxccivxaI              vs»q ,       sovw                SP^aW                   q^O ups                  crp

    V><7^r\            s e t s                      crp            s u p p o rte rs .                    X          c o u lA

      S o n e .              a p           -4 W                 S v a ^ p o .'W s                      U ie /e           C u r r c ^ n tJ               C-OA^i

      crp          W       s /          a /iA                W oyey                    vm V   > \A \        " 4 5 h G .u ^        V r-^ e/Q j^ C 6 .n s u / v » ,n ,>

     Vv»V \ ^ t               W < \ \ W t A Gy.                                                                                                                       ^

                                                    ^       a fte /n o ^ n                         fo r c w e sse             A      -" \W              C X /^ O w ^ t

                       's o ^ c y ^ .r s                       * n crec* s< a A .                H b o ^ -               I ' Z ^ i A - A uul

        fv x e w W * /                  o f           - lW                  p jib \ic               I r r fiir /v ^ e j              U *S          H l& s V
  ~ B rw e ~           w c a <£     ex             W c^e         c^oapo f                Z tu e /p O c \              —f u / ^

ru n A iA f^             A W <X au^\                A ^ > 6. C o - o p           '^ r t o r e ,

       NNcL        q/ ^ uv»rie<s» cdr                                              -tV>e. C o -o p wV>o
•tAffc^ctA <m%. -4^cA "^<d. ~f^A^                                                  haA left"      wrOoo-<f
 CcAu.Sinc» cxr»u Aumovae.
            vJV n l s V      vcrX        paV ol                 w t      - f u w>A          " ^ a t HJKql s W W s ^ t c '

pu^olit            V>Dv>s^.              o a           H3n* M                             cl                          c lc i S 6.clk

oc\r               a                          1o a t                       ocV                           re a r          " to

 lo c x A           c ^ ^ t o r 'o e r '^ .

             f^T o r^       O uX         CAjrtv/cA             u p tfc       1 SG ^>m                 w et

 Ou/vK2jOcAts>                                                                    - p ro r -»           loaW h         c _ \m W

 V ^u^na                   W e/            an A U a ^                                             " t W .— rW e sh e /"

   o fr          lic e n c e        on               M iA d ^ iw a ^ A              coaA          .
              PHr               OSpr-i             we. V><2 <^eA        on ~tirv£                                     faAia
 erf           p       C "2 2'2’S        P u lc ^ jio  - ^ < s v t -4W e  W as,                                         S c /~ i^

  4x£>A >W                                         - ^ 0,          abound                  VJgL          ^ jr > e n     w ia lW d

  "V o                          P W ri^             a n A          . n r ^ r / M e di          V> •An           w V><d~ V/\i Q.

  V v t \A                  V \e t\/e A &n             "4\>q..           T6a c \ i o ,         ^><3X’          P e jru

 “i W o                irts V u c tA                u s       c x ,iA           ~ \W              red -           o f     S^<a|

 'Z s              ~ b> c & b u r s )                - b t>     Z e p p * ''^              W ne.

4 pi/v>£            V >c\\f         o r-            -th e       S erw A             v o e rc . A ^ o n s ^ c ^ e A

 -U        4 W            < ^ ro u n A                         ^x& ns f t           v/c\/o            v o V A s t"

  an*A             p c VJe&ks ^ sen                                             ^A          alW /s                voos\ W j
                             C\TooinA          •


               O o                       <3> r r i\ja \        cxf        Z e^pm c^               £ a .n d             v\/Q_

  p o e W le A            A W         cvrecA.                  o « ts> < U         " tW               c^cw A            n<2 > Jr
 4o              - ^ e , C o rn e/                 shop.        fit—                -hn^e                “tW c .           w o re

 S r^ v A \             P ^ /A x /s           o f             Z tu e /p o o l                               ~ f A W i^ tx
       i                rv »v                               \ rx.L           JL.            J ________
 oat             erf      -th e          a^nA
 eoa>                        c o u ld              se e        “th d "          o e ^ u                   e^ era            on

 of         -A W - f W                     w e /e                                     or A n
 upse t                 Co /ir tio o
     O iA c i                        w q j Q-       A icecP i n a                     U               c £          C \\d u S C L

 c*V                           p o lic e                              ^

            \r\/4Sh \ n         -h^o0                  i c r p                   0 \M~ CAjfivycA1 ““t u ^ - f ir«.
                            cvn^ecA             cdr         Z-e^),Ajys                     W ml,, a^cA cx s t o r f
 \w U e                \c^ £/        -th^se              we*'<2.                                                      nu~rnv<->* s
     ctIAis/          "W e.         C /u ^ e s ,                              a ( ^ o ^ W > c e ,s .

                fit                  - fc i /^> £            g /e .           w o .ro ,          o n            * ry‘C.(~e.c\'5,n<j.

  cxr~\c> ^A :                crp          - p ^ s                                o j r               crp       -4 W                       <3

     c^vVe.^c^ v4r                     dtrfR cuff            -pW^-—H^no-                              e i^ e rc ^ c a          ^ W J e 's
  " to          cJ \ ^ r~                               VJe.           -tiho/i        -tri<2.c\             “t o
 4W                   QWQJ<^Ati^K               v<sAu So,'?            4 r                            -^ W             c ro w A
  buct*               a ^           cs^fr^rt's,                           woL/e                                           -tW
  Z_\\j£J^oo                                     VjV>o       VvlQj'e              \j QSi~K              cb>
                  cxoA              i^ o fA u               o^r                 lA’s l r u ^ o n ^ *                                op"
 -tK a            a ^ O u \c v u .e             Cr<£3c^£.     —t u - r n e A          op                H crf           V c o o v J i^ a

  O w e                "W        q o                         a ^ V i^ u           m   -         -fu r           A ^ e c V io A -s, ^

                Voe,        C C /^a.neA             —l^Le/'Q,         u /r k \        4* AS’p rn                v)\n£/"\           Cl/^>

X ins^ecW r                   crp       S>Qrtc\\                          ~W \J               u ^ ~W                       CeswoQ
  "V^           j^ iA A le -w o o d                   ro cv c\            c ^         ^S iT           Oa<^            o r ; r r
                            cv\A         -Vts         re tu rn            4    t> -frwj.               W o^k              ^ W ic |
  a t           S -^ O ^             -p ^ r           dfc_W -i£p,
                R 'V        £>■ is^> n o        . WQ-         c tlW d e d             c \f             C .W u           U jW ^ \ s

\o, ~\ <z         -fo r       —|W          Cl-0c\(\~\        ViacW                ~Vo             ^C/^c<v?Wf.



          Q A -^ ^ n e                                                            \       v^ j <k s         ^ p e c v W in c ^ 4 ^

c\          rouA            SvoeepO' v j \>o \aforf4Q.Jl          r^ e                                          “ ther!" W f
 ^"XOar^                  o a S * r W c k ^ l^Wr> p } p rv\ --tW /e-                                              W<l/£ - t w o
 "trcvnsrV                v/cx^'s        -fu \\        erf            ^ u o jp o a \                    CbCAOvsW
 -pov^J.^              CGaW ^ . - t W                  rvU*\e>/’t L               <sf             ese            '~pay\S           we^Q.
 - \ - o \ iaW va         c\ro ^ aV c            c^V u^U              w W ^                                 '             O ^ c ^ /e S I

                       VNjC^^          CiA A        n<yV         cx ^ J                                                 r^Q,
                                                                                                      I



 " iW .    -fW ^                                            " V ie    2 ^                sW A "
"^fNQi/x   “^ G a - n ^   Vj<_xA\            V > ret\V \   \4 ^      c\r\   c r f f - \\l QJ\l <L ■

" iW .     fo c ^ A       Z ^ e s z ^ o fS      ,A a n d

                                    \\




                                                                                  ^ ■C     Z ^


                                                                               ^zs^ls^
                    X          a c - 'i            poW e.                c ^ .n - d lio W                         v \]v\ A         in          ~ tW

      SoaW >              S o r k ^ 'b ^ e                   p o lic e            -fo rce              a t           p resen t             ’G 'tackvvA
        c*V              C )o r> C c \sW r.

                    frt        % l> O a ^                      S aW A c^                  is f t n          f ) p n \ \ C\ S ° \           I     w ia ^

      oa            <A^cla                ext            C^G>ACu5r|j2r                   p o ltc o ,           ■g I& W o

      SSP'U                         '('C>cA ) ca\ \                M c ric k                 b@ ^>oean                 L iv e rp o o l              cxoA

      N o t t ^ c ^ 0^                    F o re s t.            V^e.         -\jih e r\        le ftr            ~fb<'            s W ffte lA

                    COovcV>                    o f> A           C^C           ^ A S ar"'                 w e.         V>aA              c\ W ie f iA a

       •a                           I\1 d j ^ K          <3 r tc i.n A .           J-          w ^ s             ^         c^Q r-^o Q s             crp

*    S e c ic \          2 S>             wVwcVi                 c o ^ A t^ e c ^                     p s       ^ZfcA'O P e r r a ;

                 2300          S      ^       s      ,    pc       2 2 2 <d P ^ r ^ s                   >      p c .T 2 i£ >

      pc         \ ^ 5 > \E A w r . ^ r b 3               p c 2 S 2 f7                  G iW o o ,               p c Z o 7 7 W e e l^ /

       c\r>A              p c io^i FosW r.
                               -^cl V)ncfiAa                                       aX         \0                      a            pacU eA

    Vv_a.a<A>            W u^>   p r o ^ i AeA                                          cU           v je .     W cl         ,n         " ttia             '

                   fit        W apo                SeocA             "2 S           csnA             ^ Q _ ria \      2 ^-         w cA W edi

     4 td           M iA A le v ^ jo ^ A                       cD caA -            W o.           w ere.             S ep x ro cW A              ».-rlv^

    p e e r 's .          cxaA                ^ ^ u c k A                    4 o        c o v y e .r          M v A A W u jo g A               rd

     A unchoo                      BLrcNAGelA                  ^ O o ,c l          onA          “ bt>          p^V o\              4 ^ 0.

                 e>rou h                  p   re a n     c t        Q    ^     -f^ r                          -4 W        o \A

    ( l c ^ \\       p u k \» c               V > o^se              “fc > r             pJoL c                 o rA ^ r       f~ec\sc>/-> ^

     q a     A     ~ to              ^ re v e ^ jr             lo o ^ ^ c ^                                      s ^ a p s ,              A t

                     “ b i^ e .                \         W a^                va         C o ^ p c v /J U          W jtH ^            pC5C >T7
    V je e W s .                                                                                          ^

                    ^pon                  0vAr       cxcrivjc^l              we         Sovw              SPOaWc ro u p s                        crp

    V>er^n                                     crp              S u p p o rte rs .            X               O xA A             S*2.Q_
      Som e                   C3p         " tW                 S v j^ p o rW s               U je /e            C a rro l o a             C a/\< £

      cs£           W w              a /x c \            \   o .(j & /         w V n cV \         —i W u ^                           C 6 ^ S u /> i,n t »

     VviVv\^T    WJoAWlAGy.                                                     ^
                    ""^vg. ^ c^fte/no^o    ©roosressG                CXA^OsjiaI-
       cyf 'Svj^cy'Wrs        \ Acrec^^A. nV        \2. r^icji -Acuu^ cx
        fv\e/v\W*/ Op -IW2. pJo\ic I ^(or/vie J                    -^^V*
    -B r w e ~            w cv^              ck         W      ^ e .          c jr o u p        o f           Z iu e /p o o \             ~

 r u A A i.^ i^                                            A kfe             C o - o p            % V o r e .,

                                                     Q /V ju n r ig 's ,               c r tr         ~ tV > c        C o - o p                 w /V > o

\n ft>                                     A k e A               A^& .           ~ (^ A ^         V \aA                   l< 2 ^         w t Oo g        A"

 Q<-au.<S i A‘\               a n u               U ^ C \a € ..

             V s iV n ls V           vc rX        paV cM                     w e.                            "^>uV            '■ik o ,        sW W s^ t< _ '

 ^>vAo\tc               W ^ s e .                 q > /\          C3n?k                  A v o < v s»
                                                                                                fO iA                                     cW & A

 oc\r                                        -fro^AId                        a t opeocA AW re a r                                               "to
  lo c c A               c ^ 'A r o r '^ r s ..

                tr T b r ^           O a i"        c x r r \\j< A             u^W          I    SO ^m                  v^C i

  Ou/viG>JOuA^>                  ~ ^ o 4 o a \\                                                       " P r o .- A         ta c r tth         C .U W

   V ^uuna                           W e/                  an A         \^ a © r           '- f ro .'v \ - f c W — r W e s h e r

    o fr             uce^ce                   on                 MA cRcwgoA                              caaA*
                P H rO S p r o                w     e                          V > <2< ^eA                  c ia      ~4W                 r^A io

   orfp         c    *222^                    P u tr v jt^                     -^ n c A          - 4 W        e       W a s.              S o r * -» ^ _

   -b ^ A A e                    )os»i«L                    AA>G u               c \ c o ^ d                  W e.                             w ia lW < i

   "Vo              p's          P W rt^                    &r\ A                   i^ r/M e A                       V>tAn           wU<A~ vo<L
                               e ^     A                6 /^      A W                 r a A * o ,                                    P erru

  “t k c L O              ia s   V m cW A                                       cv k   A        A W                 rec4"e r f           S ^ w )

  'Z s               ~b> re tu rn                           4r&                  Z e p p * ''^ .                  Wne.               ( f r 4 ^ i s

 - f a .-m <l                 V^c\Vf          o r           —t h e              SencA            v je c c .                 ' W a / i s o o ^ ’e c i

 -U        -& *                c \r o u n A                                  A ra ^ sfV               v /° v .^       v A A s - |r

   a n A            p     c    V J e e K s              >                                                         c A W /s              v oo,\ W         j

  - \°          A W              o ^ r o -v n A .

                    O n                       < arrsJc^                                    Z e p p tn c ^             /la n e             V N /e

   pecW A eA                   A W -              c x r e c \ o q A s A q.                      A ^ ne_             a ^ o o tr A               oe^ A "

 Ao          AW-                 C o rr^Q j             sW p> .                fttrA ^ i^                 A :» n o e          A W g-              w q/<l

  S r^ vA                  { ^ m /A x tr s              o f              Z tv e r p o o l              A w ^ s                 A ^ A W '^ c x

  oAr               crp AK&                        orou.oA                    ~^T6^ "AW                                                        \a/)Q,
  0 T i\.           ~X           a o A (\                   s e e "Ah A "                  O e a r l^ v              e o ^ u                  o .o < l

   o f          A W            A^n's.         w e /c .                 »r>     -fc e ^ c ^            o r           » o        c \

  ups      elr                co/iu           on
     cyr\A                       wera.         Aice.chna                                     \cV a ?                      cjou^e..
 ok                                ^>oW e                                 ^

            V\z“^r\ \ rs           " tw o         r^xi                   op          o^r                 1 ~ b^c> —p \r£-

 QAa ^ f c s                 c v n s > e iA       eA                                          Ic^ e*                           a.   sh o rt

 w ^^ne.                \a l^ /'                             w    QsQ.      '   4 ~ t^ c > w J€A                                              s


     o tir \z f         ~ ^ ra         0A £^ne s              Qn A                a r A x X v * e e s           .

              fit          -4^1s        -k     i/'O£              £/e            wo.ro,            cxn              ' r'crea^coo.
  CX^u>w\ /4 r                 erf1           - p ^ s             d O ;~ 1i^>6«y^^ O ^cV                 0 ~P ~4W<.                 Cs^Cui/'iQ

                              dr         d rF R c u tt'                                                  Qj ^       qtc^ a h i        ^ / q .W l W

 4ro                cJ \^ r~           Vie. AW'* -fcneA “t o
 AW                  GJV)e^c\^\cu^ vokiAe.'s    0 4 t^ JrKe  crowA
  b a t"                               t^ ir& rts .               w q jq _          W * v ip e /£ c \                           " tW

  Z _\\J£J ^>oo \                  4 ^ s          VvjW                Vvl <2/ 0 ,      V Q /c\                      ^ s . ‘^ e ■ ~ W j u / c i s

  LA'S              CkoA               tc^Or</\a                  G^r                                                                    of
 -44\o-            Cx,^C K j\ c*acq.                               —t u - r n e A           op           n< < 4                W " > o d iA a

  U jV o /e              A^         Op          O/^A          a ^ V iA u               u-       -fo r               A ‘re c k o n s ,
              VvlQ__          ce/^\<A>neh                —^Tuird          u /r k \          A-^vspm                   vAoe/^           a /n

~!C^S(^.cWr cs^r Sonq\ ^2^ A ^ d         d^    \^   Ccsm/^ q.
  "V0    jNAtAAl C-woocl    rocvei a^> pstr o ^ r o ri^ J
 ciakve^,         cx^A “Vt> return 4ti "AW WoAK c^4^voc\
                  S 'l O p              ~p^r             d e _ b n < rp ,

              P4r            G' i S p (—•        . w o.           e A W x le J              cA"          c W a                 W ; W e .\ s

\ a ^ e            ~ ^ r      " 4 ^            C o ^ c U             W     c U         “ W>        t)a ^ > c < v ? W .


                  -tr


          Q ^ ~ ^ n e                                  flp -il      \ c\ ^ c\           \     ^ j <k s          ^ p e c v W io c ^ - W

c\          rocxA              ^ w e ep O ' --w\>o                    'a f o o ^ e d               r^ e             "4 k o f - a W f
 & l * O a r '‘             o a        S c 4 v H /-c lc i^ i5 M r>          -(-)p r» \         — |y > < i/£ .             w e / e    “ t w        o


 4 ^ n cN n srV             v /c ^ s          -fu W        e rf                    2
                                                                         Z .v \* / p o o \          ~ 4 ^ ^           -   4^        C boncasW r

 4rown                   c e/A're. . - t ir e              p/\cv\ c»/,Axa              a-f         ese - { W                           W5/Q.
 -\~ o \lA \w \                A r>^/\V'.        Ov'l (^           G ik ^ L x                              |V^£_                O £ t^/G ^ I

                         v\Zc*^ ciAA HoV OvJ
                                                                           I



" iW .                                              w as.       s WJr

"^r\e/\   -%nau^
             "'“\ ^   vjcx
                      V     AA
                        j o _V    W e^V t    o^   o f f - \ \c £ /\c e _
" iW      fO a .c \                 ,A a n

                             \\




                                                        ?
                                                     *ZS
ncide;*.                105         050689 0P5012                                 TYPING SERVICE DOCUMENT

                                                                                                                     OFFICERS REPORT NUMBER                                           R516

                                                                                                                                                                                  S ta tio n
>a r n a m e                            HIGGINS N - J             1^

 orenames                               TREVOR
                                         liliP*—■■'
>ge                                                                                                                                                                                   4I
                                                                                             Date             of- bi r t h
                                                                                                                                                                W                 , •         I
id d r e s s



'ccupation

elephone

iumber         of       Pages

#                                   020689                                                                                                                                            f i g ne d


                    I   am T r e v o r         H iggins,

                                    Rotherham,

          ;j U n t i l         July            1988       (000788)          I    was         a    Police                Sergeant                   in    the    South
        'I/'"                  ilP^’
      h K
                Yorkshire                 P olice         stationed              at     Wombwell,                       of         Barnsley              D ivision.

                On       Saturday              9    April        1988       (090488)                  I     was          detailed                  to    supervise                a

                serial             of     constables              performing                     duty           at      H illsborough                     Football

                Stadi.urn.                The       two        football          teams            taking                part             were       Liverpool              am

                Nottingham                  Forest.

                The       serial            was       delegated             duty        at        the           rear              of     the       West             and    and         in
                                                                                                                                              iSP®; ■
                particular                  to      control        fans          entering                   pens             3     and        4,    XKa.%      is     the         centre

                pens          of    the        stand.

                During             the      game         and     because          of     the              amount                  of     fans       withitj/'pe ns                3    and
                                                                                                                                                                                         vv
                                                                                J* -             V                      a a t . s . : t „ (:t ^           entra„c.                a „d

                thereafter                 direct          fans        to       the     two          outer              pens             of    the       stand-            I      cannot
                                           ^                                      ■•                 ■ ■■■ .-".“v    ,S" W   ■.    -•                                       ’ "

                recall             where           the    instruction                  came          from.                   Under            normal        circum stances

                instruction                    came       from     a    Serial           Inspector                           or         via    radio        from          control.

                I       cannot          say        from    which        the       instruction                           came.

                Bearing             in     mind          the    time        lapse        and              having                 attended               several           matches             at

                H illsborough,                      it    is    d iffic u lt            to       relate                detail                 regarding             this
PAGE
R5 1 6
Incident             IQS          £11098         OPoOOi                       D0 C U MP. N 7 P E 0 0 ft D P R I N I’
                                                                                                               5TATEMEMT          N UMBE R            3 3 -I 7

                                                                                                                                                     3 ta il 0 O

;:>u r nasne                       i-i bu LrJp;

Fo r enames                        TREvOP

Ago                                                                                   Da:     av    1 1r t n

( u . Q v" 0 3 S




0 c c ii p a t :i. o n             POL..    PS 1 4 9 3       PETIRED

       s ph o nt

 1C

 •iax r     colour

Hai . r     type

 Eyes

F acial            hair’

u a OS 3 &                         Use

Pu.oo.oo :■ of P a g e s

 Da t e a



                    F u rth e r    to      the    statom ont             I    soado    to   the     Sou. t o    Yo r k o o ; r         o   S.   J       5;

                    r e la tio n     to     my    duty       a t    the       L iverpool        v   M otto      r a r e s t   F   A Cap             Sensi    P   x oa

                    at   H illsoG ^oagh            on    9     Ap r . ; . I                            I   would        like      to       s ta te      ths

                    t o 1 i owxnq «
            gates      came    and   1    cannot   remember'      seeing   whether     or    not    fans   were

            solidly       packed     at    the   pen   end   of   the   tunnel   in   pens    3    & 4.




                                                                                              T HIGGINS      SIGNED

 STATEM ENT    TAKEN
               PLACEs

               TIME-:                      DATE

 WI TNESS   TO S I G N A T U R E S

 OFFICERS     SI GNATURES

END OF   REPORT
                                                                                                                                                            WG 412
                                                                                                                                                      (Amended 3.87)

                                                  West Midlands Police
                                            STATEMENT OF WITNESS
22 29
                                    (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s .102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)
23 30
24 31
25                     L ykyJL
        Name . . . . (-w     ^ .. .                          ..................    ........................................................
26
27      Age ..............ry         *yrs* n         Date °* Birth           '                           ...............
28
        Occupation . I p V ^ . . •                                                 . 9 ..........h       ................... . ...........
22 29   Home or business address                        .
23 30   and telephone number                            K
24 31
25
26
27
28

        This statement, consisting of    S      ’page(s) each* signed by me, is true to the best of my knowledge
22 29   and belief and I make it knowing that, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I
23 30
        have wilfully stated in it anything which I know to be false or do not believe to be true.
24 31
25
26
27      Dated the                           / day of                                                                 19 ^                                     ^
28

                                                                                  Signature witnessed by . .W t
        Signed .                                                                                                                                  'Vi
                                                                                  Officer's Name
                                                                                                        n
                                                                                  Rank .



                                    s jw < k u                             ah-                                 'i ’                           **•
                 ;L iv io 4            m   &sA J s O ftN */                       ii\         dL            rA d tJ.t< L                A)W-'

         XOtAA, . .                   .. & ...........................................• ou . .
                          . . . .                                                        ..   jM fjy ■         . A     j j r . ^              d m


          l a - . .. c n ^ . . .tf.OMf. P A h d s.. MiM)                                          kup.                  w aA .
                          ^                            L /h fs s L .                                                                                      y
                                                                                                          ^      , • J h z . . .T - V .’ a * f

                          -K to til         bqJkw M vSr. . t                  i        .. tlMP. . h w A V -*... (AJ&4
          M ...                                                                         o .tfc*£. . . Wa.
           jpw**s. .                            .^u... -viv dc/A^. - -                                                             Vyw»A
           o        x        m        ^     . c 5 a . . u -V M .                  qX                                                          |           ( O f M.,
           ).     .W k r iv R ,./..                                          .. f t - . .                   ..# ..
           ffdjb. bm&U... festboXi..                                                          ,.4?uM Jm. . r/r. a*P
                      •      P Ur\               .          I la       u          nU              Aia            /sKAjTi/rt/i                 /*u-minL




            iMr. . ' / f c s t w m .              ’£ o X . J k f U w . .................                                                          .
                   W                                     »     8 . ■ ife w o ty ,                           a w .. W                   W              ,    « A

        Signed                                                               Signature witnessed by •<
         k Delete as applicable.
                                                                                                                                                               WG 413
                                                                                                                                                       (Amended 9.87)

                                                West Midlands Police
                                       STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                             (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of statement of . .                       ......... • . y: . . , ' r . / . . . . . ..........................................                     •••
  M&...                       . ..u m ..                 ..    fd tk vm .                                                                    . .Nwjp
              1 .             ... M m . ...                                                 Q f o d .. u i f d b d . . o J im . . i f e .


                                   .S t o j u A . ..                                                                  r.,.../.,.             .


             ek.         ..$&.         E m . :: M « . u                          m      u     .z          ::h k . . . $ . . .
                                                                                                                                                                     dl
 fK U o i. . .                                                    ..   .a a n & s .. . i U                 . ..      .fik L * ... &              W .   .M u w
  '.&/QA.A UV. . k > M .. J U M H M r'.. . t f ... f . l e f h . , L k h a M . f&AiA., f f & . ..
 j f c . .. p . t t e W . .. ( h i i f : *.. .1. . . . e m i * . . . m ... . . . m & f i .. M n f i . ..
a . . . . .v \u ^ 0 kut. . . . .         .                       ... cyv... jfcoL..                                     . .UVa ..
                    ..   . i m p t w l . . 7. a . ..                                                 . <?             ^ V c n A . . \ ki.suT:9-.
X ,omV\wS).. .
           . ..a A A k u d r ^ ..                  .. e?3 k .                                                             ' .OM/v A. .. ( w A .
                      : \ .. \ t i w X . . . £ V jay .. \ W .. f                                                .     Ouyv<^                A-fVy^
                                         .. .0 J^C W .O fi\hA ,. oys.                               tW                              .   )jw ).. j).oli.W A
                     f c . . ! d S s i f o . . . & o , . -. o a U « s ^ . y p & . . .
                     ' as...kwft.... . i w i , . . a . . . . . l U . . ' f y - »v
                          s W         . . . . a v v . i * § . . d flta f t.                          . .O H * r . . M                       . |.
                          W Xi®W£ ^yy .. ((Bh ftO
                                               a o ... |^
                                                       Ifiwvs
                                                          w v ssik <                                     ,.            . wuma,
                                                                                                                     \> \
                                                                                                            c W ^ . .vVAvxriftO. .
                                \\9k ... V & S T . .Qy . V?'
 ft                                         . . A .. k j t o a . .

                                             . .W n . . . ! $ } ■ . . . f c - . .                                     r    % k %                           "
  Jk~                                        bsJfcuo5ifttAr..                                                                .. .QA/vd
                  Vjs P            Aiwil.. . . Jb tiA ... • QljuOu^ • • •                                                               •'ArTl V
                                                                                                                                        UUm>PAUAvv- .
                     ▼                   . • .J. # r          • • •V


                  .J 3te T D U ^ r.. \ W . .
                               . . OL... A ^ a^            suT ..

   (m m                               . J f c i . .. p .a J f c ^ 1
                    Aim .           ti..               ... (tyjipC,T                              ....
  ^ a . .                I       i W s . . . . £ W t ^ y . . . . f a . . . flw i& r                                                     m
                         i i v c . . . . P e e l 's . . . . ( M i d y ^ io A J i * °                    . . .                                l?9/u£<
    o w i . . o d . ..) s jjh . . . . .dLo....... I. .. a c J m m . . . m i . . . c w t i .
   o d d a.. . . . ]. r..                   .. a , . .. .f l m p . . £ . ..
    A t . . . . i c . d i y . . . . a / ) .....         ...                                                         lA j a ™ y & ( .                   ,
      b ^ y ..                                                    .. .oi ouD.. , . . / . . .

Signed . . . .                                                           Signature witnessed by . . .                        (
4
                                                                                                                                                              WG 413
                                                                                                                                                        (Amended 9.87)

                                                     West Midlands Police
                                             STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                     (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


      itinuation of statement of J u 4 .                                                                          , ............................. , ...........
      . b c ? c l u . h o d . . .. v n w t o s M y . o v ' . ^ U .                                               P c tc k
      .fill.      '    I.     ,C 0 ^ .                              . .o h w -k . . .                          .. .tU !w £ j.. .0*.1. A                   * . ..

      LA     ai        y m .. J k j * i . . . . t t ? . . Ai&w... . u r n . .                              .         .          r .p %              ,    caIm m w        -
                      \ >. . . ( . .                                                      .. k& .ck'.... .U A ik ..                                     .........
                      o?p.. . . M        f o h u r * . . . O U a c ) . . . . B e - .j v       t d / J . .. . d s f . . . f t a .

                      u > & k ...                                                                                                   .. .g & g L A .
                      W         a ? . . nf Sr . . . . A/ r f ^ y . .                      .        .            'T & w k a . .                  .         ........
     _ . . . . . ......... f J k i t .. . ^ . e W . . . m s ® . . O r. . U v ^ L . . ^ . . . j u i W f i
    V .. . b t ^ . . . J h > . . .                             . m i J L . ..                                  W .       u > .< ^ .        < $ r : .............

    i f V U w k ... t®.. . . M m A * . ..                                                                                                                            ,


     W i t . . . . . .Osv0 $ . . w & . . t^ . v y Q . . . .V w s. .^Aftwsr.v. W * . . . fcwiys..............
    ^bnrxSL^i. . . J p ^ . . . . Mf l wv. .. . u f e . ..                         . . . O ^ a W U J w v v v . ^ p . V . ..
                                . S W d ... WVsSLXfi.... A...                                                              UA-6^ W                       vs
                      S jl . . . .                                                                                                         l>                                w
     Qs£...                                                                                                              • • V*?AW?r. /sS§f^>=^
                  iP ^ v v W 4 ^ i’ ’ .. ‘                                .W        A .           ,o / v                                        "   . . , , . . ,
                                                                                                                                                        / 1" i ,
     [4 ^ . . Pfy A             ..        *n             n t . ..                                              ... ou^so.



                                                          ^     ■     &         ^         J            s         n         S         S         t          -
                     -        ....... iff...&civJrtL...C&^5..ffff
     . j f e ../Uck.W w 1 .1. J 01 ..<£ k & ..im ¥>..c.mm*P.,




    Signed                                                                Signature witnessed by . . .
                                                                                                                                             WG 412
                                                                                                                                       (Amended 9.87i
                                                               Wait Midlands Police
                                                        STATEMENT OF WITNESS
115 22                                       (C.J.   Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Wet 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)
I 16 23
I 17 24
  18 25     N a m e ................................................................ >4$^
  19 26
  20 27     Age ..........................    (yrs)                 Date of BiVth
  21 28
            Occupation.......................................................

 15 22      Home or business address                                                                  .WiCfc.SpTOc
16   23     and telephone number
17   24                                                                          UUs?T.                        ....
18   25
19   26
20   27
21   28

            This statement, consisting of      ^      pagels^ejjeK* signed by me, is true to the best of my knowledge
15 22 :
            and belief and I make it knowing that, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I
16   23 :
17   24 :
            have wilfully stated in it anything which I know to be false or do not believe to be true.
18   25
19   26
20   27     Dated the                                   day    pf                                                  1
21   28
ES 1"                                 |                              ^                      Signature witnessed by . . . ■
            Signed . .

                                                                                            Officer's Name . . .

                                                                                                                       No.

                                                                                                                                     .W e.M C .



            I t id T :                        e-UQ 1G H T . ,'W(V<pLAc<24 / life
                                                            ftoA<puAc<24     me. .-Ga^nAcT. OA. .                                            .......
                                  'a .                w W m vtA .                      . .^ 7 .                          .........




                                                                                                                             r t


            Signed                                                                     Signature witnessed by
            ’ Oetote as applicable.                        T
                                                       West Midlands Police
                                                  STATEMENT OF WITNESS
I 15 22                                  (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)
I 16 23
I 17 24
  18 25   Name .
  19 26
  20 27   Age                  .   Z.f    (yrs)            Datepf Birth ...................................................................................
  21 28
          Occupation                                                                           .................................................
15   22   Home or business address                          ..                                                           j.   ..                   . " t .........
16   23   and telephone number
17   24                             1ber                    .............. A 1r ..                                                         H °. S p rite ,
18   25
19   26                                                                                       ’f / > /CAp
20   27
21   28                                                                   'T /fJ *               o 1 * Z-. ~lCC U                              i
                                                  7        ............................................
          This statement, consisting of ^—         page(s) each * signed by me, is true to the best of my knowledge
15   22
16   23
          and belief and I make it knowing that, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I
17   24   have wilfully stated in it anything which I know to be false or do not believe to be true.
18   25
19   26
20   27           ,ej
          Dated the                               day of
21   28
ES
          SignedC                                                                    Signature witnessed by

                                                                                     Officer's Name

                                                                                     Rank . J............. ..



                                     . n C.H f £ ? l . . 'GcrJl. . .3 . .<*Vv. . .                                                          serf'             .
                               . dj.                                          . /fd. . id* . ,J&*. . ji.


          .                  Orrr. ..                                                  . ..       e       j         .    h         .ffh.                ....
          j& ^ L L \           ^Ardjh-            m f. .                       .1. ZO. /n. .                    .              /tyfu(k



                        c S .. /^yyyC^-^. . .         jh? .
                       ...   stf^Msx;. . .              W ]..                                         g^ h 4 . .
          < ^ y y y ^ .•. . .CA ,                                                                                       /^YYtS^yCj.................
                      . .< v$fyfrjr^k4 . . ^ . . . *y^H i*&<Ar£‘dA . ./&■. . sw iJdM . .                                                                   .........
                                                                                 .-J*V
          1U.                                                                                                           a*\^. \ r L w - A ....


          . <^.                          . J^*C-                        ...               ^,6.^.                                             : .   ,C$. n- -
          /Qs&x^, t.                          .. j .. / d s & w i . - . . c l ■ ./y y $ b .. .'w j . 'A fv*.
                                                                          . c ).                                                                                  .

                  yK*W.                       . . -rVfi&VT**/. .

          >ignec)(                                                            Signature witnessed by Q
          Delete as
                                                                                                                                   ~ y
                                                                                                                                                                                            WG 413
                                                                                                                                                                                  (Amended 9.87)
                                                        West Midlands Police
                                                    STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                      (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act               1980, s. 102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


C ontinuation of s ta te m e n t of . . . .                 .............................................................................................................................

 .                                                                                         . J .f sp& r .. * ii* l. .
Jmk^. .. . /$*■... sc<6.\£p?qJLJ>) . .                                                    ,e . J 4 . . /y ^ ° ..                                             .J y y d ........
                         .       fa ...                                                     .   r5 V y ? /.                                                                   ....
 & yJjjjfrrtd. . .^yCv^ . .                               . . . -ffViC & h s S < * \. .. . $ 4 . rCP. .                                                                 ............
ju&yVxiA/*.. . .                                                                    . ,*T:
fr**:. . . . .tv*P?y4.. . . {*.® .*. . .$. .                           . .■&+&*. . jib . . ■#&#£-. . .3.                                                          . ,&l. A*!1* .
       t.. .                   . . . . •£*. . .                       . . .i l z y d . . .                                                      .
                                                                         .l>.9 ..                        ./9^/yf/A^d.."?. .
'tC~*yh-. . .                      .y .   Scf/L. .                                                 . .   .O tfH 'V W '.         . .  .ArtyVrPiZA. * ..................................
                  4%fr.                       .. .4::                                J ..                                                                    jb frd :..
JU-. _                             . . . « ^ V *^ .                   ytyfrj          .



                                                                    zLlh

       for. . sC^*t&*. .                                . A T *y.                                                                                     .4*1
         (S^K   A.-^. j£ * (X
            .......................        C /XT* r-.r
                                                               r i b2 -9 . ... X j...? .-r. Xj.
                                                     /............................                s*vyL. . *y*o.. AA*te)£&<*ow.
                                                                                            . .............................
■<Prd. .Jh w .. d f ,... OWjf?*.... .‘if j... . b y / 0, o V(A.... /VrV/./y.. !*/. 7uA J. ,■. Jh*>..........
K&*r4d*&-. . .                              <7r?V^<^. ,'^?V. . .'M.„ . ,'9^V'^k/. . .          .< Jfc. 4 ^ ? . . . .
                               . .Jh*\.. . ^ V r v .. ..                    . .s&*nl. .$V&T?fr>cr*J..     J -h . .
                      ....                   . . . si.bfd'.      ........... .. ........................................

............ ,.s&y&^yfti. .                             /!rm..                                           .^V*^.                                     ..-^fiucri)......
                                                      ... . 6 * .                     .. 0..n .- /& -ru^eJaJ. A . .                                                                  .......
. bdji*-.      . . ./»?■**'?|      ...                                                ..    r r b i. . ■ rJr^fiys. .                                                                 .........
                                   6 ________________                    i»*_____E .\                                                           .Jl. .-&L& .AsSH
.<Q~.... /K“?v(*...                                         .'tyA+O... jd A .'. ^v».. .stijkik. X*:./^7- ^^0-                                                                               ■•
                             . . r '^ V v j / . .                                                                                                     i ■■-
.    ,1\ .<?£ i~A_ . .       ,a /? v > . . . . v r ^ u ^ i w .        Jj. .                                   .. .-■^ v a       ..    .fi/i CJa .G/£At\...............
. j d * U . . .iw?r>.. . '£ * /^xrr<
                                   tr i .                          ___ x^>.. v . / W t. .                                              .                       * )rp ...............


                    .jQfc. . tk. .                                    .rtf.                                .<
                                                                                                            l-..\^ r . __ 3 &4j. r'jt&JMj
                                     . .<€Ey“ . .<jCvA . .    Jr*r&$r±.                                         A^>?          .r^y                                  i l J A
           . . .^L^c.'Cs^oZ'd. . .-Ms*-. . ..r c f c e u c / . .j.*>. . . do..                                ^yVXXyyyvty"




Signed .                                                                          Signature witne
17-OCT. • 98 (TUE)           16:13                                                       TEL,:0U4    2963020             P. 0 0 1




 **   CONFIRMATION REPORT                **




 T RA NS MI S S I O N
 TRANSACTION(S)              COMPLETED




  NO.      DA T E / T I ME       D E S T I NA T I O N                           DURATION PGS            STATUS   MODE

  594      OCT. 2 7     16:11                           0114   2523481   8481   0* 0 2 ' 06"   003      OK       N ECM
                                                               D iscipline & Com plaints Department
                      South Yorkshire                          50 Windsor Road

                      POLICE                                   Heeley
                                                               SHEFFIELD S8 8 UB
                      JUSTICE   with     COURAGE



  TELEPHONE: 0114 296 3002

  FAX: 0114 296 3020

  INTERNAL FAX: 3020


                                    Facsimile Transmission

  Date:

•to :                           C   c   'o       &   r7 rc £


  For the attention of:             fl-c c .         //b o

  C om m ents:




  P (y C c & c + -t     P           I 'L s u A '

  ■fib Mw-e.                             'o d fjU te                                        <&-
 W £*M :              s i-   /C ^ 'K f A     * £ / W
                                                                                        & l+ r s ~ h j




   From:

   T elephone Number:                        i

   Number o f P a g e s (including this page)                     3

   In the ev en t o f a poor cop y, p le a se contact:-
   South Yorkshire P olice - D iscipline & Com plaints Department
   Telephone Number - Direct Line 0114 296 3002 - Internal Extension 3002
*27 OCT    '98   13:42 HO F2 DIVISION 0171 273 2703                                    P.1/3



            HOME OFFICE
            Operational Policing Policy Unit
            50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
            Direct Line: 0171 273 lA-iJ Fax: 0171 273 2703




                  Alan Hepworth, South Yorkshire Police

   From:           Matthew Pyne


   Date:           27/10/98

   Recipient’s Fax
   Number:

   Number of pages (including this one): 3


   Message:


   Hillsborough


   I enclose the Hansard extract for Maria Eagle’s Question yesterday. Thank you for
                          f 'T 3 Wlth ,he queries on outstandir>g Po|ioe statements, which
   was most helpful. I will be in touch if any further queries arise.


   I should also point out that we are querying with the Home Secretary's office the

   Libra^06 ^ h'$ rePly t0 Frank F'eid t0 P,adng documentatior* in the Liverpool City




  IF ANY PART OF THIS FAX IS UNCLEAR
  PLEASE TELEPHONE: 0171 273
                                                        THE
                     PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES
                                              OFFICIAL REPORT

                      INU™   PI^ SJ SE S^O N OF THE FIFTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT OF THE
                        UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND
                                         [WHICH OPENED 7 MAY 1997]


                               FORTY-SEVENTH YEAR OF THE REIGN OF
                             HER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH II

SIXTH SERIES
                                                                                                     VOLUME 318
                                 TW ENTY FIFTH VOLUM E O F SESSIO N 1997-98


            House of Commons                                  as I believe that there is documentation that he said should
                                                              be put in the Library, but which is not yet there. I shall
                                                              give specific examples when I write to my right hon.
                     Monday 26 October 1998                   Friend.
                                                                 The question that arises in my mind is why that
        The Home met at half past Two o'clock                 documentation is still held by the South Yorkshire police.
                                                              It was not formed or prepared by the police force, which
                           PRAYERS                            was a party that was severely criticised in Lord Chief
                                                              Justice Taylor’s inquiry report. One of the problems the
               [Madam Speaker in the Chair]
                                                              families have had in obtaining that documentation is the
                                                              fact that South Yorkshire police have been unwilling to
                                                              give it up. Can my right hon. Friend the Home Secretary
    Oral Answers to Questions                                 tell the House why the police have custody o f it?

                                                                 Mr, Straw: The arrangements for the retention of those
                     HOM E DEPARTMENT                         documents by the South Yorkshire police are. the standard
                                                              ones that apply in any police area: it is the responsibility
           The Secretary of Stale was asked—                  of the police force concerned. A huge number of
                                                              documents have been held and properly archived by the
                          Hillsborough                        South Yorkshire police. We are transferring all those
                                                              documents that arc relevant to the Library of the House.
   1. Maria Eagle (Liverpool, Garston): If all material       I am aware of my hon. Friend’s concerns and, once she
held by South Yorkshire police in respect o f the             has sent me details, I shall look into the matter.
Hillsborough disaster which he ordered to be placed in
the Library has now been deposited.             [53506J          Mr. Michael Fabrieant (Lichfield): We look forward
                                                              to the Home Secretary finally reaching his conclusions
        Secretary o f State for the Home Department           regarding the Hillsborough disaster, having taken into
(Mr, Jack Straw); As much of the evidence as possible         account the new information now coming from survivors
considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in his                and relatives o f those who were killed. Does the right
Hillsborough scrutiny, including that held by South           hon. Gentleman agree that there are lessons to be leamt
Yorkshire police, has been placed in the Library. That        regarding crowd control, not only in football stadiums,
includes copies o f the police statements, both in their      but for other large events, such as the funeral of the
original and amended form, and copies of other material       Princess of Wales? What steps is he taking to ensure that
considered by Lord Justice Stuart*Smith not already in the    the lessons lean t from the Hillsborough disaster are
public domain.                                                transmitted to other such events?
  I am aware that the Hillsborough family support group
has queried whether there are any further statements             Mr. Straw: A great many lessons were drawn from
outstanding and that is being followed up by South            what happened at Hillsborough and, mote particularly,
Yorkshire police.                                             from the excellent report of the inquiry conducted by Lord
                                                              Taylor, later Lord Chiel Justice. The police service and
  M aria Eagle: I thank my right hon. Friend for that         many others who have responsibility for crowd control
reply. I shall write to him in due course about the matter,   have taken proper cognisance of the lessons to be leamt.
    9 CO22<h0RALVI
27 OCT    /3 8     13:43 HO’F2l)WlSTON 0171 273                                                                      3 /3 *




                             Oral Answers                   26 OCTOBER 1998                    O ral Answers


    I have to say that I believe that the Metropolitan police
                                                                       on grounds of stress from the police officers involved in
    service dealt with the policing o f the funeral o f the
                                                                       arresting Senator Pinochet, as it appears that the Foreign
    Princess o f Wales with exemplary intelligence and skill.
                                                                       and Commonwealth Office had welcomed the gentleman
                                                                       to Britain through the VIP lounge but officers responsible
       Mr. Frank Field (Birkenhead); Is my right hon. Friend           to the Home Secretary were asked to arrest him?
    the Home Secretary aware that a large number o f people
    m Merseyside who lost relatives at Hillsborough would                 Mr. Michael: Hie answer to the substantive question
    like directly to look at the documentary material? Would           is no.
    he consider making available that material in Liverpool
    library?
                                                                        ^ Dr. Brian Iddon (Bolton, South-East): Is my hon.
                                                                       M end aware that last week the Greater Manchester police
        Mr. Straw: I agree with my right hon. Friend that the          announced substantial reductions in its work force?
    information should be made available. 1 understand,                Would he be prepared to enter into consultation with the
    although I am not absolutely certain, that the information         force to make sure that my constituents are not affected
    is either currently being transferred to, or is already held       by reductions in the work o f the police?
    at, the central library in Liverpool. If that is not so, I shall
    certainly do my best to make arrangements to ensure that
    it is.                                                                    Mr. Michael: In recent years the number of officers
                                                                           available for front-line policing has not kept pace with the
                                                                           number o f officers available overall. We are encouraging
                        Police (Early Retirement)                       ~  police forces to use their resources-—particularly the men
                                                                           and women who serve them— on the front line in the
         2.      Judy Mallaber (Amber Valley): What plans he has community rather than in support services Each report of
     to reduce the proportion of early retirements from the                the inspectorate has demonstrated that there are still
     police.                                                     (53508]   savings to be made which can improve the quality of the
                                                                           service to the public.
         The M inister of State, Home Office (Mr. Alun
     Michael); Earlier this year, we published a consultation                 Sir Sydney Chapman (Chipping Barnet): Does the
     document on police pension arrangements, which                        Minister recognise that in the Metropolitan police force
     highlighted the need for more efficient management of                 the problem is not only that too many officers are retiring
     ill-health retirement. Work is in hand on detailed                    early, but that too many arc seeking transfer to other
     proposals and we shall support good management                       police authorities? Will he consider that problem when he
     practice, with changes to the police pensions regulations             reviews Metropolitan police pay and conditions of
     where necessary. Any proposals will be published in good              service?
     time to allow for full consultation with the interested
     parties.
                                                                             Mr. Michael: That is a complex issue for the
                                                                          Commissioner. Many people come from outside London
        Judy Mallaber: I am pleased that my hon. Friend is                to serve in the Metropolitan police and many officers later
     taking the issue seriously because in Derbyshire                     seek to transfer to other forces, so transfers work in both
     constabulary last year, 65 per cent, o f officers retiring did       directions. For example, many serving at the highest
     so on grounds o f ill health. Has he seen the report on              levels in the Metropolitan police have spent time, perhaps
     the Derbyshire constabulary published this month by Her              at chief constable level, in another force That is a
     Majesty’s inspectorate? The constabulary is praised for              management issue that needs to be treated with care.
     having ‘‘Investors jj» People” accreditation and a
     government charter mark, but attention is drawn to the                                  Financial Regulation
     problem o f early retirement on medical grounds and
     “        f - Is my right hon. Friend aware that the                     3.     M r. Austin Mitchell (Great Grimsby): When he
                     has Previously expressed concern about               expects the inquiry into financial regulation in the
                       rf the D r t y t o police; ,„<J ca» t e            Channel Islands and the Isle o f Man to report.       (53509]
     S S              e Government will in future give the police
  '. aggqoflte resources to enable them to play their part in
     “ CKuug .Cmxie and to limit the stress on police officers?              The Secretary of State for the Home Department
            fVVityl-:,                                                    (Mr. Jack Straw): Mr. Andrew Edwards, who conducted
                                                                          the inquiry, delivered his report last week. It is being
            ’            Ml \ hon' Priend is right to draw attention      prepared for printing and will be published, in its entirety,
                                     the nec<* t0 control medical         to the House and the other place next month.
                   /Because the pensions being paid out of police
                       J* SL Uction *n {he resources available to            Mr. Mitchell: I welcome that speedy delivery. Will the
                                               m extremely large: in      Home Secretary also opt for speedy implementation of the
                              0* mi police retirements in Wiltshire
                                                                          Edwards report—by consent, if possible, but if necessary,
                                      . i , wHereas the figure in         by imposition— to clean up the financial acts in the Crown
                                        Merseyside has reduced that
                                                                          dependencies, particularly Jersey and Guernsey? The
                          ^ i i . t h e intervening period, so it is
                                                                          Edwards report found that regulators are promoting the
                                                     the problem and      development of financial services and business is being
                                  Pr** oy doing so.
                                             . . .
                                                                          conducted in maximum secrecy with those involved
                                                                          repelling outside inquiries, as in the case of the Bank of
                                        ^ f ^ l e h u m ) : Has * e       Credit and Commerce International. There is no
                                                   forearly retirement    separation of powers on the islands, so those who benefit
3 0 - 0 CT . ’ 98 ( FRI )      12:00                                                   TEL.01I4    2963020             P. 001




  **   CONFIRMATION REPORT                   **




  T RA NS MI S S I O N
  TRANSACTION(S)               COMPLETED




    NO.     D A T E / T I ME          D E S T I NA T I O N                  DURATION PCS              STATUS   MODE

    61 7    OCT. 3 0        1 1 :59                          901712732703   0" 0 0 ' 5 3 '   002      OK       N ECM
                   0      ,,           ,    , .          D iscipline & Com plaints Department
                   South Yorkshire                       50 Windsor Road

                   "P          T T            "IT1       Heeley
                                      A ^                SHEFFIELD S8 8 UB
                   JUSTICE     with    COURAGE



  TELEPHONE: 0114 296 3002

  FAX: 0114 296 3020

  INTERNAL FAX: 3020


                                Facsimile T ransmission

  Date:                        3 O i/O -

® To:

  For the attention o f:            M If P W fr

  C om m ents:                                     H


  b U e ts tc            JL    <1                                            ^      77U




              S & sd u   ^>1                                       T P tej                  '? &
  £                                                                      P ja s K




      From:

      T elephone Number:            OHif-         Z3L    ~5&8lf- .

      Number o f P a g e s (including th is page)           ^ fv d o .

      In the ev en t o f a poor copy, p le a se contact:-
      South Yorkshire P olice - D iscipline & Com plaints Department
      Telephone Number - Direct Line 0114 296 3002 - Internal Extension 3002
Mr B Smith                                        Our Ref:        D&C/AMH/
Oriel Room
House of Commons Library                          Date:           27 October 1998
LONDON
SW1A OAA




HILLSBOROUGH EVIDENCE LODGED IN THE MEMBERS LIBRARY

I refer to our telephone conversation of today regarding the poor quality of the copy of the report
R215A by Inspector White. I have recopied the report making it as dark as possible and I believe
that it is now just legible. The copy is enclosed.

I also refer to my letter of 14 October 1998 and in particular to Item 5, the reports listed between
R476 and R566. It must be appreciated that the HOLMES computer system is both an
investigative and a management tool. As such both statements and reports can be given a
reference number on the system beginning with the same alphabetic letter. I have today
examined the 91 reports listed between R476 and R566. Several of them are in fact reports that
do not refer to events of 15 April 1989. A number of them are statements from officers who
attended semi-finals at Hillsborough in 1988 and even 1987, but who were not there on the day
of the disaster. 17 are statements from officers of the Nottinghamshire Constabulary and 2 from
Home Office officials. These were obviously not amended. Of the remainder ail appear to be
unamended.



            . /         <— * /




Mr A M Hepworth
               7
Enc




                                                  The person dealing with this correspondence is:
                                                  Mr A M Hepworth
                                                  (0114)296 3084
    05: NOV        '98    10=40 HO F2 DIVISION 01?i £73 2703


               H o m e O ffice
               Operational Policing Policy Unit
               50 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW lH 9AT
               Switchboard: 01/1 27J 4000 Fax 2/03 Direct                      01/1 I /. 114}J>




          FAX
       1*0 .             Ian Daines, SourJi Yorkshire Police        J
                                                                          ■ ^ H Y o r a c a p o y o 1-.


                                                                    ■           ^3 KOVvQOI
       From:             MJPyne                                                      \            .


       D a te *           5 November 1998                      T im e 2      ' lUr-W-.b'




       Number of pages ikidudsng this one)                                      ^


          Message
       Subject: MARIA EAGLE PARLIAMENTARY QUESTIONS



          Hansard exti'act attached.




                                                      -V           .
                                                                   —      ..A




                                                                                II




                                                                           V^-Ars-4^

                              IF ANY PART OF THIS FAX IS UJMCLEAR
                                PLEASE TELEPHONE: 0171 273 7 & 1 3                                               >Kcc



5   NOU     ’ 98   1 B :3'7                                                                               i riGE .fiiji
                                                                                                             /
    05 NOV         ’ 98        10=41 HO F£ D I V I S I O N 0171 2 7 3 2703

             A
              501                          Written Arti'f'crs              3 NOVEMBER 1998                             Wr itten Answers                         502

                M r, McNamara: To ask die Secretary o f State for the
                                                                                             M a m E a g le ; T o ask the Secretary' o f State for 'he
             H om e Department on what date he is c e iv e d the P olice
                                                                                         H om e Department if South Yorkshire P olice hold
             Complaints Authority report on the death o f Diarmuid
                                                                                         (it/ transcripts and (h) the additional material arising
             O ’N eill; w hat prosecutions or disciplinary actions wert-
                                                                                         out c t Lord Justice Stuart S m ith's scrutiny o f the
             reeoraniended in the report; on what date the inquest will
                                                                                         e v i n c e relating to the H illsborough disaster QBcomputer
             be resumed; on w hat dates the relatives o f the deceased
             w ere inform ed o f the circum stances o f h is death; and if               d l* '                                                             [S747S]
             he will place a co p y o f the report in the L ibrary !'563i ?;                M r, B oateng: South Yorkshire PoU ee do not hold
                 M r. B o a te n g : T he police investigation has b e e r ,             copies of either transcripts or additional m aterial arising
             com p leted and copses o f the report have recently been sent               out o* L oid Justice Stca.iT-S m ith 's scrutiny o f the
             to the P o lic e C om plaints A uthority (F C A ), Her M ajesty's           H illsborough f a s t e r . Hard c o p ies o f these docum ents are
                                                                                         tiSid on tile &i the H om e Office.
             C oroner and the Crown. Prosecution -Seivjce, PC A
             in vestigation reports are not normally sent to the H om e
             Secretary or m ade public.                                                    M a ria E a gle; T o ask the Secretary o f State for the
                                                                                         Home Deparcmwu i f South Yorkshire Police hold the
                D ecisions as to an y crim inal or disciplinary action to                    statem ents, ibt am ended statem ents and (c) f
             be taken are m atters for the Crow n Prosecution Servi.ce,                 docum entation c o lla t e d by W est M idlands p o lice d u w * i
             ^ C o m m i s s i o n e r o f the M etropolitan Police and the             m e investigation or the H illsborough disaster on com puter
             PCA. It s.hr. cau se o f death and the circum stances in which             dlSk-                                                              [57480(
             11"           '           not already been established in the course
                                  proceedings, the coroner may resum e the                  M r . B oating: A il statem ents collected by W est
                                    :he crim inal proceedings ate com p leted to        M u la i;d i Police during the investigation into the
             •''••v              .'.sse questions.                                      Hiiisbosough disaster, mctuding the am ended statements
                                                                                        by Scutts Yorkt-fiire Police officers, are held by South
                                      S c h e n g e n Agret-wtem                         r o rtah m i P ohce us their original paper form, and also on
                                                                                        the »              comput er . Other docum ents collected by
               V a i e m D a v ey s T o ask the Secretary o f State for the             w est Midland? P olice are also held by South Yorkshire
             H om e    Department if signatories c f the Schen gen                      Bpiice m their original form, but w ere not entered o r the
            A greem ent now recogn ise the certificate o f identity                     HOu-Mcomputer,
           otherw ise Known as the brown British travel documents';
           what bus been the im pact o f their p o lity on (a) those                                                    tii“ Secretary o f State fo* the Horae
           given exception's leave to rem ain in the United K ingdom                    L^panm ent it statem ents c o v e t e d by W est M idlands
           and ib) those uaabie to obtain a travel d ocu m en t or                      Ponce- m respect o f tfie H illsborough investigation were
                   .ri; trom their ow n country w ho have indefinite leave             e n u re d or., the H olm es com puter.                      “      r574g, j
           to              -:,;d what steps his Department has taken on
           ChlSnu:t-:.;.                                            f57??0,              M r. B o a te u g : i. a m confirm ihm statements collected
                                                                                       by W est M idlands Police in respect of the H illsbm ou^h
              K a te H r « :jy ] h e C ertificate o f id en tity issu ed to certaia    investigation w ere enteied o r die H O LM ES c o m p u te r*
           foxeign nationals livin g in the U nited K ingdom is issu ed
           in accordance w ith m teraational cu stom , com p lies
           with International Civil Aviation, Organisation (IC A O )                                              P o lice S ta te m e n ts
           standards, _ and g u a ra n te e s the h o ld s? 3 return to this
                                                                                          M a ria E a g le: T o ask the Secretary o f State for the
           country within its validity. However, w c a js aware that
                                                                                       H °m e Departm ent for w hat length o f m ne statem ent-
           som e holders of these docum ents experience difficulties                   entered on the H olm es com puter are r*i?jn»d m d what
           w hen applying for visas to travel both within Europe
                                                                                       arrangement? arc m ade for their arch!         storage w hen
           and beyond
                                                                                       (he) are rem oved from the com puter system .         [57479]
            it is a matter for the com petent authorities o f each
                                                                                          M r. Boateng; I understand that under rules developed
          country to decide w hether to accept into .their territory ao
                                                                                       ^y the C rane C om m ittee o f the A ssociation o f C h ief
          individual or the hold er o f a particular type o f documcnr.
          This is not som eth in g over w hich the issu in g authority                       e O n icers, inform ation, such as w itness statem ents,
          can exert a » y influence.                              “   '                generated during a police investigation and entered onto
                                                                                       llouaes, L retaiasd on the com puter w h ile the ease
                                                                                       remains active and then transferred to m agnetic tape for
                                    Hillsborough Disaster
                                                                                       arcm val ^storage. inform ation relating ro c lo sed cases
             M a r ia E a g le: l o ask the Secretary o f State for the               for w hich a h t e sentence lias b een awarded is retained for
          H om e Department w here (a) tran scrip t and ib) :ilS                      the itte o f the con victed offender For determ inate
          additional m aterial arising out o f Lord Justice Stuart                    sentence*, the data are retained until all the appeal
          Sm ith 's scrutiny o f the ev id en ce relating to the                      procedures h ave been exhausted, until the release of the
          H illsborough disaster are held; and in what form. r57477)                  offender, or lor six years, w hich ever is the longer.
                                                                                      itilormjHiun ield iiag to u nsolved investigations or closed
             M r , B o a ten g : Transcripts o f m eetings, prepared by
                                                                                      Cdj.es ot national im portance is rerained indefinitely,
          S 8^ -            321(1 C o '* ^     hcM ia paper form at
          the H om e Office. A dditional material arising out of the
          scrutiny is also beid in paper form at the Horae Office                                 C rk iiin a l In ju ries C o m p e n sa tio n B o a rd
          Copies o f as m uch as possible o f die evidence considered
          b y Lord Justice S tuart -5; r d th have b een placed m the                    M r . E flo r d : T o ask the Secretary o f -State for the Horne
          Library. The scrutiny                 do not form part o f                  Departm ent what plans he has to increase the capacity o f
          the material held by Sri,- , v -x ?h ire Police                             the Crim inal Injuries C om pensation Board >o deal with                            ,
                                                                                      outstanding a p p a ls .                                                        /
             252CW2:il-PACi/3:*



5   NOU   '3 8        1 0 :3 8                                                                                                           PAGE. 003
    _ HD PHLICE RESOURCES           rax:0171 -2'73'-3P42             2 ? .fen ’99       l4:Q4       P. 03


           H ome O f f ic e
           Police Resources Utut
           30 Oueen Anne's Gate, London SW lB 9A i'
           Switchboard: 0171 273 4000 Fast 3742_D jr«l licsci




     FAX
     Yq,             The Chief Goiwwbte, Somi; Vcrfcskn* Police


     F rom :         John Moffat


     D a te '        27 January 1999                    Timm          « v # :l3


     Fisc m :


     Number of pages {including this one!                              L


     Message
     S u b je c t:    P M tL I A M E N T A R Y Q U E S T I O N F R O M M A M A : E A G L E
     (HILLSBOROUGH)

     I enclose &copy of a P& ihm m tar? Question it em Mariis. Flag.!? MP, wibicb. I.       a self-?;:      y,
     will only be able to answer this idtH a.coutnbudon f.corn the iotce.

     I would be ^cacefjJ for your reply by dose of pkv oit Pfidxy 29 famu&y' by fax. My 'Fax mEwi^' U 01/1
m    273 3742,

     Thank you for your assistance m this matter,




                        i f am y m w r o f t h i s f a x is u n c l e a r
                           PLEASE -ajEPHONE: 0 1 7 1 2 7 3 3 2 2 2


    JAM
                 HO POLICE RESOURCES                                                           u : 14




                                                                                    PQ
IOME OFFICE                                       TiNJT   PRO                                ANSWi-RHD

    PARLIAMENTARY QUESTION
                                              F ile N u m b e r




           Related Papers




          Date first appeared
                 2 7 /0 1 /   ms

           fo r                                                   answ er   m         fnU 2S/01/S9

           P a rty :                                                        p ^ iy Hu***       j 00744
                 93Maria 8agl*                            (Liverpool, Usrstc-n)
                    To ask the Secretary of State for the Hess D«partsisnt, virhst as8#»sa«iv; lie
                    has sad* of t&e impact 0 x1 the psrovisiort <■?£ police sazvicos of the cost.5
                    to the South.Yorkahise- Police Authority to dara o£ f^ndis:^ a m defence of
                    David Godfrey Duefcentiale and Bernard Dear;'-.Murray in the casss M
                    Adlingtcm; v ffeir'ts'y Adi In-at,on v Du;;fcanii*#'.1.. th# L-eact* Ma>2i.3trs,te
                    Court * (€622$)


    F
        THIS FILS MUST i i RETURNED TO                                      KOiIDAY       01/05/1399
        PARLIAMENTARY SECTION BY NOGN ON

lead to                        Date                                             Minutes

                                2^ / 01/ 99


1




<«W (                         •yj, 5,*4**,

                   - ——               ....




            jk    , '93
       H o m e O ffice
       50 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW IH 9AT
       Switchboard; 0171 273 4000 Fax: 0171 273 '37-42 Direct




 FAX
T0:           Inspector McGuire, South Yorkshire Police


F ro m :      Nigel Beaumont, Police Resources Unit (PRU)


Date :        27 January 1999                       T im e ;    ;2 ■ O £

Fax N2; 0114 252 3481

Number of pages (including this one!                       3


Message
Subject; PARLIAMENTARY QUESTIONS

Please find attached copies of 2 Parliamentary Questions that have been asked by Marl* Eagle MP, Tltsr
are two o f three questions currently with PRU although she may have asked more that could be with
departments. Maria Eagle MP has been involved with the Hillsborough disaster and there is m underlying
feeling that in. some way these questions may be related to that, issue.

Question No<l is straightforward and I would be grateful for any assistance.

Question 2, however, is not so simple. The Home Office was responsible for issuing Circular 4/1998
which relates to financial assistance to police officers in legal proceedings. We are happy to give a very-
general response based on the circular itself -although it stem s from the actual question, which seerns *
specific without naming names, that the MP might have an ulterior motive for asking it. I would be
grateful therefore if you could advise if there have been, or currently are, any cases which fit the
description o f the question. N o details will be given in our answer but used as briefing for the Minister.

In view of the short deadline I would be grateiul if any infonnation co-aid be faxed. A .SA P ..

Thanks for your help.




                IF ANY PART OF THIS FAX IS UNCLEAR
                  PLEASE TELEPHONE: 0171 273 2864
          HO POLICE RESOURCES                  Fax:0171-273-3742              2 ( Jan ’99        14=07       P.02
    1XV/1T1AJ              v y i * A ’C'i J                UNIT   PRU                                      i m   u     TT J U i V I



               PARLIAMENTARY QUESTION
                                                        File Number


                                                                                           A /o                       I
                      Related Papers                    Subject




— ©
                 Date first appeared
                      m             Ipaa— .
                      fo r n i i i t t r i r n                     ~ M   a n s w e r on              TKU 28/01/95


                      Party ;       Qfljftrah/iMMMMhKKyXXXX                               Parly Nuaabet'     J 00748
                          95Haris Eagle                         (Liverpool, 's*z£ton)
                             To ask. t-]n@ S&ctr0 t& rv ot* S tat& f,oz'              wH&t.  cn<^
                             average annual cost in the South Yorkshire foilcsn Authority area c:
                             keeping a police constable o n the                 . t6tii24 1




                 THIS FILE MUST BE RETURNED TO                                            MONDAY         01/02/193?
                 PARLIAMENTARY SECTION BY NOON ON
                                                                                                                           rtninn, ’
                                                                                                                                   ttSf*




        Send to                       Date                                                     Minutes

                                       2 7 / 0 1 / 99

   PRU

   QAG


                                     YV %e\<\
                                                ■=

                                     .y-X - ‘




 ii.7   JA N   ’ 99    i -4 : b 1                                                  ti i    !
          HO POLICE RESOURCES         Fax:0171-273-"                       Jc.n ’y9       14: OB              p, Q,s
HUME OFFICE                                UNIT                                                 ANSWER!

      PARLIAMENTARY QUESTION
                                       F ile N u m b e r



                                                                                                A )0l
           Related Papers              Subject



V         Date firs!, appeared

                                                           a n s w e r   o n
                                                                                         THU 29/01/93

           Party: « W a h / W i i i t e X X X X X                  ParlyKu^r     J 00746
              94 Maria Eagle                     (Liverpool, Garston)
                 To as Jc th« Secretary of Scat© for the Hom« Dapartffient, i f t h e guidance in
                 Home Office Circular £/ 199S, relating to the payi&wnt of money to
     m           officers, either former or serving, involved in criminal proceedings,
     S          applies either to officers who have retired on health grinds with
                 outstanding disciplinary charges against theta cx to officers against, whom
                 outstanding disciplinary charges have been dropped because of a
                 retirement on health grounds of another officer. [63225]


                                                                                                     meet1
                                                                                                         *4




         THIS   FILE   MUST      BE   RETURNED       TO
                                                                          MONDAY          0 1 /0 2 /1 9 9 3
         PARLIAMENTARY           SECTION BY N O O N O N



Send to                Date                                                    Minutes

                       27/01/99




                         «r




    £7 JflN ’99 14 :Oi                                                         ^ 1 i'I «-■'        *-Icl!      I"’H'-nE: .:
                                          MARIA EAGLE M.P.
                 LABOUR MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT FOR LIVERPOOL GARSTON



London Office:                                                                        Constituency Office:
H ouse o f Com m ons                                                                  U n it H o u se
London                                                                                S peke B o u levard
S W 1A OAA                                                                            L iverp oo l L 2 4 9 H Z
Phone: 0171 219 5288                                                                  Phone: 0151 448 1167
Facsimile: 0171 219 1157                                                              Facsimile: 0151 448 0976
Email: eaglem@parliament.uk                                                           O ur Ref:Am/SYPA/CC
                                                                                      (please quote in a ll correspondence)
                                                                                          R e p ly to H ouse o f C om m ons

Mike Hedges
Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
South Yorkshire Police Headquarters
Snig Hill
Sheffield
S3 8LY               URGENT

Fax to number: 0114 2523481

                                                                                           27 January 1999


Dear Mr Hedges,

Re: SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY Funding for the defence to
criminal charges of David Godfrey Duckenfield & Bernard Dean Murray

I am the constituency representative of a number of families bereaved by the Hillsborough
disaster.

I write in respect of Assistant Chief Constable Ian Daines' public admission that the funds
provided by Parliament, to pay for policing in South Yorkshire, are being used instead to pay
for the defence costs of the above ex-officers in respect of criminal charges brought by
families of the victims of the disaster.

I would like to know under what authority such a decision was taken and when. I would also
like to know how much has been spent in respect of each defendant so far and what limit
has been piaced on expenditure, i wouid also like to know what procedures the authority and
the force has put in place to ensure that funds are spent appropriately and represent good
value for money. I would also like to know at what times these arrangements are to be
reviewed. As I intend to raise this matter in Parliament, I would like a speedy reply in order
that I may do so in full possession of the relevant facts.

Thanking you in anticipation.


Yours sihcerelv


M.AJK1A ilAUrLtl                '
                                                 Representing:
                 Allerton, Grassendale, Netherley, St. Mary’s, Speke, Valley and Wool ton Wards.
                                           MARIA £A€»iE M.P.
                 L A B O U R M E M B E R O F P A R L IA M E N T F O R L IV E R P O O L G A R S T O N




London Office:                                                                           Consn!U£ni:y Ojfii'i"
House o f Commons                                                                        L’n.it H o u se
London                                                                                   S peke B oulevard
SW1A OAA                                                                                 L iv erpo o l L 2 4 9 H Z
Phone: 0171 219 52S«                                                                     Phone: 0151 448 1167
Facsimile: 0171 219 1157                                                                 Facsimile: 0151 448 0976
Email: eaglem@p3rhitmcnc.uk                                                              O ur Ref:Am/SVPA/CC
                                                                                         (plc^tw niuifc m
                                                                                             R^pi’via Hause i?/C-fniWP}ts
Mike Hedges
Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
South Yorkshire Police Headquarters
Snig Hill
Sheffield
S3 SLY               'URGENT

Fax to number: 0114 2523481

                                                                                              27 January 1999



Dear Mr Hedges,

Re; SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY Funding for the defence to
criminal charges of David Godfrey Duckenfield & Bernard Dean Murray

I am the constituency representative of a number of families bereaved by the Hillsborough
disaster.

1write in respect of Assistant Chief Constable Ian Dairies' public admission trial the funds
provided by Parliament, to pay for policing in South Yorkshire, are being used instead to pay
for the defence costs of the above ex-officers in respect of criminal charges brought by
families of the victims of the disaster.

I would like to know under what authority such a decision was taken and when, i would also
like to know how much has been spent in respect of each defendant so far and what limit
has been placed on expenditure. I would also like to know what procedures the authority and
the force has put in place to ensure chat funds are spent appropriately and represent good
value for money. I would also like to know at what times these arrangements are to be
reviewed. As I intend to raise this matter in Parliament, I would like a speedy reply in order
that i may do so in full possession of the relevant facts.

Thanking you in anticipation.


Youp sfocerely,


Mj\RlA B A G L lH a* 1
                                                  Representing:
                  Allerton, Grassendale, Neiheriey, St. Mary 's, Speke, Valley and Wookon Wards,
      South Yorkshire Jt Sec                                                              27 Jon ’99             16:36              >.01


'■I




                                                                                                                  S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E
        Fax Message                                                                                                                PO LIC E
                                                                                                                             A U T H O R IT Y



       to:         Oli'Ke Madges ,CC -/lon Dames, ACC
        Fax Nu tuber:


                                                                                               No. Of P^ges              (to&- this Sheet):   2 -




        From:                                                                                  Tel:



        Contact for Queries:                                                                   Tel;




        Message*




m




         IMPORT# ilT : This t o  k H*n<fe<i fa? f t * M m named only, » may contain pftote and cor,n4*htiaf Information or ih M M H M *
                   ^hk         e*n* to you ^ tr rw , you mud fek* no action toMti upon il, w r   you cppf or f k So any® *. p«as*
         telephone in imfttediatefy and fMum origins! le sjs, TNs cost wSi t * reimbursed to you.            j


                  Jiouth Yorkshire Joint Secretariat: PO Box 37, Regent Street, Barnsley, S Yorks S70 2PQ
                                                     Fax: 01226 772899            ^
                                            W J W ilk in s o n B A (E o o n ), C P F A , C le rk e n d T re a s u re r
                             1



        ’9b 16:18                                                                                                                   PAGE.0 01
                                                                                                                                    /
               South Yorkshire Jt Sec




               in
                                                           MARIA
                                                           ifimivA EAGLE
                                                                   ungiuc M.P.
                                                                          Hi®".
                                 LABOUR MEMBER 0 * M K U A M EN T FOR LIVERPOOL GARSTON



               London Offt te:                                                                           Comtituenty Office.
               H ouse o f C om m ons                                                                     U n it H o u se
               London                                                                                    Speke B o u lev ard
               if W
               S  W ilA
                      n Q/jA                                                                             L iv erp oo l 1,24 9 H Z
               Phone: 0171 219 5288                                                                      Phone: 0151 448 1167
               Facsimile: D171 219 1157                                                                  Facsimile: 0151 448 0976
               Email: eagiem@pai-liament.xik                                                             O ur Ref: Am /$ypA /C C
                                                                                                         (pkast quote in s$ currapwt&ww,'
                                                                                                            Repiy id H&usi oj Cftnmum
               W J Wllkinpon
               Clerk & Treasurer
               South Yorkshire Police Authority
               PO Box 31; Regent Street
               Barnsley Jsouth Yorkshire
! 0            S70 2PQ                     URGENT

               Fa* to number: 01226 772899

                                                                                                             27 January 1999

               Dear Mr Wilkinson,

               Re; S O U jTH Y O R K S H IR E P O U C E A U T H O R IT Y Funding for the defence to
               crim inal charges o f D avid Godfrey Ducken&eLd St Bernard Dfcan M u rra y
                             :                                                                    !

               i am the c jmstituency representative of a number of families bereaved by the Hillsborough
               disaster.

               I write in rtepect of Assistant Chief Constable Ian Daines' public adrrjission that the funds
               provided fcjy Parliament, to pay for policing in South Yorkshire, are being used instead to pay
               for the del fence costs of the above ex-officers in respect of criminal charges brought by
               families ot^the victims of the disaster.                                 !
                             ;                               i




               i would iik&to know under what authority such a decision was taken land when, i would also
               like to kneiw how much has been spent in respsct of each defendant! so far and what limit
               has been placed on expenditure. I would also like to know what procedures the authority and
               the force Has put in place to ensure that funds are spent appropriately and represent good
               value for rfioney, I would also like to know at what times these arrangements     to be
               reviewed. M i intend to raise this matter inParliament I would like s speedy reply in order
               that I may do so in full possession of the relevant facts.

               Thanking mou in anticipation.




               M A jM a I EAGLE W p } J

                                                                 Represen cm*:                    i
                                 Allerton, Grasnendale, Nei&ertey, St. Mary’s, Speke, Valley and Woolcon Wards.
       r>-y low »oo i t ^ o                                                                  ni       1 1o * * s        o^cr
      2 7   JfiN   ’ 9 9   1 G : 19                                                                                    P A G E . 0 0 2
       H o m e O ffice
       Police Resources Um<;
       50 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW lH 9AT
       Switchboard: 0171 273 4000 Fax: 0171 273 3742 Direct Line: 0171 273 3606 _




 FAX
To-            MR I DAM ES, BA(HONS) DIP.ED.            ASSISTANT CHIEF
               CONSTABLE

F rom :        Steve Schoiey


D a te ;       28 January 1999                    T im s ;     14:18:40


Fax N! :       011+2523481

Number of pages (Including this one)


Message
Subject:        PARLIAMENTARY QUESTIONS FROM MS M EAGLE MP


Mr Daines

Thank you for your Fax in reply to those from Nigel Beaumont and John Molt at c< ^cammg the PCs ay
Maria Eagle MP.

I am afraid that we have to come back to you for farther information o f a. more specific nature, regarding
each of the 3 PQs, in the order as per y our Fax;

r         1 Has South Yorkshire Police made any assessment of. the impact on the provision- of police
 • ■■ ■• generally, by the Police Authority’s decision to meet the cost-5 in the 2 cases mentioned- If so,
g etui for details,

Question 2 We believe the question is trying to establish the full average annual cost of keeping a police
constable on the beat in South Yorkshire. This would comprise not only pay costs, but other on-costs.
Grateful to know if you are able to provide a figure.

Question 3 Ms Eagle has asked whether HOC 4/1998 applies to officers in 2 particular sets of
circumstances. Grateful to know if these are the drcamstances c i Mr Dudsenfieid and M r Murray. We
intend to answer this PQ in terms of the genera* tppkutrion of the circular, but require the above
information to brief Ministers                                        v

           *)u once again for your help.

                   IF ANY PART OF THi,. :A X IS UNCLEAR
                     PLEASE TELEPHONE -171 273 3606
           South Yorkshire

           POLICE                                                 Ian Daines,         BA(Hons) Dip.Ed.
                                                                          Assistant Chief Constable
           JUSTICE           with   COURAGE




Ref: ACC/I Dy

28 January 1999

Mr J Moffat
Police Resources Unit
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London
SW1H9AT                                                                       BY FAX




Dear Mr Moffat

Parliamentary Questions from Maria EAGLE Relating to Hillsborough Stadium
Disaster 1989

I refer to your fax of 14.04, 27 January 1999 in which you enclose a Parliamentary
Question tabled by Maria EAGLE. I have also received a fax from Mr Nigel BEAUMONT,
Police Resources Unit in which he asks for assistance with two further questions tabled by
Ms EAGLE. She has also written to the Chief Constable and to the Clerk to South
Yorkshire Police Authority on the same subject. I attach a copy of my reply to Ms Eagle’s
letter to the Chief Constable. For simplicity I will answer all three of Ms EAGLE’S questions,
as best I can in the time available, in this one fax reply.

Perhaps you and Mr                     could get together, I will tell him I have written to you.

Question 1 To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department, what
           assessment he has made of the impact on the provision of police
           services of the costs to the South Yorkshire Police Authority to date of
           funding the defence of David Godfrey Duckenfield and Bernard Dean
            Murray in the cases of Adlington v Murray and Adlington v Duckenfield
            in the Leeds Magistrate’s Court.

Answer 1        Ms Eagle is asking the cost to date of Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray’s
                defence of the private prosecutions brought against them. The decision to
                meet these costs was taken by the South Yorkshire Police Authority so I
                would ask you to direct that question to them.

Question 2      To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department, what is the
                average annual cost in the South Yorkshire Police Authority area of
                 keeping a police constable on the beat.


           Police Headquarters
           Snig Hill
           Sheffield S3 8LY
           Tel: 0114 220 2020 Fax: 0114 252 3243
           Direct Dial No:          0114           Direct Fax: 0114 2523481
*
Answer 2      South Yorkshire Police officers are paid according to national determined
              pay levels.

Question 3    To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department, if the guidance
              in Home Office Circular 4/1998, relating to the payment of money to
              officers, either former of serving, involved in criminal proceedings,
              applies either to officers who have retired on health grounds with
              outstanding disciplinary charges against them or to officers against
              whom outstanding disciplinary charges have been dropped because of
              a retirement on health grounds of another officer.

Answer 3      It applies to serving and retired officers irrespective of the circumstances in
               which they retired.

I am sorry if any answers seem short but Ms Eagle’s questions are obtuse and your
deadline is pressing. I enclose a copy of a letter I have today sent to Ms Eagle in reply to
her letter to the Chief Constable; please feel free to quote from it. Also please telephone if
I can be of further assistance. I am in the office all day albeit with a number of meetings to
attend.

Yours sincerely

       'c-v___________



Ian Daines
Assistant Chief Constable
         :f *    T ;< CONF I Rr!HT I 0 N RE P 0 7 T                                             3 'J      IP : S3      PRGF


                                                                                               :H ! h r    . PEP T .




      DATE:       TH It               T 0 ■ i P 0 !i        HO Or              PIP    ‘‘.EC P i ' S         S i r , TUP
0 1    1 / 2 8    1 2 : 2 7           0271       7 73   3   C   j   -......7    0 7 'P IP    P7;                Ob
             South Yorkshire

            POLICE                                                   Ian Daines,        BA(Hons) DiP.Ed.
                                                                           A ssistant C h ief Constable
            JUSTICE            with     COURAGE




Ref: ACC/ID;

28 January 1999

W J Wilkinson Esq
Clerk and Treasurer
South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
PO Box 37
Regent Street
Barnsley
S70 2PQ




Dear Bill

South Yorkshire Police Authority Funding for the Defence of Private Prosecutions
Against David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray

I refer to the fax of 15.40 hours, 27 January 1999 from Maria EAGLE MP, to you on the
above subject. She has written to the Chief Constable in identical terms but does not say
so in her letter.

I attach a copy of my reply to her. There is no point in us both replying to her with identical
information. I wonder if you can furnish Ms Eagle with an appropriate reply.

Yours sincerely




Ian Daines
Assistant Chief Constable



Enc




            Police Headquarters
            Snig Hill
            Sheffield S3 8LY
            Tel: 0114 220 2020 Fax: 0114 252 3243
            Direct D ial No:     0114           Direct Fax: 0114 2523481
       1
                   TX   C GNP I R T I h T I O N   R E: P R T   >r'+-                             H !i   ’ ■ ■’    ;i 4   P A G E .0!

                                                                                   S, i .R      L H (E F .DEPT.



      DATE          TIME                     TO/FROM                   MODF       M I N ' SE>   P GS             STATUS
0 1    l - ' c S    12:33           Y O R K S JO H I T S E C           IJ F — S    0 0 11 j y   0 2.               0K
              South Yorkshire

              POLICE                                                 Ian Daines,          BA(Hons) DiP.Ed.
                                                                             A ssistant C h ief Constable
              JUSTICE       with    COURAGE




   Maria Eagle MP                                                                Ref: ACC/I D)
   MP for Liverpool, Garston
   House of Commons                                                              28 January 1999
   London
   SW1A OAA                                                                      BY FAX


   Dear Ms Eagle

   Hillsborough Stadium Disaster 1989: Private Prosecutions Against Retired Officers

   I refer to your fax of 15.40 hours, 27 January 1999 to the Chief Constable on the above
   subject. On the same day you wrote an identical letter to Mr W WILKINSON, Clerk and
   Treasurer to the South Yorkshire Police Authority. Neither your letter to the Chief
   Constable nor your letter to the Clerk and Treasurer refers to the fact that you have written
   to the other.

   You ask for a prompt reply as you say that you intend to raise the matter in Parliament. I
   have been asked by the Home Office to give them information which will help the Minister
   reply to Parliamentary questions you have already tabled.

   May I take you back to the eve of the House of Commons adjournment debate on the
   scrutiny report of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith (April 1998). Your assistant telephoned South
   Yorkshire Police Headquarters to seek information about the aftermath of the disaster. I
   contacted your assistant and answered as fully as I could in the limited time available.
   Later that evening (about 6.30 pm) I telephoned you and we discussed issues amicably.
   Relying purely on memory, I think the focus of your interest was the role of a particular
   group of South Yorkshire officers, some of whose names you quoted. I explained that their
   role was primarily one of liaison with West Midlands Police. At the end of our conversation
   I invited you to contact me direct if you had any further queries and I would do my best to
   answer them fully. I have always worked on the principle that Members of Parliament
   should be briefed fully, even on confidential issues. That offer still stands and I do hope
   you will take it up.

   Returning to your letter of 27 January 1999, it was a Police Authority decision to pay costs
   incurred by Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray in defending themselves against the private
   prosecutions. It would be appropriate therefore for the Authority’s Clerk to reply to your
   query about how that decision was made.

   Yours sincerely



   Ian Daines
   Assistant Chief Constable
             Police Headquarters
             SnieHiU
jw K i V I   sheffieids3 sly
             Tel: 0114 220 2020 IFax: 0114 252 3243
                      lialNo:
             Direct Dial  No:         0114            Direct Fax: 0114 2523481
            4- ;!■: T X   ■ 0 N r I R MH 7 I 'J M R r. r ' 1R' T   +    HS    0r    rS Jh M ’99         IS:24       P   h   G E . S 1


                                                                                    S.Y.R..     C H I E F . DEPT.




         DATE        TRIE                                T O /FROM     NODE        M I ?'• S t C PC<S     STFi TU
    01    1/ £ 8     12:23                          01712 13115?       EC--         00 40        01         0K




t
