PETER GARDNER                                                          R147




Police Sergeant 577




Hanunerton Road Police Station




On this date I commenced duty at Hammerton Road Police Station at

9-00 a.m.   (0900).   I travelled to the ground where I attended the

briefing at 10.00 a.m.    (1000).   I was allocated serial 3 which was the

South Stand, upper level and turnstiles.      I had 11 other officers to

assist me with this serial and I believe those officers were as follows:

P.S. 2759 Turner, P.Cs 70 Whiteley, 1977 Farthing, 1584 Collier,

60 Godley, 1962 Fiore-Hirst, 3341 Mitchell, 26l Cooper, 1317 Bennett,

591 Tune, 1949 Storey and 2817 Hudson, all from FI.

The South Stand had been allocated to the Nottingham Forest fans.        The

officer to whom I was responsible was Inspector Darling, FI.      Prior to

the turnstiles opening my serial did a security check of the seating

area of the upper level of the South Stand.      When the turnstiles opened

the P.Cs were deputed to the searching of fans entering the stand whilst

P.S. Turner and myself patrolled the snack bars and batting booth.

About 2.50 p.m. (1450) I heard traffic over the radio that large numbers

of fans were at the Leppings Lane end and trying to get into the ground.

About the same time I heard some mention on the radio that a gate had

been broken.    Up to this time I had periodically checked the seating

area and I was amazed at the apparent slowness of the Liverpool fans to

take their seats in the North and West Stands and on the Leppings Lane

terraces.    By about 2.50 p.m. (1450) the seats and terraces were

beginning to fill up quickly all except the wings of the Leppings Lane
terraces in which there was still plenty of room.       I think it was before

the players took to the field that I heard a request over the radio for

the start to be delayed.    It was suggested this would have a     calming

effect on the fans outside the Leppings Lane end, knowing they would not

miss any of the game.    I gathered from the transmissions that a large

number of fans had turned up suddenly, swelling the already large

numbers.   There   was mention over the radio of the fans outside the

Leppings Lane end 'pressing    forward'.     Around the start of the game    I

was hearing calls over the radio from Superintendent Marshall for a gate

at the rear of the West Stand terraces to be opened to ease the pressure

outside.   This request was repeated several times.      Radio reception was

not very good due to the noise of the crowd around the officer and the

fact he was having to shout.    There was a note of desperation and

serious concern in Superintendent Marshall's voice and I heard him

mention there was going to be serious injury if this gate was not

opened.    The order was then given to open the gate.

The game was about    five minutes old when I was able to get a     view of it

from one of the    gangways in the South Stand. Play was in the goal mouth

at the Leppings    Lane end of the ground.     I noticed a fan climb over the

high barrier which divides the terraces from the playing area.        I saw

the crowd on the terraces surge forward a couple of times, a sight which

is quite common.     I could not see anything wrong from my position and

dismissed the pushing and climbing as unruly behaviour of the fans.

I then saw a senior police officer run onto the pitch and approach the

referee.    The game was stopped but I could not see why and still put it

down to the behaviour of the fans.     Several fans came over the barrier

and I saw one of them run the full length of the pitch to the Kop end,

Nottingham Forest end of the ground and began to taunt the fans.        The
fan was detained and it was only then did I realise something was

seriously wrong.

I saw policemen helping fans over the barrier at the Leppings Lane end

and others beckoning the fans in the centre of the terraces to move

back. It was obvious that fans at the front were getting crushed amd I

saw some of them apparently unconscious and being treated on the pitch.

During this time there were many radio transmissions and there was

mention of fans dying and getting more officers to the Leppings Lane end

of the ground.

I rounded up the remaining officers of my serial, two were involved with

a prisoner and two were on meal, and when the chance came I used my

radio.     I informed ground control that the Nottingham fans in the South

Stand were calm and orderly and asked if I should take my serial onto

the pitch.     This was confirmed and on we went.

Once on the pitch and at the Leppings Lane end it was impossible to

remain together as a group as there were many people lying about

injured.     I made my way to near to the touch line, ignoring the people

who were sitting or did not appear to be in any danger, and went to two

males who were unconscious.     I first gave mouth to mouth resuscitation

to the elder one who I could only describe as heavy built and about 50

years old.     I don't know how long I continued with this man but there

was no response.     Whilst trying to resuscitate this man I was kicked on

my right thigh by a Liverpool fan who shouted to me 'You fucking

murderer' .

I went to the next man, about 20 years, wearing a bright green short

sleeved shirt and began mouth to mouth resuscitation on him.     I was

assisted at this time by a woman who said she was a nurse who gave heart

    age.     This continued for some time until it seemed obvious the man
I don't know if it was on the radio or by someone on the pitch but there

was some mention of removing the bodies.     With the help of three or four

Liverpool fans, I placed the body of the younger man onto an advertising

hoard and carried it off the pitch via the South Stand to the service

road at the south side of the West Stand.     It was here several other

bodies were laid out and I put the body of the young man with them.

I returned to the pitch but was almost immediately directed with other

officers to outside the Leppings Lane end of the ground where I assisted

in ensuring a free passage for ambulances.     Numerous Liverpool fans were

leaving the ground by this time and many of them appeared to be drunk.

Many of them, including the sober ones, were very abusive towards the

Police with comments of being murderous bastards, the opening of a gate

and of not having sufficient tickets for their greater number of

fans.

During the incident I cannot remember any breakdown in radio

transmissions but when on the pitch I was probably oblivious to

transmissions because of the urgent task at hand.

I went off duty at 7.00 p.m. (1900) the same date.

Whilst on the pitch during the early stages and afterwards outside the

Lepping Lane end of the ground, I and other officers were subjected to

abuse, mainly verbal, from the Liverpool fans.     Everyone of them seemed

to agree with the fact that they had not been allocated the parts of the

ground which would have afforded them a greater number of tickets.        This

may be so, but I believe Nottingham Forest sold all their allocation and

could have possibly sold more.   I did not hear any reports or see any

evidence of them crushing at turnstiles to get into the ground even

thoug h , with the allocation of tickets, they should have been greater in
numbers.   The Nottingham fans appeared to get to the ground earlier and

take their seats and places on the terraces far sooner than the

Liverpool fans.
