                              CHARGE FIVE




Being a member of South Yorkshire Police did act in a manner reasonably
likely to bring discredit on the reputation of the force or the police
service at Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield on 15 April 1989
in that prior to the tragedy you had given an order for gates to be
opened for the crowd to enter the stadium but did not communicate this
fact in subsequent discussions you had in the Police Control Box and
the Boad Room with Graham Kelly of the Football Association and others
when you indicated the supporters of Liverpool Football Club had forced
a gate into the stadium.
    nftfei j>wfTo^
About 3-00 pm on Saturday, 15 April 1989, a tragedy occurred at
Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield, just before the commencement
of the FA Cup Semi-Final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest
Football Clubs.



The tragedy involved fatal crushing of supporters at the Leppings Lane
end of the ground, which crushing occurred because of the forward
movement of the crowd.     Initially the cause was believed to be the
influx of a large number of supporters who had entered the ground as
a result of external gates at that end being opened.     It was
consequently felt that whoever opened the gates caused the tragedy.


Entry to the stadium would normally be only via the turnstiles, the
gates being opened normally only at the end of the match to allow the
clearing of the stadium when the game was over.


Chief Superintendent Duckenfield was the officer in command of the
police operation associated with this football match and was present
in the police control box at the ground this day.    Other persons present
in the control box were Superintendent Murray, Chief Inspector McRobbie,
Police Sergeant Goddard, Police Constable Ryan and Police Constable
Bichard.


Although Chief Superintendent Duckenfield was in command of the
operation, there was actually a more senior ranking police officer
of his Force, Assistant Chief Constable Jackson, on duty and present
within the stadium.


Also in the stadium were Mr Graham Kelly, the Chief Executive of the
Football Association, Mr Kirton, head of external affairs of the
Football Association, as well as Mr Mackrell, Secretary of Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club.
 Reference to the plan of the ground will show that there are three
 gates, A, B and C, giving access from the Leppings Lane end.      About
 2.48 pm police opened Gate C in order to eject from the ground a person
 who had climbed in.   On the gate being opened some 200 supporters pushed
 the gate further open and came into the ground, but further unauthorised
 entry was prevented by a mounted policeman who succeeded in closing
 the gate.   This happening was relayed by television camera to a screen
 within the police control box and was observed there.    Chief Inspector
 McRobbie remarked upon it saying, "Look, they've forced open the gate."
 That incident was complete in less than a minute and probably has no
 relevance as a cause of the subsequent disaster.


 It was about 2.52 pm that Gate C reopened and about 2.58 pm Gate A
^reopened.   Gate B was also opened at some stage.   The opening of these
 gates allowed a large scale ingress of fans into the ground.      It was
 in this -period that the tragedy occurred and became increasingly
 manifest.



 Once the tragedy became manifest Mr Jackson made his way to the police
 control box.   Mr Kelly, Mr Kirton and Mr Mackrell did likewise seeking
 to find out what had occurred.    So it happened that about 1515 hours
 a conversation took place in the police control box.    Recollections
 as to what was said precisely differ, but Mr Jackson, Mr Kelly and
Mr Kirton all indicate that they were left with the impression that
 the Liverpool supporters had forced open or stormed a gate.      Mr Jackson
and Mr Kirton say that it was Chief Superintendent Duckenfield who
promulgated this information.     Mr Kelly and Mr Kirton speak of a video
showing this.

                                                                                J

 As a result of what was said, these witnesses believed that          '
-' -                                                   ^
 misbehaviour of Liverpool fans had led to the             - ■■            r»
                           c;     f.       v.                         v

What they did not learn from Chief Superintendent Duckenfield was that
shortly before the tragedy occurred Superintendent Marshall, who was
                                                                         /




           the senior police officer posted to duties outside the ground, had
           become alarmed at crowd pressure outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles.
           He had requested that this pressure be released by the opening of the
           gates at that end.     In response to this request, Chief Superintendent
           Duckenfield had given the order for the gates to be opened«J[nd-'4 't>-“wac




    12.    About 1530 hours a meeting took place in the Board Room at the Club
           attended by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Assistant Chief
           Constable, Mr Jackson, who walked together to the Board Room from the
           police^box.    Also present were Mr Kelly, Mr Kirton and Mr Mackrell,
           Lionel Smart, another Football Association official, Mr Roworth,
           Chairman of Nottingham Forest Football Club, Mr Smith, Chairman of
           Liverpool Football Club, Mr McGree, Chairman of Sheffield Wednesday
           Football Club.     Mr Brown of the Football Association was present,
           Mr Robinson, Secretary of Liverpool Football Club and Mr Ensor,
           Solicitor for Liverpool Football Club.       Mr Lewis the match referee
           was present.     At some stage Mr Locj^, Security Officer for Sheffield
           Wednesday Football Club came into the meeting.


13.       Recollections as to what was said differ, but it does not seem that
          Chief Superintendent Duckenfield related the fact that he had ordered
           the opening of the gates.



14.       It was after this meeting that Mr Kelly spoke to representatives of
          the media and thus the version of events according to official sources
          was distorted.     This led to accusations of disreputable conduct being
^         made against Mr Duckenfield and Mr Jackson by members of the public
          such as the complainants^ Mr Jones, Mr Hicks and-Mr-McBrlen.


15.       Assistant Chief Constable, Mr Jackson and Chief Superintendent
          Duckenfield left the Board Room and returned to the police box.
          Mr Jackson telephoned the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police,
          Mr Peter Wright and related what was happening and it was decided that




                                            -   3   -
    he should return to Force Headquarters to give      a full briefing.
    In furtherance of this, Mr Jackson called BfepEEIcr Marshall to the
    police control box.   It was from Superintendent Marshall that he learned
    that the gates had been opened and not forced.   The time was 1600
    or 1615 hours.



Chief Superintendent Duckenfield has given his account of the two
conversations, the one in the^control box that had occurred about 1515
hours and the one in the Board Room that occurred about 1530 hours.
He gave evidence to the enquiry into the tragedy headed by Lord Justice
Taylor and he gave evidence on oath at the Inquest.


While being cross examined by Mr Dyson at the Enquiry he was asked
about the visit of Mr Kelly and others to the police,box:-


Q      "Do you remember   also telling those gentlemen that the problem
       had been created by a gate being forced open by the fans?"


A      "I may have said   that sir, referring to the first gate, because
       I thought there was a gate that had opened at first."


The passage of ceewd examination begins at Page 112 of the Hearing
on 25 May 1989-


He went on to say that, "I may have been loath to tell him exactly
what the situation was at that point."


Q     "What aspect of it?   What had happened or causation?"


A     "What had happened, my Lord.   The blunt truth that we had      been
       asked to open a gate and that we had opened a gate.     I was not
       being deceitful.   It was just a case of at that situation   we were
       still in a state of shock, one might say."
    In cross examination on 26 May 1989 by Mr Glasgow at the Lord Justice
Taylor Enquriy (the passage starts at Page 24).


Q       ... It is right to say isn't it that when you decided to withhold
       the information that the decision to let people into the ground
       had been a police one, you withheld that information from everybody
       on the afternoon in question."


A      "Yes sir."


and later...



Q       You actually went to the Board Room of the Club, because they
       wanted to be told what was       going on in their ground, didn't you?"


A     "Yes sir."



Q     "You didn't think it right        even to tell them within the confines
       of the Board Room, as the officers of the Club, that the disaster
       had been what you regarded as an unforseeable consequence of a
       police decision?"


A      "No sir."



Q      "Was there any conceivable reason for withholding that information
       from the Assistant Chief Constable?"


A      "I am not sure when he first came in he knew the full circumstances
       sir."



Q     Well Mr Duckenfield   let me help you.       He went with you to the
       Board Room to see the Directors and he stood by in the Board Room
      unaware of the fact that you were not telling my clients the truth,
      didn't he?"




                                    -   5   -
      A   "Yes sir.



      Q   "And you, when giving the account to them of what happened, realised
          that the deception which was being practised upon them was also
                practised upon the Assistant Chief Constable in your presence
          by you."



      A   "I think that is an unfair comment sir, about deception.   It was
          a decision I made in the best interests I thought of the operation."


      and much later...



      Q   "I must make it plain, Mr Duckenfield, I am not suggesting that
          you went any further than that with the Director.    I am not
          suggesting that you told them a lie; what I am complaining about
          is that you did not tell them the truth."


      A   "Sir, you are correct."


20.   In cross examination by Mr Hytner the same day (Page 31) he was asked:-


      Q   "Mr Duckenfield, now we know what you said later to the Board and
          to your Assistant Chief Constable, you have given your explanation
          as to why you did not wish to tell the truth and I am not going
          to pursue that.   What I want to ask you is why in deciding to
          suppress the truth you also decided to tell a lie about the
          supporters, about the Liverpool fans.   Why couldn't you have simply
          said you did not know what had happened?"


      A    In the crisis of the moment sir, with all the pressures that were
          so evident I can't give an honest answer other than the stress
          of the situation."




                                    -   6   -
21.       In cross examination by Mr Woodward the next day (Page 46) he was
          asked:-



          Q     It is understood from the cross examination of you by Mr Glasgow
               that it is not suggested, certainly by the Club that you told any
               lie, do you follow that?       In saying what you did, did you achieve
               anything in your view?"


      A         Apart from what has been said today I did sir.      My concerns were
               that 5^,000 people could cause massive disorder if they were angry
               about my, or the police service actions and Hillsborough Stadium
               is near a park, a shopping centre and private housing and I needed
               not only the escape routes to be opened, I say ’escape routes",
               for ambulances and emergency services, but if the media or anyone
               told the true story initially I could have a major public disorder
               not so much in the ground, but around it."


22.   This answer was tested in further cross examination the same day by
      Mr Collins (Page 49):-



      Q       "Yes, but   I am just simply trying to test to see why you thought
              that to tell the truth would have created difficulties with the
              fans.   You mean they would have been hostile to the police?"


      A       "Yes they   could."


      and later...



      Q       "The only   reason I am asking you this is that in the light of your
              answer to Mr Woodward, I am wondering why you thought it would
              be less likely to lead to disorder to tell the true position than
              to imply that it was the fault of the fans.       Some might say or
              might think that that would be more likely to create disorder."




                                          -   7   -
A     Sir, with hindsight today we can all look differently at that
     situation.       I acted as I believed to be correct in a crisis moment."


Complaints involving the allegation facing the basis of this charge
were made by Mr and Mrs Hicks, Mr Les Jones and again by Mr Hicks.
Regulation 7 Notices were served in respect of them in the following
sequence.    Mr and Mrs Hicks wrote on 7 June 1989 a letter to the Home
Secretary.    As a result Mr K P D Cooper was appointed Investigating
Officer on 25 July 1989.       The Regulation 7 Notice was served on
3 August I989 by Mr Cooper.       Mr Les Jones wrote on 19 October I989
a letter to South Yorkshire Police and Mr Dean, then Chief Constable
of West Midlands Police, was appointed Investigating Officer on
23 October 1 98 9 .    The Regulation 7 Notice was served on
7 November I989 by Chief Superintendent Foster of West Midlands Police.
Mr Hicks made a statement on 23 November 1989 that included a further
allegation and as a result Mr Dear was appointed Investigating Officer
on 30 November 1989 .      The Regulation 7 Notice was served by Morgan
Jones, then Assistant Chief Constable of West Midlands Police on
15 December 198 9 .


On 3 July 1991 in the presence of his Solicitor Mr Coughlin, Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield was interviewed by Mr Sharp, Chief Constable
of the Cumbria Constabulary who by then had taken over the investigation
originally conducted by Mr Dear when he was Chief Constable of West
Midlands Police.       The interview was tape recorded and a transcript
has been prepared by Chief Inspector Tope who was also present.
Although no mention was made in that interview to this allegation,
in fact, Mr Coughlin indicated that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
declined to answer any questions while ever prosecution for criminal
matters remained possible.       On this basis the interview terminated
without any questions relating to the allegation being put.




                                   -   8   -
