                                                                                         M IR .15


 OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                            Date and time raised                                               I
                                                                                                    Number

 Title                     -A n*.                                           t\ol
 (Include source and any document number if relevant)


 Receiver's instructions — urgent action - Yes^Jo          k   /L 'H n    <V- / / > ?

                                                                                                                 Receiver



 Document registered/indexed as indicated                                                                        indexer
No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                 r&Y
Statement reader's instructions                                                                              Statement Reader
                                                                                                             0 x ^ /3
Indexed as indicated
                                                                                                                 Indexer
No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken


                                                                                          &___ 4



Further action No(s)
                                                                                                                Indexer

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                           ST HELENS
                                           MERSEYSIDE


                                           21 4 89




Dear Sirs

I believe you are interested in supporter's accounts of the Hillsborough
tradegy.

I enclose "my own thoughts" on that day.  This was written before I
knew people were asked to send them up, so maybe a lot will be
irrelevant.

Yours faithfully
 Saturday morning all up and bustling about, making sandwiches, organisine
 tickets, arranging lifts.   We leave at 10.45 am a n d it 11.15 for their trip
 to Villa Park.   We say good-bye and wish each other the best of luck and a good
 day.  Neither of us really hoping for each other to win, we couldn’t face the two
 of us again at Wembley, all those nerves.    11.15 our coach is there not full
 but fills up at the depot, leaves a bit late 11.45 travels towards Haydock’
 First disappointment as we dont turn down the East Lancs towards the M62 but go
 on M6 towards M56, why is he going this way, this is where the hold-ups are?
 After being stuck at the end of the motorway for over an hour, we realise, we are
 going to be pushed to get to the ground on time.   I think, I ’m glad weve’got two
 stand tickets, its easier to get into the stand, than queue for the ground when
 its late.

Single file traffic all the way, stopping and starting, no traffic police to cope
with the extra volume, stuck at silly roundabouts. Maybe these people dont know
there is a big game on.   Ah, Sheffield 13* miles, might Just make it, after 20
minutes, we see another sign Sheffield 13 miles, where have we been going.
Makes towards Ml, should have come this way to start with.      Turn off motorway
2.30 pm, police get on and search the coach, no sign of drink, we want them off,
times getting short.

The ground in sight, we travel right outside the ground, but not allowed to get
off coach, driver takes up back up the hill to park, another few minutes lost.
At 2.45 we run all the way down to the ground and Join the crowds in Jubilant
mood, chanting and singing, no drunks, but quite a few cans in the road, a bit
like Wembley.   Plenty of police in the roads, get towards the ground, ’ I know
where to go from last year, we try and make towards the C turnstiles, but
crowded, why is it like this, no police here, no queues, Just a mass trying to
make for the turnstiles, one mounted policeman tries to organise but is Just
turning around, with people scrambling to get out of its way.     Another two are
trying to close a gate behind us, all to no avail. Dont even think of the time,
couldn t look anyway cant move our hands, young boy is in front of me, stoi
pushing, this is ridiculous, people force young boy to turnstile, h e ’s safe we
edge our way away from a big wall, something might happen, wall collapse maybe,
there are a lot of fans on it, a policeman is helping them over, what am I doing
here, fighting to get into a match.    Nearly at the turnstile, one policeman at
each one, you re doing a lot there I shout, but realise he is stuck and c a n ’t eet
through.

Reach the turnstile, through at last, policemen and policewomen standing inside,
why don t you get outside and do something, someone's going to be killed I hear
myself screaming. Get up to the stands, go our different ways, after arranging a
place to meet.    Find my seat, realise the game has already started, not even
heard any roars outside for the tension.    I notice Alan Hanson is playing, bit of
pushing down at the front terracing a few people are climbing over, one is
arrested and marched away, another pushed back into the crowd, hands are reaching
up, whats happening,    more people climbing over, surrounding Bruces Grobbelar's
goal, Oh not   trouble, people are collapsing on the pitch, why aren’t the police
doing something, surely they can see, they are Just walking past.       A policeman
runs to the ref, to stop the game. Police, first aid men run to the back of the
goal, bodies are brought out, kiss of life, hearts getting pumped, I dont believe
this. Why are some people Just left there, then the horror emerges, they must be
dead.   I have to get out, walk to the toilets and look out of the window, a row
of about 8/9 bodies Just lying there, dead.

I walked back into the stands to find my daughter, people are arguing amongst
themselves, why is this happening, most blame the police outside (including
myself). Why didnt they have it organised to allow for late comers.   A policeman
stands alone    in the stands and says the game     is abandoned, but no public
announcement.    People Just stare at the pitch.     Kenny Dalgliesh appeals for
people with medical training to help the injured.      Fans tear down advertising
boards to use as stretchers and race to the other end of the ground to awaiting
ambulances. Notts Forest fans applaud the L ’Pool fans for their efforts.
An announcement is made, the game is off, we make our way quietly down the
stairs and out of the ground, back to the coach, wondering who will be getting
back on it, unaware that so many have lost their lives. We heard 5, no 8, then
18.   Streams of people queuing outside telephone boxes, people crying, some
limping, others holding their ribs, faces tortured with "why".

Back on the coach everyone was relieved to find some friends already there,
hugging them and shaking hands, and all listening to the radio, then the
announcement came through that 50 people had died, there was an unbelievable
silence, then more and more people got off the coach to go into the houses that
had been thrown open by the Sheffield people, to 'phone home.   Some got through,
others didn't, the lines were engaged.   Local radio stations urged local people
not to use the phones themselves to save them for the L'pool fans.

Then it was time to leave Sheffield, all but one fan had returned, no-one knew
what had happened to him.    We went through the tickets to find out his name.
Hoping maybe he had got on another coach.

All the way home the numbers were increasing, and when we arrived at the coach
depot, it finally hit us what it must have been like for the people back home,
there were scores of people waiting for their families and friends, anxious faces
searching the coaches, and then the re-unions with their loved ones.     This was
too much to bear and we broke down.

Back at our drop-off point,   the same happened, this was our turn to be re—united
and we just cried.




It w a sn ’t until Monday morning   that we heard that the chap from our coach had
died.                                                             -
