                                                                                                                 M IR.15


 OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                         Date and time raised                7    I          SI                    Number
                                                                                                                                                 D
 Title __
 (Include source and any document number i f relevant)


 Receiver's instructions - urgent action - Y g^N o                                                         /to tu. is
                                                                                                                                                        Receiver
------------------------------------------------ ---                                                     p lih r r )
                                                           7 ]                             ~ —         f     — ^ -----------             -

Document registered/indexed as indicated                                                                                                                Indexer

No(s) o f actions raised

Statement readert i n a c t i o n ,                    ^                                                           ^        V      \ ^           Statement Reader
                                                                                ------------------------------------ - ^ r --------------—

Indexed as indicated                                                       C                                                                            Indexer

No(s) o f actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                     ..........
                ------------ ---- ------------
----------------------- ——                                                                            r-"                          f            ■tr n          SIO


                                                                                                      TCP                                       Y       ..
                                                                                                       I     1                                   h 3 i

Further action No(s)                                                                                                                                    Inc exer


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                                     ancs.




                                                         24th April, 1989.




Dear Sir,

Saturday, April 15th, 1989 sta rte d out like any other football morning, full of
excitem en t and hope of getting through to the final possibly against Everton.
L ittle did we know, setting off a t 11M5 to collect friends, what the future would
have in store for us. I will rem em ber it for the re st of my life and take it
to the grave.

The journey f r o m I v a s in good spirit, fans making jokes, laughter in the
air. I particularly rem em ber a shout from the car behind us saying "I hope
th a t dog's got a ticket", looking back a t the situation, three women in a car,
scarves flying and my dog observing the whole thing from the back would be a
sight to behold.

We arrived in a car park a t about 2.00 having been held up in several tra ffic jams.
Hundreds of Liverpool supporters were coming in the same way as Nottingham
Forest fans and we all made our way to the same car park. At no tim e was
there any trouble both sets of fans w ere joking and good humour was the order of
the day.

I found a spot under a tre e so the car had some shade on it (for the dog) and
a fte r having a drink of te a and something to e a t we made our way to Hillsbrough
going past the park and a few closed pubs.

We arrived a t the Lepping Lane End a t approximately 2AO. There was quite a
large crowd forming and a fte r three close encounters with a police horse, I
managed to make my way to Entrance 'B' (noting about a dozen or so fans on my
right getting over a wall into the ground). The lack of policing didn't show a t
first but when I got to the turnstile (and I can only thank the Liverpool
supporters for helping me), there was only one bobby for the two turnstiles.

At this point I didn't think much about the packed crowd as the last two visits
to Wembley was much more of a crushing experience, but as I w ent through the
turnstiles, I thought to myself "this would never happen a t Anfield".

Once in the ground I made my way to the right hand side going through a gate
and towards the stairs which would take me up to the West Stand where my
s e a t was situated in Row 9, I was not rushing and I knew just where to go as
we were in the same stand last year.

A t the bottom of the stairw ay two Stewards with bright yellow jackets on were
just closing the gate, I produced rny:'ticket the Steward told me they were just
about to open the gates, he let me in and closed the two m etal gates behind me
(to this day I do not know if I was the last one up the stairs or not). Ascending
the flights of stairs I rem em ber thinking "opening the gates , he must have m eant
closing the gates". At this point an almighty cheer starte d and by the tim e I
made my way into the stand Liverpool w ere out and so were N otts Forest.
                                           '   ■+ ’




The next few hours will be rem em bered not for the g re a t m atch we all w ent to
see, history will record it as a great disaster not just for the fans of Liverpool
and the families on Merseyside, but when all fans becam e united in their grief.

I would finally like to say the lack of communication around the ground was
terrible, the electronic score board and loud speakers were not used properly in
keeping all the fans informed of the severity of the situation and I don't think the
Nottingham Forest fans realised anything was wrong other than a pitch invasion
until the bodies were being carried up to their end on the advertising boards.
The final insult was an announcement to the Liverpool fans in the Lepping Lane
End to get off the pitch. We could see all th a t was happening in front of us,
clearly, again there was lack of communication. Shortly a fte r I had seen and
had enough I walked quietly out of the ground where the ground s ta ff , stewards
and police were trying to keep the exits clear for the fle e t of ambulances and
fire engines.

Everyone outside was in a distressed s ta te and clearly some rem arks made by
certain officers did not help and were not needed. I stopped just to collect my
thoughts and to w ait for my friends. A fter a while I went back to the car and
walked my dog back to the ground where I m et up with my friends a t about 4.45p.m.


Yours faithfully,
