JULIE ANNE NESBIT POLICE CONSTABLE 3212           ~f




At 9amon Saturday 15th April 1989,1 paraded for duty at Hilsborough Football
ground to police the F.A.Cup semi final between Liverpool & Nottingham Forest
My duty for that day was to be on a serial supervised by DS Tissington &
Inspector Ellis.

The duty of our serial that day was to be on Wallsend Road where parking space
had beenmade available for transit vans of Liverpool supporters to park.
We were told to search supporters as they alighted from the vehicles and also to
inspect their tickets.
Durind the game we were to be on stand by duties and at the conclusion of the match we
wereto go onto the permiter of the pitch.

The breifing for the match took place at 10am inthe North s&fcnd .We were breifed
by Ch. S u p t . Duckenfield.Following this we had refreshments and I tookup
my position with the rest of my serial on Wallsend Road for 11 15am.
W allsend Road is a single carriage way road wit$i» one carriageway in each
direction. It is situated of Halifax Road opposite the railway station.
The other end of Wallsend Road is a dead end.The car park we had for the transit
vans was at this far end of the road and was not very large. As we didnot know
how many vehicles to expectwe parked vehicles as they arrived down one side of
W allsend Road until we reached the car park and then we started filing that.

Early on very few vehicles arrived but those that did the occupants were
searched and tickets were I n s p e c t e d .Some of the vehicles had cans of beer/larger
inside but none of the occupants wished to take the alchol out of the vehicles.
The fans who arrived early were not drunk.However the fans that were arriving
later in the transit vans had obviously consumed alchol on the journey,
despite having had a drink they were not disruptive.

Further up Halifax road away from the ground was the coach park. We noticed that many
fans were beginning to walk down Halifax Road towards the ground, I therefore
with other members of my    serialstood on the junction of Wallsend Rd. & halifax
Rd. Whenever a transitvan turned into the road we   would direct it where to
park and it was then searched as I have previously stated.
 As more fans were walking dowft Halifax Rd we beleived we were better employed stood on

•
the junction. I do not know how many transit vans we parkedas I didnot
count thembut I woQl^d estimate that there wereno more than 20.

As the time got nearer to kick off more & more people were walking down
Halifax Road.Some of them didnot have ticket & were standing by me trying
to buy them from other fans.When questioned byme about not having a ticket
thet said such things as   'I've never had a ticket but I always get into the
ground.' or 'I'll buy one   on the way down.'
Many of the fans who were walking down the road were in large groups most of
whom were whom were carrying & consuming alchol. The Groups were the full width of the
pavementthey were drinking from cans; bottles and litre &half bottles. They
were carrying extra bottles & cans with them and had them in shirt &trouser
pockets.Many of them were drunk & staggering but, they were not disruptive.
Some of the lads were stopping and sitting on a wall near me to drink.Those
who looked particularydrunk or had large quantities of alchol with them I
went over & spoke to. I obviously didnot want to antagnise thembut I asked
why they hadn't stayed in Liverpool to get drunk as they didn't seen capable
ofgetting to & watching a football match.I got replies such as 'We're alright'
'We sober up when we get into the Ground.' 'We always watch football like this.'
JULIE ANNE NESBIT   POLICE CONSTABLE 3212 PAGE 2


As time passed DS Tissington who, was the only m,ember of our serial to be
issued with a radio informed me & other members of our serial to try &
move the crowds along to the ground.                                 #      #
Shortly before 3Pm when there were only a few stragglers making their way
to the ground our serial began to walk down halifax road intending to go to Claywheels _l
  a n e . There were many empty bottles & cans along the Road.
~Ks we got onto Claywheels Lane we met uo with a number of other serials
under the command of Inspector Charles, at this time a radio message was
received by the Inspectorwho then told us to make our way to the ground.
At time time I didnot know why. As we got onto Leppings Lane & approached the ground I
noticed a crowd of people outsied the ground, there,was also a n<piber of police officers
about Inspector Charles asked on the radio for further instructions
and then told us to make our way into the ground. I made my way in through an open gate
at the side of which was an ambulance.
I noticed people were being carried out of ther Leppings Lane Stand to                   (
thew a m b u l a n c e , others were running up to me & shouting such things as Murderer
and 'You're fucking Killing us in there'. Becuause of this and the fact that I
was still unaware of what was happening I made ny way into the Leppings Lane
stand through the t u n n e l . I stood and lookeddown towards the pitch trying

•
l;o access the situatiion. I saw total panicpeople were everywhere & were
still coming & shouting in my face. I saw DC Hubbard a collegue from
Rotherham on top of the perimeter fence many other officers were also on    top of this
fence leaning over from the pitch side into the stand. Below them people
were everywhere. I made my way down to the front of the satnd in pen 4
and began telling people whowere standing to get out through the back of
thew standmany people were reluctant to do so stating they were looking for
people. I then began physically pushing then backwards as it was apparent
to me that no one would find anyone until the pen was cleared.
As I made my way down I noticed people climbing over the fence seperating
pens 3 &
A collegue shouted me to go through the gate and onto the pitch to help
carry the fans who were by the gate out. He helped me onto the pitch
I then began helping to lift people form the insiefd. of the pen 4and laid them on   the
pitch.I helped carry out three or four bodies one of which was a young girl
with short dark hair wearing jeans and a Liverpool shirt.
The other were all men one of whom was of a very heavy bulid.
All of these bodies I laid, on the pitch where ever I could find a space.
All of the bodies I carried out I did so with the help of other officers.

On returning to the gate again I could not get for other officers who
were there so I walked round the ambulance that was on the pitch
and went to the gate at pen 3 -Here there was a chain of officers and the bodies were
being passed along it to get them out of this section of the stand.

•
|t got into the chain & helped here for some time. I the t moved on to help
move the bodies off the pitch, because of the lack of stretchers
advertisingboards were used and fans who were on the pitch and not
injured were bringing them ove    for us to use.                                 .
I started lifting the bodies onto the stretcherswith other people who then carried them
away. As one was taken away I lifted the next boby on & so on.
Many of the fans who were on the pitch were helping with this and carrying
the bodies off, but some of the fans were very angry and were shouting.
As the fans had less to do we wereasked to form a line acrossthe pitch to contain the
fansin their own halfof the ground. Many were obviously beginning to
realise what had happened & were very distressed
I tried to comfort them as best I could.
Following this a message was passed over thegrounds P.A. systemthat the game was
abandoned. The crowds then began to leave, when the terraces were empty
I started to help move the fans who were still on the pitch out of the
ground. Many were upset & needed consoling.When the ground was eventually emptied I
joined other officers who were sat on the North Stand. I then returned to
Claywheels Lane and went off duty at 8.30pm.
