 /I
/ /■   /
Police Constable 2922 Denton                             Hillsborough Enquiry

Conisbrough Police Office




At 8am Saturday   15 April 1989 I commenced duty at Mexborough P.S.
whwre upon I was transported to Doncaster P.S and there I joined
Serial 33 under the supervision of Sgt 222§ Atkin.


At 10am I was at Hillsborough Football Ground together with my
serial where we were briefed regarding the F.A Cup semi-final
between Nottingham Forest and Liverpool.


Shortly before commencing patrol we were again briefed by our
Serial Commander Inspector Killet.At 11.15am I commenced patorl
in company with PC 2576 McEwen ,we were on a static point between
the Travellers Rest public house and V/adsley Bridge upon Penistone
Road North where a large number of the Liverpool supporters were
expected.


At this time there were a few Liverpool fans wlking around,some
heading in the direction of the ground and some in the totally
opposite direction.In general the fans were in good spirits,
however many of them approached ae with only one question as to
the location of the nearest public house.Oii informing them that
they would be some distance away I was asked how they could catch
a Taxi to one.


As the kick off drew nearer the numbers On the street grew rapidly
yet the flow of the fans were still toward and from the ground.
There were quite a number of fans carrying ppenly packs of lager
and beer some even had bottles of cider and sherry in their hands.
I could see by their demeanour that alot of these fans were 'very
merry'.


At approximately 2.30pm coaches   began stopping on Penistone Rd
North and the supporters attempted to alight.I prvented about six
coaches from doing this as per my instructions and my actioHs
received hostility from the fans on board   as they thought this
action would make them late for the kick off.
Hillsborough Enquiry   cont..


There was now a strong flow of fans toward the ground and I could
see a number of ticket touts selling tickets as they were walking
along.The pace of the crowd increased as the minutes ticked by
and some of them were actually running to the ground.


I then grouped with my serial and we headed in the direction of the ground.
As we drew level with the Gate P.H a little way down Penistone Rd
there were a number of officers outside and I was informed there
had been some trouble inside the pub.We ascertained thai sit was now
under control.


We then proceeded to the ground at this time I was unaware of the
reason.As I arrived outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles there
were a number of other officers already present and §bout k mounted
officers.There were a small number of Liverpool fans outside .1
particularly remember one fan making a nuisance by continually
going up to the turnstiles and attempting to gain entry.At hhis time
it appeared that no one was being allowed into the ground.The
youth was continually requested to move away .A mounted officer
approached the youth and the officer told him to move back.The youth
somehow got under the horses belly and this made the Horse rear up
and its hoofs landedr’upon the youths leg.


We then formed a cordon but I was still unaware why.Then suddenly
I saw a number of Liverpool fans appear      from behind the feurnstiles
carrying some apparently unconscious persons.I immediately thought a
fight must be taking place.Someone then shouted that we should go
                          ✓
into the ground.Together with other officers I went into the area
behind the turnstiles and was confronted by people lying prostrate
all over the ground,they were obviously suffering from being crushed.



I went towards the tunnel enteance and a young girl came outand
collapsed in front of me.I stopped and took hold of her she was gasping for
as I comforted   her she calmed and began^breathing easier.I carried
to where the ambulances were gathering,as I did she kept muttering
"HAVE LIVERPOOL WON ".I could smell intoxicants on her breath. I then
left her with some medical sta£f,and returned to the tunnel entrance
where I   formed acordon with a couple of other officers not of my serial,
to prevent fans re-entering the terrace area.
Hillsborough Enquiry Cont..


I seemed to do this for a long time,and throughout I was
confronted by angry and disturbed Liverpool fans attempting
to break the cordon.They wece screaming and shouting at us
and some fought violently against us to gain access.Some were
genuinly trying to look for their reletives and friends but
there were also anumber just wanting to see the match totally
ignoring what was happening around them,and some just taking
advantage of iti   '


I still had no information as to what had happened,but eventually
the crowd got the message that the game had been cancelled and
the pressure we were under relented.


Gradually most of the crowd dispersed and I then regrouped with
my serial outside the ground. After a few minutes I returned to
the North Stand where we were debriefed.


Eventually I retired from duty at 8pm at Mexborough P.S.




                                             PC 2922
