                                                                  Kevan John GODLEY.
                                                                  Police Constable 60*
                                                                  South Yorkshire Police,
                                                                  Haamerton Hoad Police artation,
                                                                  Hillsborough,
                                                                  Sheffield.

 At 9.00am on Saturday 1 5 th April 1 9 8 9 I paraded in con^wa^r with other officers at the
Sheffield Wednesday Football ground,After a briefing by senior officers           myself and other
members of m j Serial (no 3) consumed a packed lunch in the Gym situated at the rear of the
North stand.At 11.15 am the serial took up its allocated position at the rear of the
South stand and my duty along witji other officers was to supervise the entrance of fans
through the turnstiles numbers 2 3 to 2 7 .
 At 2.27pm the same date I saw a youth jump over turnstile number 23 and run up into the
South stand.The youth had failed to show his ticket when requested by the ticket attendant
and nyself and PC 591 TONE gave chase to the youttuffhe youth was caught in the seated area
^|the South stand«He was ascertained to be
LIVERPOOL 1 *t.This youth was subsequently arrested for entering a designated sporting event
whilst drunk. Ifyself and PC TONE escorted                  to the Police room situated at the rear
of the Noth stand where after documentation his detention was authorised.
 At   2 .if 0 p m   the paperwork referring to___________ arrest and the Pocket Book entries were
completed in the Gym at the rear of the North stand.At 3.05pm I went to the mobile canteen
for a hot meal              had just returned to the Gym at 3.10pm when along with all other officers
present I was ordered out onto the pitch.0n entering the pitch area I could see a large
number of people standing in front of the fencing at the Leppings lane end and Police
officers were moving towards them.I also made w j way in that direction.
 I helped where possible and assisted one fan help another fan into the goal mouth area
where I ascertained he was alright apart from a twisted ankle*
 At 3.15pm I saw amari break away from this general crowd and he ran towards the Notts Forest
•^l« on the Spion Kop.I followed him and when I reached him he was shouting obscenties at
the Kop and gesticulating with his arms in a very aggresive manner.I ascertained him to be
                                                         this man was ejected by myself for being
in a designated sporting event whilst drunk and for inciting rival fans.
 As i escorted this              from the pitch I saw two makeshift stretchers being carried off
the field, they both appeared to have lifeless bodies on them as the heads of them wsmx
were covered with coat s.The stretchers were carried by a mixture of fans and Police Officers.
 At 3.25pm I returned to the pitch and again attended at the Leppings Land end.As I
approached a large body of people detached themselves from the crowd# and ran towards the
Spion Kop.
                                        2.
                              KEVAN JOHN OODLES’
                              POLICE CONSTABLE 60.


Together with other officers I gave chase and aanaged to grab hold of a young Ban who
was obviously very upset and was shouting threats towards the Spion Kop#I took the man
to one side and was able to calm him down.I then escorted him back to the halfway line
and watched him walk back towards the Leppings Lane end,At this time together with other
officers I was ordered to form acordon along the halfway line,After a few minutes together
with other officers I was ordered to exit the ground and attend at the rear of the Leppings
Lane stand.
 I attended in the enclosed area behind the Leppings Lane turnstiles and stood by there
until it was announced over the tannoy that the natch had been abandoned when we assisted
fans to leave the stand,During the m time that the fans were k leaving the stand all officers
present were subjected to verbal abuse from numerous people,At this tine we were greatly
assisted by twos liverpool fans who told other supportess which gate to leave by.
 After the stand had been evacuated I was ordered with other officers to the North stand
where after a short time we were spoken to by senior officers and stfeod down.
 As we left via the rear of the North stand myself and other *F* division officers were
asked to form a cordon to prevent press men from harassing emergency personnel who were
working at the rear of the North stand.This was done for a short time and the we were relieved
by other officerstwe stood down at 7.15pm*
