                                                                  Poj         M '/ U   q



                    j


                                                             Deponent Ann Adlington
                                                             Second Respondent
                                                             First affidavit
                                                             Six exhibits
                                                             Sworn 26th February 1999

                                                             IN THE HIGH COURT OF
                                                                  JUSTICE
                                                                            CO/582/99
QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION
CROWN OFFICE LIST




BETWEEN

                    The Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire Police
                                                                            Applicant
                                             and

                           The South Yorkshire Police Authority
                                                                             1st Respondent
                                             and

                                   Ann Marie Adlington
                                                                            2nd Respondent


                             Affidavit of Ann Marie Adlington


I, Ann Marie Adlington, Solicitor of the Supreme Court, of 1st Floor, Central Buildings, 41
North John Street, Liverpool L2 6RR, MAKE OATH and SAY;


       I am a Solicitor of the Supreme Court and the legal adviser to the Hillsborough Family
       Support Group (“HFSG”), a non-political organisation whose members are relatives
       the ninety-six victims of the Hillsborough football stadium disaster in Sheffield on 15th
       April 1989.

                                  The criminal proceedings

       In July 1998 I laid information in writing before the Leeds District Magistrate Court
       alleging that Bernard Murray and David Duckenfield (“the defendants”) were guilty of
       manslaughter of two victims of the disaster, re^resentativg.of^               and of
       misfeasance in public office; and in the case of Duckenfield alone, of attempting to
       pervert the course of justice. Summonses were issued in Leeds on 10th July 1998.
       Committal proceedings have been fixed to start in Leeds on 19th April.
The prosecution is not financed by public funds, but by donations, large and small, and
by fund-raising events. The HFSG is well known and supported in Liverpool, where
most of the victims lived, and elsewhere.

The interest o f the prosecution in contesting the application fo r judicial review

The prosecution does not wish to deprive the defendants of proper legal representation
in the criminal case. It was decided to make representations to the South Yorkshire
Police Authority (“the Authority”) on the subject-matter of this application for judicial
review after it became clear that the defendants had access to public funds on an
apparently unrestrained basis. They were seeking to make profligate use of public
money in a way which would not be tolerated by, for example, the legal aid authorities,
or by any other body responsible for the granting of public finance to individuals, and,
in doing so, they were imposing potential strains on the privately-raised finances of the ^
prosecution.

Although, so far, there have been only three short remand hearings in the Leeds Court,
on 24th August 1998, and 7th and 21st December, and the committal proceedings are
still two months away, I am not in the least surprised to learn from the Applicant’s
Grounds that “very significant sums have been incurred by way of defence costs”
(paragraph 10), and that “many tens of thousands of defence costs [s/c] have been
incurred” (paragraph 34). I have served a provisional committal bundle of some 38
witness statements, and various interviews, but any competent lawyer would have read
those within a few hours.

I do not know at the time of swearing this affidavit whether the defendants are
themselves applying for judicial review of the Authority’s decision; whether they have
applied for, or are applying for, legal aid; whether they will submit evidence; or even
whether they will definitely be represented at the hearing of the motion. However, I
believe that barristers’ clerks attended the meeting to fix the date on behalf of leading
counsel instructed by each defendant.
                          „                            ,           *UT            Pfto&CVToPs
                          The prosecution s arguments              _                  „ ,
                                              5                    ^
The prosecution will make the following submissions :

       (1) There is no power in a police authority to provide financial assistance for
       the defence or prosecution of persons charged with criminal offences;

       (2) The Applicant has no sufficient interest in the decisions of the Authority to
       make this application; alternatively, no sufficient interest in relation to some of
       the relief sought;

        (3) Relief should in any event be refused:

                (A)    because the Applicant and Authority have wrongly sought to
                       divorce the strict legal issue in the case from the underlying
                       facts, while choosing to put forward a few selected facts in an
                              attempt to place the defendants’ case for funding in a favourable
                              light;

                      (B)     because the Applicant’s publicly professed position has been
                              that he does not accept that the conduct alleged against the
                              defendants was of the character in respect of which he argues
                              now that financial assistance should be given;

                      (C)     because the Applicant’s approach, and the approach of the
                              Authority, to the question of funding the defendants’ defence
                              has been characterised by illegality, procedural irregularity and
                              irrationality for a year, thus rendering the grant of financial
                              assistance by “any previous decision”, in the first decision
                              sought to be reviewed, null and void;

                      I.              because the Applicant failed in February 1998 and
                              during the rest of the year to provide the Authority with full
                              information and all material facts about the merits of
                              applications for funding;

                      (C)             because the Applicant failed seriously in his duty of full
                              and frank disclosure when he made his ex parte application for
                              leave in this application;

                      (A)              because the misconduct of the South Yorkshire Police
                              over ten years in relation to investigations into the Hillsborough
                              disaster makes it important in the interests of justice that any
                              lawyer representing the defendants is wholly independent of that
                              force.
       The following facts will be relied on in support of those submissions.


         The procedural background to the present applications fo r judicial review

The decision to prosecute

8      In June 1997 Lord JusticeJStuart-Smith was appointed by the Home Secretary to
       conduct a “Scrutiny” intcroew evidence as to the circumstances of the disaster. He
       found in his report of February 1998 that there were no grounds for re-opening the
       Taylor Inquiry of 1989-90, nor for any other fresh inquiry. However, he re-affirmed
       trenchantly the original findings of the Taylor Inquiry. In the course of the “Scrutiny”,
       bjTperrnKsioiTofth^                   large numbers of statements of witnesses to the
       disaster were made known for the first time to the HFSG. Leading counsel was asked
       to advise whether sufficient evidence existed for the prosecution of anyone involved in
       the disaster, and, if so, what criteria should be applied. In due course, after he had
       advised, prosecutions were brought.

The South Sefton proceedings
9     I first laid information before South Sefton Magistrates Court in Liverpool on 24th
      June 1998, and summonses were issued there. The South Sefton court is referred to in
      the second decision impugned, on the second page of the Applicant’s Form 86A. On
       1st and 2nd July, the defendants invited the Crown Prosecution Service to take over the
      prosecutions under section 6 (2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 and
      discontinue them under section 23 (3) of that Act. As a separate exercise, written
      representations were made to the magistrates court on behalf of the defendants arguing
      that the summonses issued were ineffective to procure their attendance.

10   In a way that has since become characteristic of the defendants, judicial review
      proceedings were planned in relation to the summonses. The prosecution’s position
      was that, although the Sefton Court undisputably had jurisdiction to hear the committal
      proceedings, there was an argument that the summonses were ineffective unless the
      defendants submitted to the court’s jurisdiction. I wrote to the solicitors for the
      defendants, inviting them to submit to the jurisdiction of the court. They declined. To
      avoid the delay and expense that protracted judicial review proceedings would involve,
      I withdrew the summonses, and fresh summonses were taken out in Leeds, in the
      county of West Yorkshire, in which one of the defendants, Murray, lived, and where
      the court undoubtedly had jurisdiction to issue summonses.

11   I understand that the South Sefton court awarded defendant’s costs orders under
      section 16 of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 in favour of both defendants. It
      seems that the appropriate payment of costs pursuant to those orders is a subject on
      which the defendants have threatened another set of judicial review proceedings,
      referred to in the second decision listed in the Applicant’s Form 86A, and have asked
      the South Yorkshire Police Authority to pay for it. It appears, however, that the
      defendants have personally incurred no costs at all. It is not known whether the
      defendants propose that the question of providing financial assistance in relation to the
      South Sefton matter will be raised again, if the Applicant succeeds: the defendants are
      not applicants in the present proceedings.

The Leeds proceedings

12   On the first appearance in court, 24th August, it was argued for the defence that the
      court should take no action to advance the case while the defendants’ application to
     the Crown Prosecution Service was outstanding. The court agreed. Prosecution and
      defence made detailed representations to the CPS in August, September and October.

13   On 7th December, a date which had provisionally been allocated on 24th August for the
      start of two weeks of committal proceedings, a short hearing took place at the Leeds
      court. It had been retained as a remand date because it was hoped that the CPS would
     by then have announced its delayed decision. However, at the time of the hearing, the
      decision had been postponed again, and was now due to be made before Christmas.
      On 7th December, the prosecution expressed a desire for the committal hearing to start
      in February, assuming the case had not been discontinued. It was common ground
      that, since there had been a police investigation into the case in 1990, the new regime
      for committal proceedings introduced by the Criminal Procedure and Investigations
      Act 1996 did not apply. The defence could therefore insist that the prosecution call its
      witnesses to establish a prima facie case.
    14    The defence however made representations that leading and junior counsel had been
          instructed by each defendant, and neither leader could be available before 19th April
          1999. It was said by the defence that at least four weeks would be needed for the
          hearing. The magistrate agreed to fix 19th April.

    15    In the course of the CPS review, it had become clear to me that the defendants were
           receiving funds from the Authority. This was confirmed by Mr Daines in a broadcast
           interview on 30th November. He is reported to have said (Exhibit AMA/1. Divider A,
           page 10 produced below);

                  “.... it [the funding] was standard practice under the circumstances and
                  necessary to maintain morale among officers who have to make “split second
                  crucial decisions”. South Yorkshire Police Authority is meeting the cost of
                  legal advice for these long-retired police officers and will continue to do so
                  until this case is concluded.”

The decision o f the Crown Prosecution Service

16        On Friday 18th December 1998, the CPS announced that it would not take over and
           discontinue the prosecution. The prosecution had produced to the CPS in the course of
.        \its review a volume of material, much of it made known to the prosecution only in
           199S thfough the good offices of th^Heme-Seefetary. Some of this was produced to
           the Authority in a file with letters written by me on 22nd December and 5th January
           1999, a true copy of which is Exhibit AMA/1.

The hearing o f 21st December

    17    On Monday 21st December the defendants were present amid a retinue of eleven             r j>
          lawyers and ancillary staff for a remand hearing. At leas\twc^~of ffiese~were—— 5
          representing the present Applicant; all of them, however, were present at the expense
          of the South Yorkshire chargepayer. A meeting took place between the lawyers for
          the various parties in the precincts of the court before the hearing itself about 10 am.
          In the course of this meeting, Mr Michael Harrison QC, representing Murray, indicated
          that it was “99% certain” that an application for judicial review of the CPS decision,
          which had been announced only the previous working day, would be made.

    18    Mr Harrison also indicated that, if the judicial review application failed, an application
          would be made to the magistrate at some stage to dismiss the charges on the ground
          that the prosecution was abusing the process of the court. In his view, which the
          prosecution disputed, that hearing should take place before the committal proceedings,
          and, if the abuse of process application failed, the committal would still take at least
          four weeks.
    19    Contrary to the express assertions of Ms Varty in her grounds at paragraph 13, and to
           the evidence of Mr Daines in adopting them on behalf of the Applicant, there was no
           argument advanced to the court on this day, or on any other, by the defendants that the
           date of 19th April 1999 should be vacated. Ms Varty was present throughout, and
           heard Mr Harrison assert positively to the magistrate that he was making no
       application to vacate the date, because the date might act as a “lever” to ensure that
       the judicial review proceedings were heard promptly.                                  v.

20     The prosecution’s grounds at paragraphs 12, 13 and 36, sworn to as correct by Mr*'
       Daines, refer to a “tight timetable”, allegedly “imposed” on the parties. This is a
       travesty of the truth. The leisurely timetable has been extended with every indulgence
       to the defendants, while they have sought recourse to the CPS, and then for the ^
       convenience of counsel pending protracted and expensive old-style committal
       proceedings.

The announcement o f the defendants’proposal to seek judicial review o f the CPS decision

21    Two things transpired at the hearing which prompted me to challenge the legality and
      rationality of the decision of the Authority to provide financial assistance. The first was
      that leading counsel for Murray, Mr Harrison, told the magistrate in open court that an
      application for judicial review of the CPS decision would definitely be made, and
      would be lodged within the first two weeks of January. The 1% doubt about the
      matter, expressed outside court, had disappeared. ( Mr Manning, solicitor for Murray,
      had also made it clear in the weeks before the CPS decision was announced that he
      would seek judicial review of any adverse decision.)

22    At the specific request of counsel for the prosecution for information, junior counsel
      for Duckenfield, Mr Isaacs, also told the magistrate that he would be applying for
      judicial review of the decision at the same time.

23    The wisdom of the decision to mount a pure irrationality challenge may be judged
      against the following assertion of Winckworth and Sherwood, made on behalf of
      Duckenfield in the course of long written arguments on 9th October 1998 to the CPS,
      contending that they should intervene to stop the prosecution;

              “It is submitted on behalf of Mr Duckenfield that the power of the Director is
              far wider than a mere assessment of the evidence, and embraces a consideration
              of the wider public interest. The Director is well placed to assess where the
              public interest lies having had involvement in the case over a period of nine
              years and having seen the Taylor report, the Stuart-Smith report, the coroner’s
              verdict, the judgement of the Divisional Court and the review of evidence, and
              the advice of leading counsel obtained when the Director made the decision not
              to prosecute.”

24    The announcement by Mr Harrison and Mr Isaacs was material to an issue before the
      court, namely, whether the present Applicant, or the CPS, would make “voluntary
      disclosure” to the prosecution of statements and exhibits in their possession. It was to
      deal with this issue that the magistrate on 7th December had asked that the Chief
      Constable be represented on the next occasion, and for which Ms Varty had been
      instructed, and the prosecution had contemplated applying for a witness summons.
      The defendants had failed throughout the CPS review to support the prosecution’s
      application for disclosure of the papers held by the CPS and South Yorkshire police, a
      matter the prosecution had been pursuing for several months.
25     Previously, the Applicant had declined to make disclosure of materials in his
       possession on the ground that the CPS had given “guidance” to that effect, but he had
       indicated that consideration would be given to the question later, if the CPS should
       decline to intervene. The Chief Constable’s position on 21st December, expressed by
       Ms Varty, was that he might now decide that no “voluntary disclosure” would be made
       while a judicial review challenge to the CPS decision was pending, and there were
       indications to the parties from the CPS over the telephone that morning that they might
       feel obliged to take the same position. (In the event, the CPS did disclose voluntarily
       all evidence in their possession to the prosecution in January 1999. The Chief
       Constable has offered “voluntary disclosure” of the material in his possession on very
       expensive terms and has purported to reserve for himself the question whether material
       sought by the prosecution is relevant to the charges. The matter is unresolved.)

26     Having announced his announcement of a concluded intention to apply for judicial
       review, Mr Harrison also told the court that the CPS had indicated that it would
       provide some reasons, or the criteria it had applied, possibly on 24th December, or
       early in the New Year. Mr Manning had made a similar observation in the discussions
       outside court.

The Chief Constable’s ignorance o f the issues in the case

27     The second matter that arose, prompting me to challenge the funding decisions, was an
       observation made by Ms Varty to the magistrate. She suggested that the Chief
       Constable was not in a position to make decisions about “voluntary disclosure” for the
       following additional reason;

               “South Yorkshire Police are not privy to the nature of this prosecution and the
               issues within it and therefore are not able to say or agree what is or is not
               relevant.”

28     I therefore inferred from this hearing;

               (A) that leading and junior counsel and both solicitors for the defendants were
               certain they could obtain unquestioned access to the funds of the Authority;
               they could accordingly announce a concluded course of action to challenge by
               way of judicial review, on pure irrationality grounds, a decision of the CPS
               before they had received a statement of reasons, or of the basis on which that
               decision had been taken, even though that statement was expected soon ;

               (B) that, if Ms Varty was correct, nearly six months after the prosecution had
               been instituted, the defendants had not informed the Applicant, who had
               publicly supported his claim for funding, of the nature of the prosecution, or
               the issues arising in it; and

               (C) that the Chief Constable or his deputy had urged the Authority to commit
               thousands, potentially millions, of pounds to a defence of a case raising issues
               of which he was ignorant.                                                   '

The normal professional obligations in respect ofpublic funds
29     Any lawyer involved with public funds knows that to obtain them for the purposes of
       court proceedings, it is necessary to justify the claim, and to make detached
       professional assessments of the merits. I attach as Exhibit AMA/2 pp 196-200 a copy
       of The General Council of the Bar’s Guidelines which I have extracted from the Legal
       Aid Handbook 1998/9 (Sweet and Maxwell 1998), indicating the professional
       standards of good practice appropriate to applications for legal aid. The hearing of 21st
       December made it clear to me that the defendants, and their lawyers, enjoyed a much
       more luxurious and privileged service, and that the Applicant would support any
       applications made on behalf of the defendants and their lawyers to take full advantage
       of that facility.

30     It further appears now that, in contrast to legal aid arrangements, the Authority has not
       made any stipulation that either of the defendants should make any down-payment or
       personal contribution, although both retired with pensions intact, on “health grounds”,
       in 1991 and 1992. It appears that the Authority is paying not only the defendants’ full
       costs, but all their “expenses” and “disbursements” as well. (See Exhibit ID1 to
       Daines affidavit and letter of 10th February 1999, from Garretts, part of Exhibit ID 2)

The history o f the financial assistance

31     I produce as Exhibit AMA/3 pp201-215 copies of documents I believe to form part of
       the Authority’s public records of this matter.


32     It will be seen that on 1st August 1997 AMA/3. page 202. the Authority made available
        £500,000 for the purposes of legal costs in relation to the Authority itself, the Chief
        Constable, and serving and retired police officers in the context of the “Scrutiny” of
       Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. No reference is made to the legal power, if any, under
        which such assistance to individuals might be given. The power to grant assistance was
        delegated to the “Clerk and Treasurer” (one person), in consultation with the Chief
        Constable. At this stage, the Chief Constable was then represented in the “Scrutiny”
       by Winckworth and Pemberton (now known as Winckworth Sherwood). Winckworth
        and Sherwood now represent the defendant Duckenfield.

The 1998funding decisions

33     On 27th February 1998, nine days after the publication of the Stuart-Smith report, a
       decision in principle to provide financial assistance was made, but not in favour of any
       named officer AMA/3. pp204-205. The minutes record that the decision was taken in
       accordance with the 1987 Circular, when the 1998 Circular had in fact replaced it
       eleven days before. Hammond Suddards, the solicitors for the Applicant, who acted
       for him throughout all the enquiries into the disaster from 1989 to 1992, and who have
       represented the Applicant at least since July 1998 in relation to documents and
       statements retained by them, have insisted to me that they did not advise the Authority
       in February 1998. However, the Chief Constable himself told a press conference on 5th
       February 1999 that he stood by the original decision to fund the defendants and that
       the decision to fund was taken upon legal advice. He did not specify whether such
legal advice was given in August 1997 when Winckworth and Pemberton were
advising him or in February 1998.

The minutes of 27th February 1998 AMA/3. page 204 record :

        “That in the light of the findings of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s inquiry and his
       comments on the outcome, members do not believe there is any evidence to
       cause them to reconsider the Authority’s previous view, and remain of the view
       that the officers acted in good faith.”

The minutes do not record whether the Authority considered also that the defendants
had also “exercised their judgment reasonably”, a requirement of the 1987 Circular,
which the Applicant seems to accept is, on his argument, part of the proper test (See
Grounds, paragraph 22.2 and 23.3 (sic). For a reason which is unexplained, the
minutes record that it was resolved that the decisions, involving perhaps millions of
pounds, were to be delegated to be taken in private by a single unelected official, the
Clerk and Treasurer. It will be argued that this delegation was unlawful.

Section 101 of the Local Government Act 1972 provides that an Authority can
delegate any of its functions to an officer. It will be argued that consideration of
applications for financial assistance in legal proceedings cannot be said to be a
“function”.

Section 100G(2) of that Act requires the Police Authority to maintain a list of powers
delegated to officers stating the officer’s title, unless the arrangements for discharge of
such powers are made for a specified period not exceeding six months.

The initial decision to delegate the power to grant assistance, taken on 1st August
1997, did not specify a period. Similarly the decision taken on 27th February 1998 to
delegate consideration of applications to the Clerk and Treasurer, is open-ended. I
produce as AMA/4 pp216-220 the Authority’s “Scheme of Delegation”. This contains
no reference to delegation of powers under Section 6 Police Act 1996, or Section 111
Local Government Act 1972. Neither does the scheme contain any reference to the
Home Office Circulars.

I have not seen the application for financial assistance by Duckenfield, approved by the
Clerk and Treasurer in March 1998, nor that by Murray in June 1998, to which Mr
Daines and Ms Varty refer at paragraph 9 of the Grounds. Neither defendant faced
any charge until June 1998. No explanation is offered by the Applicant as to why
funding was promised and agreed for Duckenfield three months before criminal !//c.
proceedings were instituted and the character of the accusation made known.              ^

On 25th September 1998,1 received a letter from Miss Maureen Oades, Deputy Clerk
and Solicitor to the Authority, following a query I had made by telephone about the
power to delegate. AMA/3. page 207. On 30* October 1998, the Authority resolved
that any future applications for legal assistance should be referred to the full Authority.
AMA/3 d208
41      On 11th December 1998 receipt of a request for “further financial assistance” was
        noted by the Authority. AMA/3. p209 It is to be presumed that this had been sent on
       behalf of one or both of the defendants, but no reference is made to it in the Grounds
        or in the evidence of Mr Daines. The “special meeting of the Authority” referred to
       would consider “further matters”. I believe that the request that had been received
       may relate to the South Sefton matter, referred to in the second decision challenged as
       listed in the Applicant’s Form 86A. The second may relate to an application for
       judicial review of the impending CPS decision, should it prove adverse to the
       defendants. It is recorded in the minutes that:

               “The Authority stood ready to give further support.”

42     The Grounds of the present application record in paragraph 14 that applications were
       made by the defendants on 22nd and 23rd December for financial assistance to cover a
       judicial review of the decision of the CPS not to take over and discontinue the
       prosecution. These applications have not been produced.

43     On 22nd December 1998, and in greater detail on 5th January 1999,1 objected to the
       funding in letters to the Authority. (Exhibit AMA/1 is the copy of the file of materials
       I gave to the Authority on 5th January 1999. It includes the earlier letter.) It will be
       seen that, although the Authority chose to separate the strict legal issue from the facts,
       my objection was for the most part directed to the facts of the case, and the flawed
       procedures and decisions employed in granting the funding in 1998.

44     I produce as Exhibit AMA/5 pp221-240 relevant correspondence between 22nd
       December 1998 and 5th February 1999.

The events leading to the separation o f the legal issues from the factual and procedural
issues
45     On 31st December 19981 received notification that there would be a meeting of the
       Police Authority on 8th January at which the Authority would be asked to give
       consideration to further requests from Messrs Duckenfield and Murray for financial
       assistance in connection with legal proceedings which they intended to take.

46     I immediately sought written confirmation that my letter of 22nd December would be
        placed before the members at that meeting. Maureen Oades replied by facsimile on 5th
        January simply stating that my letter of 22nd December “and a matter of a report to the
        Authority” were under consideration. I responded immediately by facsimile pointing
        out that I was still awaiting confirmation that my letter of 22nd December would be put
        before the members of the Authority in advance of their meeting on 8th January.
        AMA/5 p 224

47     In the meantime I had prepared further written representations and documentation
        (Exhibit AMA1) which I wished to draw to the attention of the individual members of
        the Authority. However, the only address I had for members was that of the Authority
        itself. On 5th January, therefore, I spoke to Maureen Oades by telephone, and told her
        that I intended to deliver the material to the offices of the Police Authority the
        following day and asked her to confirm that she would distribute the same to individual
        members. She agreed to do this.
   I delivered the documents personally at approximately 11.15 am on Wednesday 6th
   January. Delivery was accepted by a young woman from Maureen Oades’ office who
   stated that Ms Oades wished to know whether I would like her to post the material to
   members. She clearly had not anticipated the sheer volume of the documentation. I
   pointed out that in view of the nature and volume of the documentation, it would not
   be practical to send the material to members by post. My concern was that members
   should study the documents in advance of the meeting on 8th January. I suggested
   that, unless the material could be delivered by courier to members that day, a safer
   alternative would be for Ms Oades to telephone each member to request them to
   attend the meeting on 8th January in sufficient time to enable them to read the
   documents.

   Also on that day, Trevor Hicks, Chairman of the Hillsborough Family Support Group
   wrote to Ms Oades requesting that he be allowed to address the meeting on 8th
   January. She responded to him by facsimile timed at 18.55 that evening stating that
   the requests for financial consideration were to be considered at a meeting of the
   Authority to be held on 15th January.

   She also sent me a facsimile to this effect at 18.57 whilst further stating that members
   would be provided with a copy of my written representations in advance of the
   meeting on 15th January.

attempts to deliver factual material to the Authority’s members

   I telephoned Ms Oades the following day (7th January) and asked her to confirm that
   my material would be distributed to members at the meeting on 8th January. In this way
   members could consider the papers over the weekend. She stated that she could not
   confirm this. When asked the reason for this she stated that she did not want to
   circulate my material in advance of her report which she was in the process of
   compiling. I objected to this stance and pointed out that this was contrary to the basis
   upon which I had left the documentation at her offices. I asked her to confirm that she
   had no objection to my retrieving the documentation to arrange personal delivery of
   the same to members. I pointed out that I would not have left the material with her
   had I known she intended to withhold it from members. The material was clearly
   addressed to individual members. I stated that I would attend her offices to reclaim
   the documentation the following day. She was in agreement with this.

   On 8th January I travelled to the Authority’s headquarters in Barnsley with Margaret
   Aspinall and Doreen Jones who each lost a child in the disaster. We arrived at
   headquarters just after 11 am having previously received written notification that the
   meeting would start at 12 am. Upon arrival I was informed that the meeting had in
   fact started at 10.30 am.

   I reclaimed my documents and asked that a message be passed to the Chair of the
   Authority, Mr Swindell, that I, Margaret Aspinall and Doreen Jones would like a short
   meeting with him. Margaret Aspinall and Doreen Jones had previously spoken to him
   in Blackpool on 6th November at a conference of the Association of Police Authorities.
Mr Swindell sent a message to confirm that he could meet us for a few minutes during
a refreshment break.

We were asked to wait behind a partition in the reception area. Shortly afterwards I
observed two women leave the building for what appeared to be a cigarette break. I
suspected that they were members of the Police Authority. I therefore suggested to
Margaret Aspinall and Doreen Jones that they approach them and enquire as to their
identity. If they were indeed members then Margaret Aspinall and Doreen Jones
should hand them both a copy of my representations. It transpired that they were
indeed members of the Authority. Both accepted a file of my representations.

A short time later we were led to a private room by the Clerk and Treasurer, Mr
Wilkinson. He stressed that Mr Swindell was restricted as to what he could discuss. I
stated that it was not my intention to discuss the merits of my representations. I was
simply concerned to ensure that members were in possession of all relevant facts
before they reached a decision on the funding issue.

Mr Swindell, in the presence of Mr Wilkinson and Ms Oades spoke briefly to the three
of us. I mentioned my concern that Ms Oades could not confirm when the members
would receive my representations and that I was anxious to ensure that they had
sufficient time to study them given their sheer volume.
                                                                        •          th
Margaret Aspinall and Doreen Jones (whom Mr Swindell clearly recognised from 6
November) expressed the concern that they did not wish to appear vengeful. They
were not saying that the defendants should not receive legal representation but they
were concerned that they appeared to have been given “a blank cheque” by the
Authority. Doreen Jones pointed out that the defendants could apply for legal aid.
She remarked upon the unfairness of legal proceedings since the disaster in that the
legal costs of officers and official bodies had always been paid from public funds in
contrast to the families who had always had to pay their own legal costs and expenses.
In particular, families had to pay for legal representation at the inquests. She also
urged Mr Swindell to allow Trevor Hicks to address the meeting the following week.
Mr Wilkinson undertook to circulate my representations to all members who were
present that day and to arrange delivery to those members who were not in attendance.
Doreen Jones suggested that it might be appropriate for us to enter the meeting room
and distribute the papers personally so that we could “put a face to a name”. This was
agreed on condition that we did not enter into any discussion with members.

59                            Upon leaving the building I checked the Public Notice
                              board to ascertain the precise time of commencement of
                              the meeting. I was concerned that I may have been
                              deliberately misled. I was surprised to note that the
                              Authority had failed to post a Public Notice in respect of
                              the meeting that day. However, there was a Notice
                              displayed concerning a meeting which had been held on
                               11th December. The final item at that meeting had been
                              “Financial Assistance for officers in legal proceedings”.
                              I later requested a copy of the minutes of that meeting.
                                      These minutes include that referred to in paragraph 41.


60     At 19.12 that evening Ms Oades sent a facsimile to Trevor Hicks stating that the
       members had agreed that he address the meeting on 15th January. She stipulated that
       his address should not exceed 15 minutes in length and asked him to provide Mr
       Wilkinson with the text of the address in advance of the meeting. She pointed out that
       the Authority had also agreed to offer Messrs Murray and Duckenfield the opportunity
       to address them.

The postponement o f the discussion about funding

61     On 13th January Mr Wilkinson wrote to me stating that my representations would be
       considered by the Authority at a meeting to be arranged. On the same day he also
       wrote to Trevor Hicks stating that the Authority would not now be in a position to
       consider the funding issue on 15th January. He further stated that the Authority now
       had to consider whether it would be appropriate to hear representations not only from
       him and the former officers, but also from the Chief Constable. If it was so decided
       then it would be necessary to arrange a date convenient to the Authority and all
       parties.

62     On 26th January, Garretts wrote to Trevor Hicks informing him that the funding issue
       would be considered at a meeting on 5th February. Garretts set out the procedure to
       be followed at the meeting and the order of submissions. It was stated that the Chief
       Constable’s submissions would be heard after the other parties. Garretts sought
       outline submissions by 1lam on Tuesday 2nd February and any additional material to be
       served by 29th January.

63     On 29th January I notified Garretts that the only additional material I wished to serve
       was as follows:-

              i)      Copy note of meeting on 25th November 1997 between Lord Justice
              Stuart-Smith and Richard Wells, former Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
              Police;
              ii)     Copy extract of transcript of meeting on 1st December 1997 between
              Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and former Superintendent Denton. AMA/5
              pp237A-F
64    On 1st February Garretts wrote again to Trevor Hicks to draw “some important
      matters” to his attention. They stated that their letter of 26th January should not have
      included reference to the Chief Constable. They also stated that the meeting would be
      limited to considering whether the Authority had the legal power to provide the
      assistance sought and so submissions should be restricted to this issue. If it be
      concluded that such a power existed, the decision whether it should exercised “to
      confirm the assistance being given for the criminal proceedings and/or to grant
      assistance for possible judicial review proceedings” would be considered at a later
      meeting.

65    It was my clear impression that if it was decided that no legal power to fund existed
       then that would be the end of the matter. The letter of 1st February from Garretts
       AMA/5. pp238-9 announced an attempted separation of the legal issue from the facts
       of the case. I believe that this decision was taken by the Authority in consultation with
       the Applicant. The prosecution had presented argument, of course, on the totality of
       the issues arising, concentrating on the factual issues. On 5th February the Authority
       did indeed restrict its consideration to the pure legal issue.

66     I produce as Exhibit1AMA/6 pp241-278 copies of press releases and correspondence
       from 5th February to the present. It will be seen that on 10th February 1999 AMA/6.
       p270-3 I asked both Hammond Suddards and Garretts by facsimile to defer the
       application for judicial review until the factual questions surrounding the applications
       had been resolved.

The Applicant ’s refusal to disclose the prosecution’s case to the single judge

67     I also asked Hammond Suddards on 10th February to make full disclosure to the single
       judge of our arguments and facts. They refused to include the papers the prosecution
       had sent to them and the Authority on the funding issue, and refused to draw the
        attention of the single judge, who was asked to consider the grant of leave as a matter
        of “extreme urgency”, to the representations I had made. AMA/6. pp272. Hammond
        Suddards have acknowledged that they received my letter the day before application
       was in fact lodged on 11th February, but chose not to meet my request. AMA/6. p267-
        8 .1 regard this as a violation of proper professional standards. Those who apply ex
       parte for relief have a duty to make full and frank disclosure, especially where they
        claim “extreme urgency” and “national importance” as their justification for asking a
       judge to grant them leave very quickly.

68     No documents in support of the application were disclosed to me until late in the
       afternoon of Friday 12th February, the day leave was granted, when I received by
       facsimile a copy of the Grounds and affidavit of Mr Daines. On Monday 15th, I
       received also copies of the exhibits, and on that day submitted a written argument to
       the Crown Office, drafted by leading counsel, suggesting that leave should not be
       granted. I did not know until two days later that leave had been granted on the papers
       on 12th February by a judge who had not been given our material by the Applicant, or
       even a summary of it.

        The legal power o f a police authority to provide funds fo r a criminal defence

69     The prosecution supports the argument of the Authority that there is no legal power in
       a police authority to provide financial assistance to persons facing prosecution. The
       Applicant has sought to argue his case in press releases, one of which, issued on 8
       February, quoted him in his formal capacity as Chief Constable, when he announced
       the decision to apply for judicial review, as saying;

               “I hold a very firm view, as do our legal advisers, that there is a firm basis in
               law, backed by a long list of precedents, for these officers to have their legal
               costs paid.”

70     The Applicant’s Grounds, and Mr Daines, assert (Grounds, paragraph 20);
       “...Pursuant to their duty under section 6 of the Police Act 1996, and its
       predecessor section 4 of the Police Act 1964, which is in very similar terms,
       police authorities nation-wide have as a matter of practice over many decades
       granted financial assistance to police officers to defend legal proceedings in
       appropriate cases.”

Garretts asserted in their letter of 10th February 1999 (Exhibit ID 1 to the affidavit of
Mr Daines) in a way that suggested that they were speaking with direct knowledge of
the practices of police authorities;

       “The Chief Constable contends that the SYPA, and indeed all police
       authorities, did have a power to grant financial assistance to officers facing
       prosecution. This view accords with a practice which police authorities have
       adopted for some 60 years. This practice appears to have been endorsed by the
       Home Office in two Circulars (number 77 of 1987 and Number 4 of 1998),
       although we have now received a letter from the Home Office which appears to
       cast some doubt on the matter.”

I have asked Hammond Suddards and Garretts, solicitors for the Applicant and
Authority respectively, to provide me with this “long list” and evidence of practice, but
they have not done so, beyond a bare assertion that the practice and the list exist, and a
reference to a practice in the Royal Commission on the Police of 1962, which existed
before the development of the modem legal aid system.

Garretts sought on 18th February to justify their assertion AMA/6. pp256-257 about
police authority practice by referring to the Royal Commission of 1962 and the letters
from senior police officers produced by Mr Daines. They made the following revealing
remark;

       “Our comments on this practice were of particular relevance to the grant of
       leave and expedition.”

I have seen no evidence as to:
        any procedures for the implementation of such an entrenched practice;
        any mechanism for a tendering system;
        guidelines as to how funding is to be applied for, enforced, or controlled;
        the basis on which lawyers’ fees may be calculated, paid, challenged, and
        monitored;
        whether it is permissible to pay for all a defendant’s costs, “expenses” and
        “disbursements”, as in this case, irrespective of his means. (See Exhibit ID 2 to
        the affidavit of Mr Daines, letter of Garretts of 10th February 1999.)

In this case, as appears below, the decisions on the facts of individual applications
appear to have been taken in 1998 by a police authority employee, rather than its
members, in private, and on unknown terms and conditions.

My own enquiries tell me that this practice is quite unknown in the Metropolitan
police, who have no police authority in the ordinary sense, of course, and I am
informed that the practice does not prevail in Merseyside. The “extreme urgency” and
“national importance” claimed for the application for judicial review suggests that v£. ^ ,
there is a number of officers in receipt of public funds from police authorities in c p ^ al    i
pending prosecutions, whose entitlements need to be established at once.
Alternatively, the reference to “extreme urgency” might mean that there are
                                                                                  eX^jN
applications for financial assistance by other defendants currently held in abeyance
pending the outcome of the present proceedings.

No examples have been cited, however, by the Applicant or the Authority from their
own experience in South Yorkshire, nor by the Police Superintendents Association or
Association of Chief Police Officers. (Exhibit ID 4 to Mr Daines’ affidavit). Mr
Daines does not provide his curriculum vitae but officers of his seniority have often
served in other forces and have very wide experience of them from which they can
usually cite modem instances.

I have asked                 a solicitor with Russell Jones and Walker of Sheffield about i^gy-
the alleged practice. He and his firm frequently represent police officers, and are the      i
principal solicitors used, nationwide, by the Police Federation. He has not come across ^
the practice. Leading counsel instructed by me has, however, heard anecdotally of « \ pT i
isolated instances of the funding of criminal defences by police authorities outside       ^
London, but only on an exceptional and very occasional basis, involving serious crime,
which does not justify the suggestion that a “practice” exists. In both the
Metropolitan and Merseyside forces, policemen accused of crime are defended, I
understand, either on legal aid or at the expense of the Police Federation.
                                                                                          0j-M
The defendants were too senior in rank to be represented by the Police Federation, but         '
I note that the letter from the Police Superintendents Association of 8th February 1999, UW
while asserting that the matter is of “national importance for the Police Service”, fails        \Ji
to set out its own rules, policies and practices in funding its members’ legal costs. I     / v *0
believe that that Association has power to fond the legal costs of its past and present
members, and I am making enquiries of the Association about it. I am informed that . ytt
that Association paid for the representation of some senior officers at the main inquestv
into the deaths at Hillsborough in 1990-1. I believe that the South Yorkshire Police
Authority at that time declined to fund the costs of legal representation.

I note that it is alleged by Mr Daines and Ms Varty in the Grounds of the application
that:

       “If it be correct in law that a police authority has no power to grant financial
       assistance to police officers who subsequently face a private prosecution arising
       from their conduct when acting in the course of their duties, it will have very
       significant repercussions with regard to the recruitment of police officers,
       discipline and effective policing.”

Mr Daines goes further in his affidavit at paragraph 10;

       “It takes little imagination to think of how the threat of private prosecution
       may be used to intimidate where police officers do not have the confidence that
       they will receive police authority assistance should any such threat be realised.”
82    I have seen no evidence of any kind to suggest that problems of recruitment, discipline
       and effective policing have arisen in the Metropolitan or Merseyside police forces, or
       the other forces where police officers have no recourse to such financial protection
       against private or other prosecutions. Unless some such evidence is produced, the
       court will be asked to disregard these melodramatic remarks.

Locus standi

83    This action is brought not by the defendants whose applications were refused, but by
      the Chief Constable of the force in which they served. Neither defendant now lives in
      the county of South Yorkshire. In bringing this Action it cannot be said that the Chief
      Constable is promoting or protecting the interests of the inhabitants of the South
      Yorkshire area. Submissions will be presented in the Skeleton Argument that the
      Applicant does not have a sufficient interest in the subject-matter of the decision
      reviewed; alternatively, that he does not have sufficient interest in the decision of the
      Authority to refuse to pay for the defendants’ various applications for judicial review
      or the refusal to pay for the defendants to challenge “any other decision of any court,
      authority or body arising from such prosecutions”.

84    It cannot possibly be said that, so fragile is the morale of the officers of the South
       Yorkshire police, discipline and recruitment will suffer unless the ordinary constable is
       reassured (a) that the defendants will be guaranteed their entire costs, expenses and
       disbursements of a judicial review of a CPS decision, brought on pure irrationality
       grounds, and (b) that they will not have to suffer the indignity of reliance on the legal
       aid scheme.

The underlyingfacts

85    If it is held that there may be circumstances in which financial assistance could be made
       to police officers facing prosecution, relief ought nonetheless to be refused because on
       the facts of this case, no reasonable police authority could grant assistance on the basis
       of the test which the Applicant argues should be applied, namely, “if he [the
       policeman] acts in good faith and exercises his judgment reasonably.”(See Grounds,
       citing the 1987 and 1998 Circulars, and the letter of the Police Superintendents’
       Association, Exhibit ID 4 to the affidavit of Mr Daines)

86    The Applicant, while (a) failing to inform the single judge of all material factors in his
      application, and (b) suggesting that the legal decision can be divorced from its
      underlying facts, nonetheless advances a number of selected and partial arguments,
      assertions, and assumptions about facts, which he asks the court to regard as relevant
      to the decision:

               Paragraph 7 of the affidavit is predicated on the basis that the defendants did
               indeed “act in good faith in preforming their duties”;

               Paragraph 12 of the affidavit refers to “the way that David Duckenfield and
               Bernard Murray have been treated” which will be “of much concern within the
               force” (a reference obviously intended to suggest that the defendants have been
               unfairly treated);
       Paragraph 5 of the grounds says that the CPS “plainly” decided not to
       prosecute “on the basis that there was no realistic prospect of conviction”, and
       paragraph 28 asserts that

                “On some three occasions the DPP has declined to prosecute these
               officers. This must be on the basis that the prospects of success do not
               justify a prosecution. Yet the private prosecutor is subject to no such
               restraints and the prosecution continues. It is contended that the policy
               interest in providing financial assistance to officers who face
               prosecutions where there is no or little realistic prospect of success are
               overwhelming.”

The true and detailed facts, as known to me, are set out in the material I provided to
the Authority on 5th January 1999 in Exhibit AMA/1. and which were provided to the
Applicant. They undermine seriously the factual claims and assumptions made in the
Grounds. I had to struggle to get them into the hands of the members of the Authority,
and they were not disclosed by the Applicant at the leave stage. In that material, I also
set out most of the arguments summarised above. The facts show, inter alia, th a t:

       (A)            The Applicant, with presumably the support of the Authority,
               has always accepted that the deaths of the 96 victims were caused by          \\J n
               negligence (letter of 5th January 1999, paragraphs 9 to 10);

       (B)     The Applicant has accepted, or at least has never challenged, the                /y L,
               findings of Lord Taylor that the negligence of which the defendants are            ^
               accused was “a blunder of the first magnitude”, and an immediate cause
               of death; (5th January, paragraphs 8 to 10, AMA/1. and Dividers C and
               D)
       (A)             The negligence of which the defendants are accused cannot on ^^
               any view of the facts be attributed to a “split-second decision”.(AMA/1, q J                '
               letter of 5th January 1999, Divider C and D)                                                    jj

       (B)             The Police Complaints Authority directed in July 1991 that the                 s-
               defendants should face charges of neglect of duty. (At that time,
               Duckenfield had been suspended from duty for two years. Two weeks
               after the PCA direction, Duckenfield, though suspended, went on “sick
               leave”. The Chief Constable retired him from the force on “medical
               grounds” in November. The charge against him therefore lapsed. It
               was then considered unfair to proceed against Murray Next year,
               Murray, too, retired from the force on “health grounds”.)

        (B)             The failure of the Applicant to disclose the fact of the       \
               disciplinary proceedings on his application for leave in this case is in ,'           GpX
               itself a most serious failure of the duty to make full and frank
               disclosure.
                                                                               4
       (B)             The negligence of the defendants and, vicariously, the
               Applicant, was much worse than was presented to the Taylor Inquiry,
               Crown Prosecution Service, Coroner’s inquest and Police Complaints
               Authority. The South Yorkshire Police, with the advice of their
               lawyers, Hammond Suddards, deliberately edited out of the statements
               of over a hundred junior officers factual criticisms of senior officers,
               facts about previous policing of the ground the year before, and other
               factual material discreditable to the defendants and the force. That force
               ensured, with the connivance of the West Midlands Police, that only the
               edited, uncritical versions, were sent to the CPS, Police Complaints
               Authority, and Coroner. AMA/1. Divider G

       m              The lie told by David Duckenfield, when it was apparent to him
               that deaths had occurred and a judicial inquiry would be inevitable, was
               not relayed just to Mr Kelly and Mr Kirton of the Football Association,
               but much more widely and systematically as the disaster became clear
               (see AMA/1. Divider E).

       (B)            Even the single lie attributed to Duckenfield was described by
               Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, whose report the Authority referred to in
               agreeing in principle to applications for financial assistance in February
               1998, as a “disgraceful lie”.

       (B)             It has been an important part of the prosecution’s presentation
               to the CPS in 1998, and the Authority in December 1998 and January
               1999, that the CPS, PC A and Coroner were misled about the strength
               of the case, and that the West Midlands police, as has now become
               clear, was not independent in assisting the four investigations in this
               case. In reality, that force regarded itself as the agent of the South
               Yorkshire police in the collection, disposal and supply of information.
               (This argument was developed in detail in the file sent to the Authority
               on 5th January (see AMA/L Divider FT)

The matters set out in this file will be relied on in support of the arguments set out at
paragraph 6 (3), above, and will be developed in a skeleton argument.

The prosecution will contend that all these matters should have been considered by the
Authority compendiously. It is clear from the correspondence in AMA/5 pp221-240
that neither the Applicant nor the Authority wanted a discussion or resolution of the
facts on 5* February, in spite of the serious allegations that the prosecution makes
against the South Yorkshire police, to which it has received absolutely no answers.

The long paragraph towards the end of the letter from Garretts of 18th February 1999
AMA/6. page 257 demonstrates the possible consequences of this precipitate
application for judicial review. Garretts themselves recognise that a decision in favour
of the Applicant on the legal point will lead not only to a further debate about the
merits of the defendants’ application before another meeting of the Authority, but in all
probability to a further expensive, cumbersome judicial review application of the same
subject-matter. This will happen because the Authority will then have to make a
       controversial judgment on the facts, which may well be the subject of further challenge
       by way of judicial review, brought by one party or the other.

91    On the other hand, a decision adverse to the Applicant will, in view of the claimed
      “national importance” and “extreme urgency” of the case, no doubt lead to appeals
      when, in the submission of the prosecution, there can be no case for funding the
      defendants’ costs, expenses and disbursements on the facts, in the light of the test
      proposed by the Applicant himself.

The importance o f resolving factual and procedural issues in the Divisional Court

92    It will be submitted that the only way in which this legal tangle can now be avoided is
       if the High Court grapples with the procedural impropriety and irrationality arguments
       at the hearing of the motion in this case.

93    I understand that it was represented to the Crown Office by the Applicant and the
       Authority on 22nd February that the matter was of such compelling urgency that it had
      to be heard in the week of 12th April, since the committal was fixed for 19th April. I
      understand further from the clerk to leading counsel that other cases listed for that
      week have had to be removed from the list.
                                                          •              •
94    In the circumstances, I draw to the court’s attention  that I received a letter on 25 th
      February, in response to an enquiry of mine, from Mr Manning on behalf of Murray,
       arguing that, since the matter will have to go back to the Authority after the Divisional
       Court’s decision in any event, he will apply on Monday 1st March for that committal
       date to be vacated. I am told that the clerk to leading counsel instructed by Walker
      Morris attended the fixing meeting at which the problems of week of 12th April were
       discussed, and after which that week was allocated to this case, but that the Crown
      Office was not told that application was to be made to vacate 19th April in any event.

96    It may be necessary for me to swear further evidence in reply to affidavits expected
      from the Authority, and, perhaps, from the defendants, and to deal with the results of
       requests I am making, some of them under Order 24, Rule 10, about documents and
      facts set out in the Applicant’s evidence. On 10th February 1998 (ID 2), Garretts said
       that

              “In order to facilitate an early hearing date, SYPA will endeavour to put in its
              evidence in reply within 7 days of service of the application.”

97    As at 26th February 1999,15 days from the grant of leave, and 16 from lodging of the
      application, I have not received it, and am unable to deal with matters they will
      advance.



SWORN by the above named Ann Marie Adlington th is               day of February 1999 at
Liverpool in the County of Merseyside
Before m e .................................................

               Solicitor/Commissioner for Oaths



Name:
Address:
