OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                           Date and time raised                              Number


Title                                                                                                           ’i \ KLL J
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action          „ __
                                                                                                             Receiver




Document registere^/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                             ^    gyv^                         Indexer




                                                                                                         Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                               Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                    O/M         SIO




Further action No(s)                                                                                           Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
 1         9       9        1




 INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS
  OF THE VICTIMS OF THE
  HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL
 STADIUM DISASTER ON THE
     15th APRIL 1989




SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF
SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL




                                \




Ref:   AAW/DEH

Messrs. Keeble Hawson,
Old Cathedral Vicarage,
St. James' Row,
Sheffield.
SI 1XA
                 INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE VICTIMS OF THE

                    ’
                    ■ HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL STADIUM DISASTER                             ;

                              ON THE 15th APRIL 1989




                SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL




INTRODUCTION

 1.    These submissions relate only to the possibility of the Jury being

directed to consider a verdict of unlawful killing.      The submissions below

are developed both generally in order to make relevant submissions of law

and specifically with a view to showing that Sheffield City Council and the

Council's employees could not possibly be regarded as persons who unlawfully

killed any of the deceased.   Sheffield City Council do not presume to enter

the debate that will no doubt arise as to whether any other person, whether

corporation or natural human being, might, or might not, possibly be regarded
                                                                                 •   \

as one who unlawfully killed the deceased, and so far as that issue goes

Sheffield City Council take up a neutral position.




POSSIBLE BASIS FOR VERDICT OF UNLAWFUL KILLING




2.     For the purposes of these Inquests a verdict of unlawful killing would

be justified if the Jury were satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that some

person or persons (whom the Jury must under no account name or identify)

had brought about the death of the deceased,    or some or any of them, as a

result of committing the offence of manslaughter.      It would be improper to

direct the Jury to consider the possibility of a verdict of unlawful killing

based upon the offence of murder having been committed, as there is no




                                    -   1   -
 evidence at all to show that any person caused the death of the deceased

 through some unlawful act or that any person intended to kill or to cause

 grievous bodily harm.    Neither the actus reus nor the mens rea of murder

 is established on the evidence before this Jury.




3.      If the Jury are to be directed to consider a verdict of unlawful

killing on the basis that any or some or all of the deceased died as a

consequence of manslaughter then the Jury must be warned in terms that they

are being directed to consider whether a criminal offence of manslaughter

had been committed.    They must be given the appropriate direction as to the

standard of proof for manslaughter,   and the appropriate direction is the

simple one that they should be satisfied beyond all reasonable doubt or,

as sometimes said, satisfied so that they are sure that all the necessary

elements of the offence are proved; and that the verdict of unlawful killing

must not be returned unless they are satisfied beyond all reasonable doubt

that such elements are proved.    When directions are given as to any other

verdict that may be brought in, e.g., accident/misadventure or open, it

should be stressed that a different standard of proof applies viz, proof

on a balance of probabilities, with an appropriate    explanation of what that

means and how that differs from the criminal standard of proof.




4.     So far as the offence of manslaughter goes there is no question of

any of the deceased having been killed as a result of an unlawful a c t .   For

these purposes an unlawful act is one which is unlawful for some reason other

than the negligent manner of its performance.    The Jury should not,

therefore,   be directed to consider the possibility of any person having
killed the deceased or any of them as a result of an unlawful act.

 Involuntary manslaughter of that form could not possibly form the basis for

a verdict of unlawful killing.




5.    The    question is whether the Jury should be directed to consider a

verdict of   unlawful killing based upon reckless manslaughter,   that is to

say to consider whether the Jury are satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt

that some person or persons (whom they must under no account name) has

brought about the death of any or some or all of the deceased as a result

of recklessness.     It is not necessary, and it will be unhelpful and

confusing, to direct the Jury to consider "gross negligence manslaughter".




FIRST ELEMENT OF RECKLESS MANSLAUGHTER     - CAUSATIVE CONDUCT




6.     If the Jury are to consider whether some specific individual committed

the offence of reckless manslaughter then the Jury have to consider firstly

whether that person by his conduct, i.e., some act or omission to act (where

there was a duty to act), was a substantial cause of the death of any or

some or all of the deceased.    In order to prove causation the following

matters must be established:




      (i)          that but for the conduct of the person under consideration

                the    death of the deceased would not have occurred.




      (ii)         that although the conduct of the person under consideration

                need    not be the sole or the main cause of death it must

                be a substantial cause.
       (iii)    that where the conduct of the person under consideration

                was performed prior to the 15th April 1989 then a subsequent

                and intervening act which causes death breaks the chain of

                causation if that intervening act is not foreseeable; and

                that this means that such prior conduct is not, in law, to

                be regarded as a substantial cause of such subsequent event.

                This is consistent with the Jury's function of establishing

                how the deceased came by his death since the Jury are there

                concerned to find out what circumstances are directly

                responsible for the death of the deceased.     Such an

                intervening and unforeseeable act prevents any prior

                circumstances,   by way of earlier acts or omissions,    from

                being directly responsible for subsequent death.




(b)   It is submitted on behalf of Sheffield City Council that no reasonable
                                                                                •   \

Jury properly directed could possibly conclude:




      (i)       That but for the conduct of the Sheffield City Council, or

                any of its employees,   the deaths would not have occurred.




      (ii) .    That any conduct of the Sheffield City Council or any of

               its employees was a substantial cause of death.




      (iii)     That the events occurring at the ground on the 15th April

               1989 from 2.30 p.m. onwards were foreseeable.     The events

               referred to are the sudden introduction of a large number

               of fans en masse into an area of the terraces which was
                  already crowded and full.      On the contrary,    no reasonable

                  Jury properly directed could find that such events were

                  foreseeable by Sheffield City Council or any of its employees

                  or that any chain of causation which might otherwise have

                  been established by any prior conduct on the part of

                  Sheffield City Council was other than broken.




(c)     Accordingly as a matter of law the Jury should not be directed to

consider the conduct of Sheffield City Council or any of its employees in

the context of any verdict of unlawful killing based upon involuntary

reckless manslaughter.




(d)    If the submission at (c) is rejected,      then the Jury must be properly

directed to consider the issue of causation in the specific context of the

conduct of Sheffield City Council and be given full instructions to the
                                                                                     \
relevant criteria to be applied i.e. as per (b) above, but amplified as

necessary.




SECOND ELEMENT OF RECKLESS MANSLAUGHTER      -   MENTAL ELEMENT




7.     The second matter to be considered is the mental element involved

in reckless manslaughter.    So far as this mental element is concerned the

appropriate direction is that known as the Lawrence Direction which is to

be found in the following passage of the speech of Lord Diplock in

Reg -v- Lawrence 1982 A.C. 510 at 526 E to 527 B as f o ll o w s :
 "Recklessness on the part of the doer of an act does presuppose that

 there is something in the circumstances that would have drawn the

 attention of an ordinary prudent individual to the possibility that

 his act was capable of causing the kind of serious harmful consequences

 that the section which creates the offence was intended to prevent,

 and that the risk of those harmful consequences occurring was not

 so slight that an ordinary prudent individual would feel justified

in treating them as negligible.     It is only when this is so that the

doer of the act is acting "recklessly" if before doing the act, he

either fails to give any thought to the possibility of there being

any such risk or, having recognised that there was such risk, he

nevertheless goes on to do it.




In my view, an appropriate instruction to the Jury on what is meant

by driving recklessly would be that they must be satisfied of two
                                                                          \
things:




First,    that the defendant was in fact driving the vehicle in such

a manner as to create an obvious and serious risk of causing physical

injury to some other person who might happen to be using the road

or of.doing substantial damage to property; and




Second,   that in driving in that manner the defendant did so without

having given any thought to the possibility of there being any such

risk or, having recognised that there was some risk involved, had

nonetheless gone on to take it.
        It is for the Jury to decide whether the risk created by the manner

        in which the vehicle was being driven was both obvious and serious

       and,   in deciding that,    they might apply the standard of the ordinary

        prudent motorist as represented by themselves.




       If satisfied that an obvious and serious risk was created by the manner

       of the defendant's driving,      the Jury are entitled to infer that he

       was in one or other of the states of mind required to constitute the

       offence and will probably do so; but regard must be given to any

       explanation he gives as to his state of mind which may displace the

       inference."




A practical application of the Lawrence direction can be seen in action in

Reg -v- Seymour 1983 2 A.C. 4 9 3 .   The importance of this decision is that

Lord Diplock was a member of the Court and he (and all of their Lordships)
                                                                                   \
agreed with the speech of Lord Roskill.      In the speech of Lord Roskill at

page 504 C to 504 G appears the following:




       "The learned judge rejected the submission and gave the "Lawrence

       direction" subject only to the omission of any reference to the "

       obvious and serious r i s k      of doing substantial damage to property"

      see Reg. -v- Lawrence (Stephen) [1982] A.C. 510, 526.       In my view,

      he was entirely right not to refer to damage to property, a reference

      to which was irrelevant in this case and might well have confused

      the J u r y .   His admirably clear direction not only properly reflected

      the decision of this House in Lawrence but also Lord Atkin's speech

      in Andrews [1937] A.C. 576.       I quote the relevant passages:
The second question you have to decide; was the driving that

caused those injuries     reckless?    If so, then it is

manslaughter.     If you are not satisfied that it was reckless,

then the verdict is not guilty.       To amount to reckless

driving mere negligence is not enough.       His conduct must

go beyond the question of compensation between citizens and

amount to, in your view, criminal conduct requiring

punishment.     You have to be satisfied upon the question of

recklessness that he drove in such a manner as to create

an obvious and serious risk of causing physical harm to some

other person who might happen to be using the road at the

time....Once you are satsified that the matter of his driving

was such as to create an obvious and serious risk of causing

physical harm to a person using the road at the time, you

also have to be satisfied that driving in that manner he

did so without having given any thought to the possibility

of there being any such risk, or alternatively, having

recognised that there was some risk involved, nonetheless

went on to take it; in other words, he was reckless.       He

reckoned not of the consequences.




"In determining the quality of his driving, you apply the

standards of the ordinary reasonable motorist.      You, of

course,   take into account all the evidence including his

explanation        ""
A suggested direction




The passage last quoted can be adapted as apropriate to the context of any

specific person, whether corporation or natural human being, whose conduct

the Jury are directed to consider for the purposes of deciding whether that

person committed reckless manslaughter.        The passage quoted from Lord

Roskill's speech presupposes that the Jury have concluded that the issue

of causation is p r ov e d .   The adaptation of this passge of the speech might

be on the following lines:




        "If you are satisfied so as to be sure that the first question is

        proved that is to say that the act of X was a substantial cause of

        the death of any of the deceased then the second question you have

       to decide is was the act that caused those deaths reckless?       If so

       then it is manslaughter.       If you are not satisfied that it was reckless
                                                                                  \
       then a verdict of unlawful killing is not open to you.       To amount

       to a reckless act mere negligence is not enough.       His conduct must

       go beyond the question of compensation between citizens and amount

       to, in your view, criminal conduct requiring punishment.       You have

       to be satisfied upon the question of recklessness that he acted in

       such a manner as to create an obvious and serious risk of causing

       physical harm to some other person who might happen to be using the

       terraces at the time.       Once you are satisfied that his act was such

       as to create an obvious and serious risk of causing physical harm

       to a person using the terraces at the time you also have to be

       satisfied that acting in that manner he did so without having given

       any thought to the possibility of there being any such risk, or
        alternatively having recognised that there was some risk involved

        nonetheless went on to take it; in other words he was reckless.      He

        reckoned not of the consequences.     In determining the quality of his

        act you apply the standards of the ordinary reasonable person who

        happened to be in the same circumstances as X.     You of course take

        into account all the evidence including his explanation..."




Lord Roskill added at 508C that it is appropriate also to point out that

in order to constitute the offence of manslaughter the risk of death being

caused must be very high, and such a remark should be made to the Jury here.

Lord Roskill said:




        I would therefore answer the certified question as follows:    "Where

        manslaughter is charged and the circumstances are that the victim

        was killed as a result of the reckless driving of the defendant on        .

        a public highway,   the trial judge should give the Jury the direction

        suggested in Reg -v- Lawrence but it is appropriate also to point

        out that in order to constitute the offence of manslaughter the risk

        of death being caused by the manner of the defendant's driving must

        be very high."




In deciding whether or not a risk was obvious the Jury should have regard

to whether the risk would have been obvious to an ordinary prudent individual

in   the relevant circumstances.   The Jury should be told that they may take

account of what any witness has told them was obvious or not to that witness

as a risk.   The witnesses'   perception of the risk can provide an indication

of whether or not the risk was obvious to an ordinary prudent ‘person, and
 especially so if the Jury conclude that the witness in question was such

 an ordinary prudent person.    For this purpose   'witness' includes a person

whose    conduct has been called into question at the Inquest and Lord Roskill

made it clear that a Jury can    take into account an explanation given by such

a person.




It is important to stress to the Jury that a failure to appreciate that there

was such a risk would not by itself be sufficient to amount to recklessness

see Reg -v- West London Coroner ex parte Gray 1988 1 Q.B. page 477 B per

Watkins L.J.:-




        "He deliberately chose to run the risk by doing nothing about it.

        It should be emphasised, however,   that a failure to appreciate that

        there was such a risk would not by itself be sufficient to amount

        to recklessness.
                                                                                  \



FURTHER RELEVANT MATTERS:




(i)     PRIMA FACIE CASE




8.       The Jury should only be directed to consider a verdict of unlawful

killing based upon reckless manslaughter if the Coroner concludes as a matter

of law that there is a prima facie case,    that is to say a case fit to be

left to the Jury where the Coroner concludes, as a matter of law, that a

reasonable Jury properly directed might bring in such a verdict.     If the

Coroner concludes as a matter of law that there is no such case fit to be
 left to the Jury then the Coroner.must direct the Jury not to consider that

 verdict,    that is he must withdraw-the verdict from them.




 (ii)      INDIVIDUAL CONSIDERATION   -   THE DECEASED




 9.        The death of each deceased must be considered individually.   Before

 the Jury may be invited to consider a verdict of unlawful killing in respect

 of any of the deceased the Coroner must direct himself as to whether or not

 there is a prima facie case so far as that individual deceased is concerned.




A verdict in the case of each deceased is required and if unlawful killing

is to be left to the Jury it must be considered by the Jury in relation to

each of the deceased.     The Jury should be directed that if, having considered

the circumstances of death affecting each of the individual deceased,       they

are satsfied beyond reasonable doubt that some or all of them may be

considered as a group of persons whose death was caused as a result of

reckless manslaughter committed by some specific individual or individuals

(who must under no account .be named or identified),     then similar verdicts

may be returned in the case of each member of such group.      There will

therefore be 95 verdicts but some or all may be in similar terms.




However,    the Jury must be directed that it is improper to consider unlawful

killing in relation to the 95 deceased as a whole or to any group of the

deceased without first considering the individual circumstances of the death

of each particular d ec eased.   The Jury must be warned that no short cut is

available to them permitting them to proceed on the presumption that they

are entitled to consider the circumstances of death of the 95 deceased as
 a whole,    or of any group of the deceased as a group, unless some cause is

 shown why they should not do so.     That would reverse the order in which

 relevant consideration should be dealt with.      They are concerned with the

 Inquests^ relating to the deaths of the victims. of the Hillsborough Football

Stadium Disaster.      There is no presumption that a verdict in common form

 is applicable to the 95 deceased persons.      Only after a careful consideration

of each individual case can the Jury establish what verdict is appropriate.




(iii)     NO AGGREGATION




10.       The Jury must be directed that they can return a verdict of unlawful

killing only if they can attribute the ingredients of the relevant offence,

reckless manslaughter,     to some individual person or persons whom they should

on no account name or otherwise identify:

Reg -v- West London Coroner ex parte Gray 1988 1 Q.B. at page 477 B .       In   -   ^

this context the Jury should consider the position of each single person

who may be a candidate taking each such person in turn and coming to a

conclusion.




In this context the Jury     must be warned that whatever person is being

considered (and be that person a corporation or a natural human being) the

ingredients of manslaughter must be established by proving the necessary

mens rea (mental element) and actus reus (criminal conduct) of manslaughter

against it or him by evidence properly to be relied on against it or him

and a case against any person cannot be fortified by evidence against another

person.     No aggregation of criminal culpability is permitted.




                                      - 13. -
(iv)    ORDER OF PRIORITY IN CONSIDERING VERDICT




11.     If unlawful killing is to be left to the Jury as a possible verdict

then the Coroner should indicate to the Jury that they must deal with that

issue first; and that they should approach,            therefore, initially the question

whether or not they are satisfied so that they are sure beyond a reasonable
                       /

doubt that the verdict of unlawful killing may be returned in respect of

any or some or all of the d e c e a s e d .   If they conclude that unlawful killing

is not an appropriate verdict,        or are not sure that it is an appropriate

verdict,   in the case of any or some or all of the deceased then they should

go on to consider other possible verdicts,            i.e., accident/misadventure or

open verdict.     Support for this is to be found in R. -v- Wolverhampton

Coroner ex parte McCurbin 1990 1 WLR 719 at 728 B - D :




       "It is true that,      in many cases where it is open to a Coroner's Jury

       to find a verdict of unlawful killing,              they may also have to consider

       the question of death by misadventure.              However,    in my view, this

       does not and should'not give rise to problems.                 The Coroner should

       indicate to the Jury that they should approach,                initially, the question

       as to whether or not they are satisfied so that they are sure that

       this is unlawful k i l l i n g .   If they come to the conclusion that it

       is not unlawful killing,       they are not satisfied so that they are sure

       that the verdict is appropriate,         then they will consider the question

       of misadventure and, in so doing, they do not need to bear in mind

       the heavy standard of proof which is required for unlawful killing.

       They can approach the matter on the basis of the balance of

       probabilities.      The situation is that, just as it is important




                                                 14    ~
          that a jury should not bring in a verdict of suicide unless they are

          sure, likewise they should not bring in a verdict of unlawful killing

          unless they are sure."




SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL


                      /


12.       The Jury have heard a variety of criticisms of different persons and

such criticisms have been voiced wholly or mainly in cross examination.

Representation of certain persons whose conduct was likely to be called into

question has been permitted.       One of those persons,   legal persons, is- the

Sheffield City Council.




In the case of any such person whose conduct has been called into question

then, unless a reasonable Jury properly directed could conclude that such

person committed the offence of manslaughter against any or all or some of .

the deceased,   the Jury must be directed in terms either (1) to exclude that

person from their consideration of the issue whether or not they are

satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the verdict of unlawful killing is

appropriate or (2) to consider such a verdict only_ in the case of some other

person or persons (who should be named in the direction but not of course

in the verdict) and not to consider such a verdict in the case of any other

person.




The reasons for discriminating in this way are:-




(a)   For reasons of justice and humanity there should be no question of

      any risk arising that a verdict of unlawful killing, where the Jury
           are forbidden to name any culprit, might be understood in the context

           of the evidence to refer to one or more of those persons whose conduct

           was called into question at the Inquest, but in respect of whom no

           reasonable Jury properly directed could conclude that such person

           had committed the offence of manslaughter.    Such a risk does arise

           where there have been criticisms of and suggestions,   express or

           implied,   of negligence against a variety of persons; and all the more

           so where the verdict of unlawful killing involves a finding of

           recklessness which the Jury and the public may be at risk of confusing

       with negligence.       There must be no risk of those who are innocent

       of criminal culpability being caught up with any whom the Jury may

       regard as criminally responsible.




(b)    The converse to (a) is also true, namely that, in the case of a person

       whose conduct the Jury are rightly scrutinising to see whether they
                                                                                     \
       are satisfied so as to be sure that such conduct is criminal, any

       allegations against or criticism of any other person might give rise

       to prejudice.       Such a risk does arise where the Jury may be tempted

       to aggregate fault.




(c)    Without discrimination and exclusion of persons who ought not to be

       regarded as candidates in terms of criminal culpability there is a

       risk that the Jury may be confused by an unnecessarily and erroneously

       wide choice of candidates.




13.    No reasonable Jury properly directed could find that Sheffield City

Council,    or any employee or agent of Sheffield City Council whether it be




                                        -   16   -
Mr. Butler or Mr. Bownes or anyone else employed by Sheffield City Council,

has or have committed any offence of manslaughter.      The Jury should be

directed accordingly, with an instruction that as a matter of law there is

no evidence on which the Jury could find that any of those persons committed

any such offence.   The Jury should be told in terms that quite apart from

the difficulties relating to the issue of causation (as Paragraph 6 a b o v e ) :




       (i)     There is no evidence on which any reasonable Jury could find

                 that any of such persons acted in a manner so as to create

                 an obvious and serious risk of causing physical injury to

                any football fan or fans.




       (ii)    There is no evidence on which any reasonable Jury could find

                that any of such persons acted recklessly,     having regard

                to the definition of such term as above.
                                                                               '    '   n




      (iii)    Specifically in the case of Sheffield City Council no verdict

                of corporate manslaughter could possibly be established here;

                and any verdict that Sheffield City Council committed the

                offence of manslaughter would be unreasonable and improper.

                No further direction is needed, but if it was thought

                desirable to amplify such direction then the appropriate

                indication would be that for a corporation to be criminally

                liable for manslaughter then it is required that the mens

                rea (alternatively the mental element of recklessness) and

                the actus reus (alternatively the conduct complained of)

                comprised in the alleged offence of manslaughter should be
                  established not against those who acted for or in the name

                  of the corporation but against those who were to be

                  identified as the embodiment of the cororation itself.

                  Neither Mr. Bownes nor Mr. Butler nor anyone else referred

                  to at the Inquest could properly be regarded as the

                  embodiment of the Council.          No sustainable case in

                  manslaughter arises here against Sheffield City Council.




         See for example R. -v- H.M. Coroner for East Kent ex parte Spooner

         1989 88 Cr. App. R. page 10 at page 16-17.




NOTE:   (i)      Copies of Cases referred to above are annexed for ease of

        reference, to the copy of these submissions filed with the Coroner's

        Court. The cases are:




        Reg   -v- Lawrence 1982 AC510




        Reg   -v- Seymour 1983 2 AC 493


                                                               *•
        Reg   -v- West London Coroner ex p.Gray         1988   1Q.B. 467




        Reg   -v- Wolverhampton Coroner ex p.McCurbin 1990 1 WLR 718




                                    -     18.   . -
Reg     -v-    H.M. Coroner for;East Kent ex p. Spooner (1989) 88 Cr. App.

R. 10




(ii)          The evidence of   Mr. Arthur Butler      for Sheffield City Council

was given on Days 36 and        37 (23.1.1991 and 24.1.1991)




(iii)         The evidence of   Mr. David Bownes for Sheffield City Council

was given on Days 37 and        38 (24.1.1991 and 25.1.1991)




                                 -   19 -   -
