                                                    \                                                                               MfR.15
                                                          V

OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                                                   ised
                                                                      Date and time raised           1               5              2 .-2 0   N u m b er           J
Title                                                                                                                        +o T|5>cn_
(Include source and any document number if ' cicvai/t;


Keceiver s instructions — urqent action — res/IMo                            '—m - j o i         (               ”       *   «- ~       *
                                                                                                                                                                       Receiver
        fxzM                                                 y L i.          (£fi/            S y 'fh c * ^
  ............ ................ T .......................... ....................     " ......................   •   ■
                                                                                                                                                                         Indexer
Document registered/* iduiWM as indicated                             \Q    Q J
No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                                                                   Statement Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions                                                    (g fU i

                                 - -..     . . . . . . .■. b. . /. qT ” '                                                                                                Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                                                               om         SiO

                                                                                                       '    '    •            ■   V .                          •
                                                                                                                             ■' * ■■           ....' .r
Further action No(s)                                                                                                                                  |
                                                                                                                                                                   l -l Ifeiai'" /1'
When    satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse o th e r D o cu m e n t Master Number F o rm                                                L
                                                        Merseyside


                                                       24th /-April 4989




Dear Sir/Madam

I travelled to Hillsborough by car with four other people, three of
whom had been to the same fixture 12 months ago (including myself).
Traffic congestion meantwe arrived in Sheffield at 2 o'clock, having
left Liverpool at 11am.     Last year the same route took one hour less,
leaving plenty of time to park and get to the game.       We drove till
we saw signs indicating the ground was five minutes away, so we stopped
and went for a quick drink before going to the match.         A local told
me the ground was 20 minutes away; on hearing this at 2.15pm we decided
to drive closer to the ground.     We parked at what turned out to be
approximately 10 minutes walk from the ground, arriving at the ground
about 2.4pm.


Half a mile from the ground, people without tickets were asking for
spare tickets (indicating     few spare tickets).    On arriving at Leppings
Lane turnstiles there was confusion as to where we should go, as there
were no clear signs above the turnstiles.     There was a large crowd,
obviously anxious to get in the ground before kick off.          We held back
at the edge of the crowd because it was clear that people were being
crushed at the front, against the turnstiles, of which there appeared
to be pitifully few to give access to so many.      There were no signs
of drunkenness or disorder at all.     There was, however, a lot of anger
directed towward the mounted police because of their lack of ability
to control and organise the fans into orderly queues.        Twelve months
previously we arrived at the same time, to be met by a crush (though
not as big) but eventually got in through the appropriate turnstile.




                                                      c o n t’ d /
Page 2




The police appeared to be nervous and in a panic, which is something
I have never seen before, especially from mounted police.           At about
2.55pm a policeman on a horse said "Go around this way", directing
us toward an open gate to our right.      At this point my group split
up, a friend who had been with me 12 months previously, and his father,
followed me to the left—hand side of the terracing.       I made my way
there at once because twelve months previously I had been directed
there by a policewoman who had explained that the middle section was
full.    THIS YEAR THERE WERE NO POLICE OR STEWARDS DIRECTING FANS TO
THE SIDE ENTRANCE.   To my knowledge, no signs or directions exist
on the back of the stands at Leppings Lane to direct supporters.


To get to the side entrances to the terracing, entrance through an
unmarked side gate was necessary.      On entering the ground just in
time for kick off, overcrowding was obvious in the middle section of
the terracing, although there was still plenty of space available in
the terracing below me (to the left of goal from Leppings Lane).
At this point I spotted on#of my group (who had been twelve months
previously) just behind me.      He said he had gone down the tunnel,
then realised that was not the way he had been the year before, so
made his way to the left-hand upper terracing, where he knew we would
be standing.


The first teenager to climb the fence and collapse on the pitch was
dragged off by a policeman, convinced apparently that this was a hooligan,
not a human being in distress.      It was obvious to most people in the
Leppings Lane end that something was seriously wrong.        The police,
however, seemed unconcerned, indeed physically knocking back people
who were climbing the perimeter fence.     Even by the time ambulances
arrived, apart from half a dozen or so policemen giving heart massage,
the majority of policemen stood watching, as teenage fans tried as
best they could, to revive the injured.     Policemen trained in first
aid watched as people with little or no training tried to save lives.
Policemen were still, it seemed, concerned about a possible pitch invasion.




                                                      c o n t'd /
Page 3




Fans, mostly young men and teenagers, ripped advertising hoardings
down and used them as stretchers to ferry the injured to the other
end of the ground, watched by policemen supposedly trained in emergency
aid.     As someone who witnessed the Heysel stadium disaster at first
hand, I never thought I would have to endure again, watching people
die just yards away from me at a football match.        The depth of
helplessness I feel at not being able to help those people is matched
only by the depth of anger I feel at the incompetence of those organising
the policing/stewarding of the game.      This was a totally avoidable
tragedy, if ever there was one.      In simple terms a row of policemen
blocking the tunnel entrance, directing fans to the side entrances
would have saved 95 lives.       In reality, only better communication
with police ranks inside and outside grounds can ensure safety.


In conclusion, the facts as I saw them are these
1.       There was no drunkenness amongst Liverpool fans;
2.       There were inaccurate signs pertaining to the walking distance
         to the match along the roads in Sheffield;
3.       There was inadequate labelling of turnstiles and a pathetic
         number of turnstiles;
4.       Lack of effective policing outside the ground, insensitive and
         illogical policing inside the ground;
5.       No police or stewards inside the perimeter wall directing unknowing
         fans to safe parts of the ground;
6.       Police reacting (if at all) in contradiction to events unfolding
         before them? overcrowding obvious to everyone in the Leppings
         Lane end, was seemingly dismissed and evacuation hampered and
         even positively discouraged by policemen who were hitting people
         trying to escape;
7.       Lack of help for the injured from policemen (firemen when they
         eventually came, were giving heart massage and mouth to mouth
         resuscitation from the moment they arrived).


The fifth member of our group turned up after the match, having gone down
the tunnel into the middle section of terracing, escaping with just a fright




                                                        c o n t'd /
*




    Page 4




    and bruising.     Significantly, he had not been to Hillsborough the year
    before and had presumed the tunnel was the only access to the terracing.


    QUESTIONS
    1.       Why no stewards, or police, inside perimeter walls?
    2.       Why no check on tickets half a mile from ground?
    3.       Why was kick off not put back half an hour?
    4.       Why was police reaction hostile and unhelpful?
    5.       Why were Liverpool FC once again given inadequate ticketallocation?
    6.       Problems of overcrowding were experienced 12 months   agoby   Liverpool
             fans, so why was Hillsborough chosen again?


    Yours faithfully




    (Hoping this evidence will be heard, or at least taken account of)
