STEPHEN PAUL WOOD

POLICE CONSTABLE 2621

HACKENTHORPE POLICE STATION, SHEFFIELD



At 8.30 am, Saturday 15th April 1989 I paraded fear duty at Hackenthorpe

Police Statical for transport to, and eventual employment at Hillsborough

Football Ground, where the semi-final was to be played between Liverpool and

Nottingham Forrest.
At the ground I was deployed as part of serial 4, under supervision of

Police Sergeant 226 Jaques.     Our duties as a whole were to patrol the car

park at the rear of the South Stand.     We were split into pairs, and I was in

 company with Police Constable 1412 McLoughlin.     Our orders were to be on a

 roving patrol between the players entrance and the main gates opening onto

 Penistone Road.    Due to the large numbers of supporters congregating by the

 main gates it was suggested by Police Sergeant Jaques that we concentrate

 our   efforts there,    providing a   back up to the two Police Constables

 stationed at these gates.       These officers were Police Constable 1200

 Woodward and Police Constable 2679 Astin.

 During my time at these gates I was approached by numerous supporters of

 both factions who wanted to know if there were any tickets on sale.         In

 addition I had to remonstrate with a number of supporters, mainly fran

 Nottingham Forrest, who had alcohol in their possesion.         All spoken to

 agreed to pour their drink away.

 Shortly after 3.00 pm that date I became aware of a disturbance taking place

 on the Leppings Lane end of the ground.     I received this information mainly

  frcm tannoy announcements and messages fran the radio issued by Police

  Sergeant 266 Jaques.    I was not in possession of my own radio.   My initial

  impression was that we were facing a serious public order situation, and it

  was not until sane time after and the ambulances began to arrive that the

  full picture was revealed.
  I spent the remainder of the afternoon in the Scuth Stand car park directing
ambulances in and exit of the ground, and attempting to disperse the crowd

leaving the area.   The only tine I had left the ground prior to going off

duty was to accompany an ambulance to the Northern General Hospital.   Both

the crew were in the rear of the ambulance working on victims, and the

ambulance was driven by a Police Constable fran out of Sheffield who did not

knew the way.
I later attended as a serial to the garage at Claywheels Lane where we

received transport back to Hackenthorpe going off duty at 8.00 pn that date.

At no time during the incident did I enter the ground prcper nor did I deal

with any of the dead or injured.
