     Oth«r Document Form                     Date and time raised                                    Number



     Title___
     (Include source end eny document number if relevant)

      Receivers instructions urgent action Ye>/No
                                                                                                                Receiver

                                                                                                        € .Cm 2 .
'     Document registered/ini
                  istered/in)lexed es indicated

    ~1to(s)TtTrti6nrraised
                                      indi                                                              i
     Statement readers instructions                                                                            Stetement
                                                                                                               Reeder


     Indexed as indicated                                                                                       Indexer

     No(s) of actions raised

     Examined - further action to be taken                                                                    0/M             SIO




     Further action no(s)                                                                                           indexer


     When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Oocument Matter Number Form

     MIR 15
                                              (DRAFT: 25 May 1989)


CROWD CONTROL




INTRODUCTION


The Government's objectives in relation to crowd control at
football matches and other sporting events.are to ensure that
necessary legislation and practical arrangements exist so that:


     - spectators can watch the event safely and enjoyably


     - violence, disorder and other unacceptable behaviour is as
     far as possible prevented and is dealt with if it arises.


Practical arrangements rest principally with the organisers of
the events (in relation to football, clubs and the football
authorities) and the police.   Ultimately, no arrangements can be
entirely satisfactory without a large measure of responsibility
and self-discipline amongst spectators.


The Home Secretary's general role in relation to policing, under
the Police Act 1964, is to promote the efficiency of the police.
He is assisted in this task by Her Majesty's Chief Inspector of
Constabulary who conducts annual inspections of every police
force.   In addition his department is in regular contact on his
behalf with individual police forces and representatives of the
Association of Chief Police Offices (ACPO).


In relation to safety at sports grounds the Home Secretary's role
is to ensure appropriate legislation is provided and is explained
to the relevant authorities and operators (see earlier Chapters)
(G1 — content?1


Unless otherwise stated the information in this Chapter relates
specifically to England and Wales.
The incidence of football hooliganism F8


The annual criminal statistics published by the Home Office show
numbers of offences recorded by type of offence not by
circumstance, so offences inside football matches or otherwise
related to football are not recorded as a separate category.
However, as a guide to the level of trouble at matches, ACPO
collate for each football season the total number of people
arrested at or ejected from Football League matches (arrests ‘at1
meaning arrests inside grounds, or those made outside but
directly connected with the policing of matches).   In recent
seasons these have totalled:



     Season         Arrests        Eiections

     1985/6          4,143           4,356
     1986/7          5,531           6,466
     1987/8          6,106           6,542



This level of incidents occur despite many efforts to counter
football hooliganism such as the extensive use of police
resources, strict segregation of opposing supporters, the use of
closed circuit television and video at most grounds, and special
efforts for liaison and gathering of information and
intelligence.


Away from grounds the police report many incidents of violence
and disorder connected with football, for example violence or
damage on trains, disorder at motorway service stations or pubs,
and even pre-arranged confrontations between rival supporters.
On the last full day of the 1988-89 football season (13 May 1989)
there were over 300 arrests of football supporters (180 at
football grounds and 126 elsewhere) including several violent
incidents, in which two people received serious head injuries.
Similar incidents, normally on a smaller scale, are often
associated with football.
General police duties and powers


The primary duty of the police is to maintain the Queen's Peace -
to preserve life, to maintain law and order and to prevent and
investigate crime.


The Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE) sets out the
police powers to investigate offences, for example to stop and
search or arrest persons or to detain and question suspects.
(                ?   The police also have common law powers to take
action necessary to maintain law and order or prevent a breach of
the peace.)


There are also a variety of specific offences covering theft,
violence, damage and other matters.    The following paragraphs
describe offences and powers relating to disorder, alcohol and
exclusion from football grounds.


Disorder


The offences which football hooligans may commit during bouts of
disorderly activity vary greatly in type and seriousness.      At one
end of the scale, section 5 of the Public Order Act 1986 makes it
an offence for a person to use threatening, abusive or insulting
words or behaviour, or disorderly behaviour, or to display any
writing, sign or other visible representation which is
threatening, abusive or insulting, within the hearing or sight of
a person likely to be caused harassment, alarm or distress.     The
offence may be committed in public places and, with a few
exceptions, private places.   A constable may arrest without
warrant a person who does not stop such behaviour when warned to
do so.   On conviction the maximum penalty for the offence is a
fine not exceeding level 3 (currently £400).


At the other end of the scale is the offence of riot in section 1
of the Act.   This makes it an offence where 12 or more persons
 who are present together use or threaten unlawful violence for a
 common purpose and their conduct (taken together) is such as
 would cause a person of reasonable firmness present at the scene
 to fear for his personal safety.    The offence attracts a maximum
 of 10 years' imprisonment.


 In between these two ends of the scale there are the offences of
 violent disorder (section 2), affray (section 3) and fear or
 provocation of violence (section 4) which attract maximum
 penalties ranging from 5 years' imprisonment and a fine not
 exceeding the statutory maximum (currently £2000) to 6 months'
 imprisonment and a fine also not exceeding £2000.    There is a
 specific offence in the Act to deal with threatening, abusive or
 insulting behaviour which is intended to stir up racial hatred or
 is likely to stir it up.    A person suspected of committing the
^ offence can be arrested without a warrant and on conviction can
 be imprisoned for up to 2 years.


 There are many other offences, outside the scope of the Public
 Order Act 1986, which hooligans may commit during disorderly
 activity.   For example, the offences of common assault and
malicious wounding.    These attract maximum penalties of 1 year
and life imprisonment respectively.     The gravest incidents of
hooliganism may involve murder or attempted murder for which the
maximum penalty is also life imprisonment.     Criminal damage and
possession of an offensive weapon in a public place are other
offences which hooligans sometimes commit which can attract terms
of imprisonment.


Statute law is not the only means at the police's disposal for
coping with hooligans.     Breaches of the peace may be dealt with
using common law powers.     If the police reasonably apprehend an
imminent breach of the peace they may take any reasonable steps
which are necessary to control or prevent it, including arresting
those responsible.    They may bring the offenders before the
courts where they may be bound over to be of good behaviour for a
period.
Alcohol


The Government is very concerned about the part which alcohol can
play in spectator violence and has already taken firm action.
Various specific powers in relation to alcohol at football
matches are contained in the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol
etc) Act 1985, as amended.   In addition there are a wide variety
of general powers in relation to alcohol licensing which have a
bearing on alcohol in the context of football.


The Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc! Act 1985 restricts
the sale and consumption of alcohol on the way to matches on
football special coaches and trains.   It also makes it an offence
to try to enter a ground when drunk or in possession of alcohol
and to possess or consume alcohol within view of the pitch during
the period of the match (from 2 hours before until 1 hour
afterward).   Although there is provision for magistrates to grant
exemption orders for premises with no view of the pitch, the
police are empowered to close any bar in the ground should they
believe that sale of alcohol there is detrimental to orderly
conduct or the safety of spectators.    The Act also prohibits the
possession of any bottle, can or other container capable of
causing injury.   All Football League grounds, Wembley Stadium and
non-League grounds when used for matches involving League clubs
are designated under this Act.   The Act also gives the police the
power to search someone reasonably suspected of committing an
offence under the Act, and to arrest such a person.   Given the
nature of offences under the Act this may include searching
coaches on the way to or from matches or on arrival as well as
searching fans waiting to enter a ground or inside a ground.


Schedule I of the Public Order Act 1986 extends the Sporting
Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985 to prohibit alcohol on
minibuses on journeys to or from a designated sporting event, and
prohibits the possession of a firework or similar item at, or
while entering, a designated sporting event.
Home Office Circular 68/1988 (Alcohol and disorder* issued on 5
August 1988 gave wide ranging advice reminding courts and the
police of relevant criminal offences and powers to regulate
licensing, including the power to close all licensed premises in
an area when riot or serious disorder is expected.     (Section 188,
Licensing Act 1964).


In addition to the powers already available to the police, the
Home Secretary agreed last year to try out, on an experimental
basis, a fcyelaw which prohibits the public consumption of alcohol
In specified areas.     The seven local authorities involved have
designated areas, in consultation with the police, in which the
practice of drinking in public by groups of mainly young people
had reached the state where other citizens found it both
threatening and intimidating.     One of the Councils involved,
Scarborough, has included in its designated areas the roads
leading to and surrounding both the (separate) local cricket and
football grounds.     The byelaw will be tested for two years,
during which time it will be closely monitored to see whether it
can provide an effective remedy, without becoming oppressive,
which can be made available as a model to other Councils.
Although it is early days, preliminary results in Coventry where
the byelaw has been in force for seven months are encouraging.
The byelaw has been shown to be popular and public drinking on
the streets has effectively stopped.


Exclusion of troublemakers


Part IV of the Act gave new powers to the courts to impose
exclusion orders, prohibiting attendance for a minimum period of
3 months at all prescribed matches of any person convicted of a
footbal1-related offence.    This includes offences committed not
only inside or outside grounds, but also on journeys to or from
matches.


[From 1 August 1987, when this power was introduced, to
7 February 1,417 exclusion orders were recorded by the Football
Association. Update? ]
This power to impose exclusion orders is without prejudice to a
club's own entitlement to choose who to admit, or refuse to
admit, to their property.   Conditions under which this will take
place are set out in each club's Ground Rules, which normally
follow a model drafted by the rDOE? Football League/Association].
Ground   rules typically assert the club's right to exclude
someone who refuses to be searched on entry.


The national football membership scheme proposed in Part I of the
Football Spectators Bill is intended to replace exclusion orders
with a positive check on entitlement to admission and mandatory
disqualification for fixed terms.   See separate evidence
submitted by the Department of the Environment (DOE).
(DOE - content?)


PRACTICAL ARRANGEMENTS


Responsibility for crowd control at football matches


Chapters 2, 13 and 14 of the 'Green Guide' set out the respective
roles of the management and the police in controlling crowds in
football grounds and other sporting stadia.


Primary responsibility for the safety of the public and the
control of crowds inside a football stadium rests with the
management of the ground.   Football is offered as a commercial
enterprise to the public, who pay for admission.   It is therefore
a matter for those running the enterprise to ensure it is
conducted safely.   To assist the management to discharge its
duties the club appoints stewards, for example to direct crowds
entering or leaving the stadium.


For management to discharge its responsibilities properly
paragraph 204 of the Guide points out that a special police
presence inside the ground may be necessary to deal with anv
problem of disorder which may arise, as well as to provide
support and leadership in an emergency.   The number and
disposition of the police must be determined by the chief officer
of police who has sole responsibility for the direction of police
operations.     So the police are not inside stadia for the
management of crowds unless serious disorder or other emergencies
arise in which case they may be able to provide assistance beyond
the capability of the club’s management and stewards.


Outside the ground, on public property, direction of crowds going
to or from a football match is a matter for the chief officer of
police.      However paragraph 205 of the Green Guide emphasises the
need for effective liaison with the club, in connection with
advance planning and debriefing.     Co-ordination is necessary not
only for policing inside the ground but also policing outside
directly connected with the match - for example escorting fans or
directing traffic.


In addition to specific operational decisions by the chief
officer, the Association of Chief Police Officers (ACPO) issues
general guidance to its members on the policing of football
matches.


Cost of policing football


C.QSt^<^^Q3fig^Ck-^otfrgl 1


Substantial police resources are deployed on football duties.        No
precise record is made centrally but on two Saturdays last
November a sample by ACPO revealed an average of 5,000 officers
in England and Wales deployed on these duties on each of the
days.     Slightly more were deployed outside grounds than inside.
The total cost of this activity would depend on the precise rates
of pay and periods of duty of each officer involved, but an
indicative cost might be in the range of £200,000 to £300,000 per
"football Saturday".


As a 'special service' within the meaning of section 15 of the
Police Act 1964 the cost of police presence inside the ground, if
the chief officer agrees to provide it, is normally charged to
the club.
Police intelligence and liaison F8


Police operations at football matches are usefully reinforced by
suitable advance planning and, especially, by information eg on
known travel routes and numbers attending and by intelligence on
possible trouble at matches and on individuals thought likely to
cause that.


Good liaison generally exists between police forces whose
supporters are meeting in a fixture, territorial ('Home Office')
police forces and British Transport Police.   Many individual
forces have made efforts to collate intelligence on football
hooliganism.
  /£
The Home Office intends shortly to establish a National Football
Intelligence Unit as a central police team (under Common Police
Service arrangements) to promote the further development and co­
ordination of local efforts and to take a central view on
emerging national trends and issues of concern.


Some forces have also undertaken covert investigations over
protracted periods to identify small numbers of hard-core
football hooligans who engage in systematic, organised violence.
Some subsequent trials were unsuccessful when evidence was
brought into doubt and all defendants were acquitted.
Appropriate lessons have been learned.   But other operations have
been highly successful.   Most recently in operation 'Omega'    (...
sentencing expected 5/6 June.   25 out of 26 defendants have
pleaded guilty to all substantive charges, including conspiracy.
Heavy press interest likely.)


Perimeter Fences


One of the possible counter-measures to hooliganism is the use
of perimeter fences to assist with segregation of opposing
supporters.   See also paragraphs    above.   (Reference to G1
evidence)
Responding to major outbreaks of hooliganism - 'Swifter Justice'

Home Office Circular 62/1988 issued on 4 August 1988 invited the
courts, the police and others to formulate contingency plans to
bring very rapidly before a court those involved in large scale
disorder.    Swift action was intended to deter further outbreaks
and to demonstrate the determination of the agencies involved to
deal with hooliganism.    The initiative envisaged disorder in
general, but included that arising in the context of football.


CONTROL ON ADMISSION


An important ingredient in the safe conduct of football matches
is adequate control on the numbers of spectators admitted within
the authorised limit and, frequently, the segregation of opposing
supporters in different parts of the ground to prevent conflict.
Rigorous control by the organisers is therefore important
whenever there is a potential for trouble, often strengthened by
an 'all ticket' requirement (ie an announcement that spectators
will be admitted only with tickets bought in advance, none being
on sale on the say of the match).


Potential threats to safety related to ticketing arrangements
are those which would result in overcrowding inside grounds:
especially unauthorised entry without tickets or with forged
tickets.    Other threats to public order exist for example from
touts selling tickets to persons the organisers wish to exclude
or selling tickets without regard *to segregation arrangements so
that rival fans are admitted to the same enclosures.    Other crime
can be associated with ticket arrangements such as theft by
snatching valid tickets near the turnstiles.


Ticket allocation


The overall limit on ground capacity, and limits on individual
parts of the ground, are set by the licensing authority and
guidance on this is given in Chapter 16 of the Guide.    (Section
14 of the Public Order Act 1986 also gives the police the power
          to limit numbers at any public assembly, but only if the senior
          police officer reasonably believes serious public disorder (etc)
          may result.    We are not aware of this power having been used in
          the context of football matches.)


          Before tickets are offered for sale organisers normally allocate
          a certain proportion between home and away supporters, and
          possibly others.       This would, reasonably, have regard to expected
          demand but also to arrangements for their arrival and separate
          entry to the ground (paragraph 205 of the Guide).



          While an allocation of tickets that is perceived as fair by all
          groups is desirable, that may not be achievable, for example if
          total demand for tickets significantly exceeds the overall
    "     capacity of the ground.      In those circumstances it is therefore
^
          important that supporters unable to obtain tickets accept they
                          ' "*              ’      i.i.i.'w ii.m iw i, . . !   —   ... .— .        t


         will be unable to enter the ground; and suitable precautions may
          be necessary to deal with those who nevertheless try to enterT                                           ^


         Unauthorised entry


         Methods that may be employed to gain entry to football grounds
         without authorisation include rushing or forcing turnstiles or
          other points on the perimeter of the ground;                                        bribing turnstile
         operators;     and snatching tickets from others.                                      Entry to the
         ground without payment to the operators may constitute an offence
         of evasion of liability by deception (Section 2 of the Theft Act
          1978);   and snatching someone else's ticket may well amount to an
         offence of theft (Section 1, Theft Act 1968).                                         Such action poses
         activity which the club and police at a ground may need to be
         ready to deal with appropriately.        (Depending on circumstances
        ^ the police may have the power under common law, for the
         preservation or public order           , to control access eg in
         the vicinity of the ground, turning away those without tickets
         to prevent them approaching the turnstiles.                                     F2/TAB content?^
Unauthorised ticket sales


It is desirable for clubs to control the distribution of tickets
so that as far as is practical they do not fall into the hands of
known troublemakers or those known to have abused arrangements
for the distribution of tickets in the past.    For some games
tickets are only released for sale at the latest practical
moment, to minimise the opportunities for circulation to ticket
touts and forgers.


The Government is not in principle opposed to re-selling of
tickets being at increased prices.   Such commercial activity is a
response to market forces, and would-be purchasers will be clear
if they are paying a premium over the face value of the ticket,
and are free not to buy if they consider the price too high.      The
activity of "ticket touts" offering tickets for sale in the near
vicinity of grounds, especially, at all-ticket matches, can
present problems as fans may be encouraged to travel there in the
hope of buying tickets.   If unsuccessful they may in frustration
be tempted to try to enter the ground anyway.


There are a variety of powers which may be used against ticket
touts.   A club may eject a tout from their premises if they wish.
The police may ask someone who is unlawfully obstructing the
highway to move and, if necessary, may arrest him.   They may also
act to prevent a breach of the peace.   If they have reasonable
grounds to suspect that someone is carrying a stolen or
prohibited article (which would include forged tickets) they may
stop him and search him and they also have power to arrest him if
they reasonably suspect him of having committed theft or fraud or
any other offence for which the maximum period of imprisonment is
5 years or more.


The Government has not been convinced that further powers to deal
with ticket touts are necessary, or that a further specific
offence of ticket touting would be practical or enforceable.     It
may well be that any further measures should come from tighter
controls by the organisers of sporting events over the
distribution of tickets, and the imposition of sanctions against
, those found abusing the controls.    (C4/DOE comments on this
  section?)


 Forged Tickets F8/C4


 Forged tickets are a serious matter not only because of the
 dishonesty, deception and fraud involved but also because they
 could lead to serious overcrowding.    However practical
 difficulties arise both with detecting forgeries, particularly
 given advances in printing technology, and in identifying the
persons responsible.    There is a responsibility on clubs to try
 counter forgery eg by safeguards in the printing of tickets:
watermarks and even holograms have been used on tickets.       All
 seating areas also assist in detecting forged tickets since it is
obvious when two people have tickets with the same seat number.


Where a person makes or sells a forged ticket he may be guilty of
offences under Section 15 of the Theft Act 1968 and Sections 1 to
5 of the Forgery and Counterfeiting Act 1981 which carry maximum
penalties of up to ten years' imprisonment.


 (Newspapers reported that on 5 May Judge John Prosser QC at
Cardiff Crown Court sentenced 3 defendants to terms of 4, 3 and 2
years' imprisonment and a fourth to 1 year's detention following
the distribution of 2,000 forged tickets for Welsh rugby
internationals.    It was also reported that fairly serious
problems of overcrowding arose at the matches.)



MATCHES OVERSEAS


The Government also considers it very important to do all it
reasonably can to deter and deal with football hooliganism by
those from our country who travel to matches abroad.


In 1985 very serious disorder by Liverpool fans at the Heysel
stadium in Belgium during a match with Juventus led to the death
of 39 people when a wall collapsed.     A substantial police
investigation identified 26 suspects who were extradited to
Belgium; [?] were recently convicted (although some defendants
are appealing).   Following the Heysel tragedy English clubs were
banned from UEFA competitions in Europe.     Then in the Summer of
1988 over 300 English fans were detained in West Germany during
disturbances at the European Nations Cup.     (To be updated bv C 5 )


The Government has sought action in two main respects: through
powers to prevent certain hooligans from travelling to key
matches abroad ('restriction orders'), and through encouraging
effective international liaison between police forces and between
football authorities.


Restriction Orders


Part II of the Football Spectators Bill now before Parliament
proposes for the courts with a new power, on convicting someone
in England or Wales for a football related offence, to impose a
restriction order on him if the court is satisfied that would
help to prevent violence at or in connection with a designated
football match in other countries.     Provision is also made, after
designation of the appropriate arrangements, for a restriction
order to be made in respect of a conviction outside England or
Wales for an offence corresponding to a football related offence.
Under the terms of the Bill a restriction order if imposed would
be for two years or, if the accused was sentenced to immediate
imprisonment, five years.


The effect of a restriction order would be that the person must
report to an agency (the reporting agency) on the occasion of a
designated match (outside England and Wales), thus preventing him
from attending.   Failure to report as directed would be a
criminal offence punishable by up to one month's imprisonment or
a level 3 fine (currently £400) or both.


The reporting agency is unspecified in the Bill and might for
example be the police, probation service or a private security
firm - or some combination of these.    The Bill provides for a
degree of selectivity so that, for example, full internationals
would probably lead to all persons subject to a restriction order
being required to report whereas when individual clubs were
playing abroad only some individuals might foe 1called u p1.   The
Bill also provides for someone to apply for exemption from a
requirement to report, where special circumstances exist, and for
termination of the restriction order.


The Government believes restriction orders will be effective in
significantly reducing hooliganism at football matches outside
England and Wales by persons from those two countries, and will
demonstrate to other countries (especially in Europe) our resolve
to tackle this problem.   The proposed powers have received
general support.   The conceptual alternative of withdrawing
someone's passport was considered both ineffective (since it is
relatively easy to obtain a temporary British Visitors Passport)
and too sweeping a restriction (since it would prohibit all
foreign travel, whether a foreign match was taking place or not).


Police liaison


Football hooliganism is discussed by European Community partners
under the 'TREVI' committee of law enforcement Ministers and
officials.   Under the UK's Presidency of the EC in 1986 a network
of 'Permanent Correspondents' on football was established: each
country has nominated such a person who then acts as the primary
communication channel between police forces in his own country,
and other EC countries, in connection with football.     (Police
forces remain free to communicate directly, if appropriate.)       The
arrangements have been put to frequent use and are considered to
be helpful by EC partners.


During the European championships last Summer police liaison
officers from this country went to West Germany to provide on the
spot advice to the German police who were responsible for public
order at matches involving the English team.     Advice was provided
on the handling of English supporters, and on the identity and
suspected intentions of troublemakers.     Various other EC
countries provided similar support.     This too was a considerable
success and the Government intends that it should be repeated for
the World Cup in Italy next year.     The lessons from the
experience in Germany have been incorporated in draft guidelines
for international co-operation on the policing of international
football matches; these are being discussed within TREVI.

Football authorities


(DOE - international co-operation on security arrangements,
ticket sales, etc; and on the Council of Europe Convention on
Spectator Violence?).
