                                       ISi?■aftu Aionn/es Ref;                 j
                                                                           \\ b \ \    8^   M I R . 15


                                                                                                                   'h          6
OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                Date and tim e raised                    \v_y3D       Number
                                                                                                                   •y


Title
                                   ^                            C ix 3 ^ > y       -
(Include source an d a n y docum ent num ber i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/Mfi
                                                                                                                         Receiver
  ^trcrrs ..


                                                                                                                         Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised                      ft 4-05                                                                M i s ­
                                                                                                                  S tatem ent Reader
statem ent reader's instructions            JZ-



                                                                                                                         Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined       further action to be taken                                                                         O /M          SIO




Further action No(s)                                                                                                     ndexer

                                                                                                                           ■7 ?r
When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Number Form
                                                                 Liverpool
Mr Johnnie Kennedy,
                                                                 17th April 1989.
Radio City.


Bear J.K.

      What can one say about this great city of our, once again the heart has been
t o m out entire somraunity.
      My son left happily for the match on Saturday and      returned a verybitterand
angry young man. He related to us scenes that will be          etched in   horror in    his
memory.
      Waiting for news as you will know was unbearable. When you know your son is
in that part of the ground and pictures are being flashed on to the T.V. every few
nprnutes left us with a feeling       of complete helplessness.
      Our son had a chance of astand ticket but that would have taken him over his
cash budget so he opted for a Leppings Lane End ticket.
      He got to the ground with his mates at 1 - 50 and       they made  theirway      tothe
front, just'.behind the goal. He said that even then they could not move due to the
crush but eventually theydid manage to edge themselves out and they found their
wayyover to the other side of the partition gate.
      When the disaster struck he and his mates shouted at a policeman to open the
gate but he took no notice. My son was shouting at him that people were dying but
his pleas went unheard.
      His friend shouted that he was trained in mouth to mouth and first aid but
he was told to "Piss Off* 1 don't want to know"
      My son said that the police had no idea how to deal with the situation.
      The Liverpool supporters are treated like animals and this was borne out on
Saturday, they were caged up and left. Even eaged animals have room to move but
moving space was denied to those poor people.
      Why   are the great people of this eity classed as dirt?
      Our   son is 21 years old, hehas never been in trouble in his life, •]?$. has a,
good job    and loves Liverpool F.C. He has a season ticket for the AnfieldRoad
stand that his Mum and 1 bought him for his 21st birthday.
      Why do the young lads of this city have to suffer the humiliation of a full
body search. He told us that the way he was treated would not even happen at Risley.
He was ordered to stand with his legs apart and his arms outstretched. He was
searched inside the back of his trousers and down the inside of his socks. He was
ordered to remove his ring and was asked if he intended to throw it when he got
inside the ground. He was told to empty his pockets and was asked why he was
carrying keys and money, he was also questioned about his job. I agree that these
precautions are necessary but only if they apply to everyone entering the ground,if
not then the system stinks. Our son is not a hooligan but he was treated like one.
Can you really blame the youngsters rebelling against the system when they are
treated like they were on Saturday.
      Surely Johnnie, enough is enough, the treatment of our young people by over
 zealous louts in other cities has got to stop.
      My son convinced me that the Sheffield Police had no idea of protecting those
people who were crushed. The price they paid to be murdered was just £6, that's
all Johnnie, just £6 to meet the most horrible death imaginable. They can hold all
the enquiries they want but it will not alter the fact that those fans that died
 on Saturday were murdered and all those helpless fans who stood and watched them die
will bear witness
       When ay son was watching the disaster he saw a man he knew wandering around in
 a daze looking for his daughter. My son could see his daughter on the pitch and he
 shouted to the man that his daughter was okay. When my son went to the Bridge in
 Pieton Road last night the man saw hi* and he came over to my son and told him that
 for the rest of his life he would never forget my sons face as they looktfeW-eacn
 other when my son pointed to his daughter on the pitch. What more can 1 say after
 that.
       Please thank the old lady outside the Sheffield ground for letting my son use
 the phone.
                       See you,
