     Statement of Gary James OGILVIE                                      i   q   Q
     Police Constable 333                                                         '
     C group Ecclesfield.                                                      ! 3-1


                        Evidence concerning events of Saturday 15th April 1989




         On the day in question X paraded for duty at Ecclesfield Police station
         at 0900 hours. I was then transported by bus to Hillsborough football
         ground where upon arrival I confirmed that I was be part of serial ^9
         pa.troiling the Foxhill area of Sheffield in a Transit van, Tango


         Myself and other meabers of this serial tods our seats in the North Stand
         for the breifing by senior and intelligence officers before collecting our
         meals and comencing patrol at approximately 10.50 hours.




••
         Our first port of call was "he Fox public house situated on Foxhill Road.
         This is a fairly large pub with a very large tarmacadam carpark and grassed
         area opening onto the above road. At about 11.05 hours n^self and Inspector
         Robinson visited the Landlord in the Lounge Bar of the premises. He stated
          that he had five extra staff on duty and had retained the services of "a big
         lad1' as doorman. He also said that he had extra beer and lager on and that he
         would be welcoming Liverpool supporters. At this time there were a few locals
          drinking in the pub and about two "families" of Liverpool supporters with
          young children. These supporters were quietly minding their own business .
          The manager was advised that we would be patrolling the area and calling by
          regularly and that we should be contacted in the event of any need for assistance.


          We then resumed patrol , checking-visually other pubs in the area. Most were
          either quiet o^ cloded. However during this time many supporters began to flood
          into the side streets in this area and park their private cars and vans.


          At 31.30 fars we again checked The Fox public house. It was starting to fill up
          with crowds of LFC fans standing outside drinking in the sunshine. The surrounding
          streets in Foxhill and uptowards Grenoside were now very busy with the vehicles
          of arriving fans ; to the extent that it made manouvering of our shortwheelbase
          transit van very difficult. We then observed that traffic    flowing freely down
          Halifax Road from the North with many supporter*,   arriving in private cars, vans
          and hire minibuses. These vehicles were turning off into the Foxhill and Parson
          Cross estates? presumably to park.


          At 12.10 we again during our patrols checked The Fox pub. The car park was now
                                                                                       kV-
f u n to capacity with people standing very close to each other, sitting
on cars and standing on the boundary wall ; all drinking      alcohol.


At 12.30 we were directed by control to attend at      Wilcox         Road, Foxhill
where youths were reported to be acting disorderly manner and urinating
in peoples front gardens. At the scene we liaised with PCs stationed at
the bottom of the road who stated that 5-6 liverpool fans had passed them
being abusive and throwing down beer cans. Some of this team were observed
to go up Wilcox Rd and urinate in gardens. We saw this group of youths
walking up that road and stopped and spoke to them. All had been drinking
heavily and were in a very boisterous mood. They were advised and pointed
inthe direction of the ground. We followed then down the hill and near the
bottom they all boarded a SYPTE bus bound for the      town centre.


At 12,50 we again visually checked the Fox pubilc      house. By now thecar park
was bursting to capacity and fans stood drinking some distance up and down
Foxhill Road on the Pavement on both sides drinking alcohol purchased from
The Fox. I would estiipate the number in the car park and walls alone to
be in the region of ^bout 300 to kOO, With a ftirther 200T standing on the
pavement and pull- in on the opposite pavement.   ThigJfe was in there number
a large drunken, rowdy contingent who cat called as we passed and who
continued to do so when we paused for observations.


At 1300 hours we checked the White HORSE public house on Halifax/Southey green
Road. This, too, was full of LFC supporters and the scene was very similar to
that at The Fox.


At 13*05 hours we receive a message from control to attend at GT news, a
newsagent,tobacconist and confectionary shop opposite the Fox pub. The
manegeress stated that six drunken LFC fans had come into her shop and
acted disorderly before stealing cigarettes and sweets. She followed them
outside where they were very abusive and threatening and saw them drive off
in a White 'Renault van registered number


At 15.15 hrs I saw the van being driven on Halifax Road. We followed to the
car park of The White Horse pub where it parked up. After a short conversation
the six occupants of the van were arrested by me and placed in our police
van. They were then transported to EPS arriving at 13.i*0 hours.
                                                                   cont/-
                              -   3-




 The prisoners were all Liverpool supporters ranging in age from 18 yrs to
 37 years. They had all been drinking both in the van on the way over and
 at The Fox public house. They stated that they had arrived in plenty of
 time at about 12.15 hours. When booking the prisoners property in it was
 found that not all of then had tickets for the match.


It was ascertained that all six had attended Sheffield for the match with only
TWO West stand ticket between them. They had managed to swap one of these
tickets for TWO lepping lane terrace tickets; brining the total held to THREE
between SIX. The prisoners told me that they had heard that tickets would be
on sale from touts at the ground and that last year the officials at the ground
had let some in without checking tickets owing to the rush because of the
match starting. It was further noted when booking in property that there was
very little cash between them. And certainly some of those without match tickets
did not have sufficent funds -to purchase tickets at TOUTS prices; indeed they
only had loose change.


This was noted at the time and subject of discussion between myself and the
custody officer. Obviously the full significance of this information did not
become apparent until later? but the custody records corroborating this
evidence re property are availible for examination at Ecclesfield     police station.
It appeared to me at the time that if these prisoners had insuficient funds     to
buy tickets and that they   ere determined to get into see the match ( this was
.more than apparen by the noise and ^complaints comming from the cells when they
were detained) then they were going to attempt to gain enrty by some means. This
is again corroborated by the fact that they had turned up on spec without money
but with the knowledge that people had some how gained enrty at the last minute last
year because of the rush.


The prisoners were all held whilst     I liaised with CID regarding their interview.
At about 15.15 hours I was in the CID office when PC 12^+2 Armitage called me
and told me that OPERATION SUPPORT was required at the ground. My transit had
departed earlier so I was driven in a police car to the ground in co PC 12^+2
Armitage, PS 2269 Strafford and Inspector Hudson. We arrived at the Leppings
lane end at about 15-30 hours. We parked the car in a side street and all headed
towards the tumsiles. Fans were pouring out of the ground some confused, some
angry and others obviously distressed by something.
As I approached the gate infront of the turnstiles, a few paces behind
Inspector Hudson, I saw a LFC fan attack him and try to punch him. Hudson
managed to restrain the 'youth who was upset and crying, I assisted him and
pulled the youth off and took him awajr from the scene. During the struggle
I received an injury to my right foot ; it was not serious and the bruise
only lasted a few days. I tried to calm him down but he kept shouting " THERE
IS FUCKING DEAD BODIES IN THESE". I released the youth to ths custody of friends
and returned to the main gates.


I had NO personal radio so I was unaware of the circumstances of the incident,
however I assumed there had been some sort of crush, perhaps a wall collapse.
A mass of people were pouring out of the gates at Leppings Lane. Most of them
did not know what had happened either and seemed mostly concerned with the fact
that they had not gained entry oy wished to know if the match was abandonded.


However quite a few of there number informed me that some supporters had been
crushed because of a massive surge or that a gate had been opened by the police
or stewards. I was on my own now so I tried to move fans out of the path of
oncomming emergency vehicles; the progress of which they were hampering. I
sensed that something very disasterous had happened from the mood and tears
of fans. I continued to try to clear the roadway but the mood of some fans was
                  u j-ti-e-gl
very agressive fesaxtd by the fact that they were heavily under the influnee
of intoxicants. I was jostled and abused by these drunken fans and whilst
attempting to move a large congregation from the path of a Fire Engine I was
punched on the right shoulder by an unknown assailant and jeered and insulted
by the rest of the group. Some still had beer cans in their hands.


The situation had become potentially very violent with all the violence and abuse
apparently directed at the police. I was still in the dark about the incident of
requirements as I was on my own without a personal radio. After the task
of keeping fans of/the road became fruitless and dangerous to my personal
                                1^ 0 p i   S   ^
safety I looked further down ■&: and saw my serial in their transit van.
PS 2207 Shaw saw me and got me back into the van. Crowds of LFC fans jeered and
rocked the van as they passed. Several police motorcyclists parked across from
us became very vunerable to attack by fans and after a few close calls
had to move on. The fans shouted "MURDERESS'* to us and other officers as they ■
walked by0


The Sgt. in the van had a personal rasio but the reception and communication
was very bad. Inspector Robinson got out of the van to go to police control_
                                                        cont/-
to find out what assistance we could render or if our vehicle could be of
any use* We heard over a domestic pocket radio owa'cd'-by- oner                            -in tba—gan
that fans had been killed. Wo oecmedr=feo get more idea of the eriygtrmst&aees
and_g]^3gj.4^-oilLiiij&ry--aRd jieath from t h l ^ set -t-faat- Jrout "tlie police- ofaanne3^»-


 Inspector Robinson returned and stated that our van was need ed as an
ambulance and that we were needed to assist at the mortuary area, situated
 in the gym* We left the driver with the van and walked through the extreme
left ahnd gate at         ana down along behind the North stand towards the gym.


I was detailed by the Inspector to go to the gym to ask if any more numbers were
                             <^ > 'A y t^ a 0 L 'M iV
needed inside* Luckily a ^ o n the door stated that there was enough help but
asked that we keep fans looking for lost family/friends as well as sightseers
away. Our serial along with some men drafted in from Barnsley formed a
cordon along a line between the corner of the North stand and some outbuildings
parallel to the stand*


We allowed only streachers bearing the dead and injured through as well as
police,nurses,doctors,ambulance men,and other officials. Some fans earring IPs
were allowed to take them through. Ambulances reversed up to our cordon and
IPs were taken away* Many fans approached our line in a very distressed state
inquiring after lost party members. Many became aggressive and violent at not
being allowed to look through the dead and injured for them. Again many of the
most aggressive and violent fans had been drinking and still smelled heavily
of intosicants. At one point I received a kick from a fan being refused access
to the back of my left knee. He was removed after a struggle with sober
friends and other officers^


Inspector Robinson and PS Shaw then asked members of our serial to assist
with a makeshift casualty desk. I took details and descriptions of those
missing form fans and asked them to return to their transport in case the r\
missing person was looking for them. Some were bussed down to                          to give
info to the casualty bureau.


At about 18.00 hours serial ^+9 was asked to return to their van at Claywheels
Lane, pending further assignment. Reunited with the van, we had to attend
several times at the -£gg to deal with Fans lighting with pressmen. Other officers
were present at the scene and we acted as back up. we were eventually stood down
at 20.00 hours. I had a meal at Claywheels and went of duty at Ecclesield police
station at 20o30 hours.                                 _______________ ____ _______
to find out what assistance we could render or if our vehicle could be of
any use.   We heard over a domestic pocket radio that fans had been killed.


Inspector Robinson returned and stated that our van was needed as an
ambulance and that we were needed to assist at the mortuary area, situated
in the gym.    We left the driver with the van and walked through the extreme
left hand gate at Leppings Lane and down along behind the North stand
towards the g y m .


I was detailed by the Inspector to go to the gym to ask if any more numbers
were needed inside.     Luckily a Sergeant on the door stated that there was
enough help but asked that we keep fans looking for lost family/friends as
well as sightseers away.     Our serial along with some men drafted in from
Barnsley formed a cordon along a line between the corner of the North Stand
and some outbuildings parallel to the stand.


We allowed only stretchers bearing the dead and injured through as well as
Police, nurses, doctors, ambulancemen and other officials.     Some fans
carrying IPs were allowed to take them through.     Ambulances reversed up to
our cordon and IPs were taken away.     Many fans approached our line in a very
distressed state inquiring after lost party members.     Many became aggressive
and violent at not being allowed to look through the dead and injured for
them.    Again many of the most aggressive and violent fans had been drinking
and still smelled heavily of intoxicants.     At one point I received a kick
from a fan being refused access, to the back of my left knee.     He was
removed after a struggle with sober friends and other officers.


InspectorRobinson and PS Shaw then asked members of our serial to assist
with a makeshift casualty desk.     I took details and descriptions of those
missing from fans and asked them to return to their transport in case the
missing person was looking for them.     Some were bussed down to Hammerton
Road Police Station to give info to the Casualty Bureau.


At about 1800 hours, serial 49 was asked to return to their van at
Claywheels Lane, pending further assignment.     Reunited with the van, we had
to attend several times at the Northern General Hospital to deal with fans
fighting with pressmen.     Other Officers were present at the scene and we
acted as back u p .   We were eventually stood down at 2000 hours.   I had a
meal at Claywheels and went off duty at Ecclesfield Police Station at 2030
hours.                                               ---------------------------
                             -   6-

On return to Ecclesfield I learned that my six prisoners had all been released
at about 18.15 hours with a warning but no further action to be taken against
themo




                      Gary   James    Ogilvie
                      Police Constable 333®
