I




    $ € & & & £ * *   *V   £   f. f   *
                          Jpo' I ^ ^
                           2.
                           i
                          (D




O*?>0'}y   ~HtOi GrijI,
                                                                                                  2 Park Lane
H am m ond S u d d a rd s                                                                         Leeds
                                                                                                  LS3 1ES
                                                                                                  Telephone (0113) 284 7000
                                                                                                  DX No. 26441
                                                                                                  Fax (0113) 284 7001
                                                                                                  Peter.Metcalf@HammondSuddards.co.uk



 Ian Daines Esq
 Assistant Chief Constable
 South Yorkshire Police
 Police Headquarters
 SnigHill
 Sheffield
 S3 8LY


                                                                                                                                                                 V(| m YI
 Our Ref:                                                           Your Ref:                                                      D ate:

 PCM. SB. CHI. 57-9                                                 ACC ID NMH                                                      14 May 1999




 Dear Ian

 Hillsborough Stadium Disaster 1989
 Judicial Review__________________

 I now enclose a copy of the sealed Court Order on the Judicial Review which, in spite of the date on
 the seal, has reached me today.

 There is no action which needs to be taken and a copy will have been delivered direct to the Police
 Authority Solicitors.

 I should be interested to know in time how David and Bernard’s solicitors get on with recovering
 their costs from Ms Adlington

 Yours sincerely




 P C METCALF




                                                                                                                                       chi.057-0009.letdaines.1405.pcm.doc

 Offices also at:

 7 Devonshire Square              Trinity Court                      Pennine House                  Suite 688 Lloyd's                       Avenue Louise 250
 Cutlers Gardens                  16 John Dalton Street              39-45 Well Street              One Lime Street                         1050 Brussels
 London                           Manchester                         Bradford                       London                                  Belgium
 EC 2M 4Y H                       M 60 8HS                           BD1 5NU                        EC3M 7HA                                Telephone (00) 32 2 627 7676
 Telephone (0171) 655 1000        Telephone ( 0 l6 i ) 8 3 0 5000    Telephone (01274) 7347* m*     Telephone (0171) 327 3388/3399          Fax (00) 32 2 627 7686
 Fax (0171) 655 1001              Fax (0161) 830 5001                F a x (01274)307239            Fax (0171) 621 1217

 A list o f Partners can be view ed at the above address. This firm is regulated by the Law Society m the conduct ol investment business.
CO/582/99

DATED the 31st day of March 1999


IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE

QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION

DIVISIONAL COURT

BEFORE THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD JUSTICE
LAWS
And THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE CRESSWELL
and THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE LATHAM

IN THE MATTER of an application for Judicial Review


THE QUEEN -v- (l)THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                 AUTHORITY
              (2)HILLSBOROUGH FAMILY
                 SUPPORT GROUP
INTERESTED PARTY
             (1) BERNARD MURRAY
             (2) DAVID DUCKENFEELD


EX PARTE              CHIEF CONSTABLE of SOUTH
                      YORKSHIRE POLICE



    UPON READING the Notice of Motion herein dated the 17thday of

February 1999 filed on behalf of the above-named Applicant together with the

statement lodged pursuant to Order 53 Rule 3(2) of the Rules of the Supreme
Court for Judicial Review o f the decisions made by the Respondent on 5th

February 1998:-

1. that the Respondent has no legal power to provide financial assistance to

     Mr David Duckenfield or Mr Bernard Murray in relation to their expenses

     of defending the private prosecutions brought against them by the

     Hillsborough Family Support Group (“H F S G”), by information dated 10th

^    July 1998, and that any previous decision of the respondent, or any officer

*    acting under its authority, to make such assistance available is null and void;

2.   that the Respondent has no legal power to provide financial assistance ro

     Mr David Duckenfield or Mr Bernard Murray in relation to the costs of any

     Judicial review proceedings brought by either of them, whether relating to

     the decision of the Crown Prosecution Service not to take over the conduct

     of the private prosecutions and discontinue such prosecutions, or to any

     decision of the Clerk to the Sefton Magistrates Court to challenge the

     payment of the officers’ costs of proceedings before that Court from

     Central Funds, or to any other decisions of any Court. Authority or body

     arising from such prosecutions; and accordingly, to reject the applications

     of Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray for financial assistance in relation to
                                   *


     such proceedings




     AND THE RELIEF SOUGHT:-

1.   Certiorari to quash the decisions of 5thFebruaiy 1999 identified above;

2.   A Declaration that the Respondent has vires to provide financial assistance

     to David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray in relation to their costs and

     expenses of defending the private prosecutions brought against them by the
      Hillsborough Family Support Group;

 3 ■ A Declaration that the Respondent has vires to provide financial assistance

      to David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray in relation to their costs and

      expenses of defending the private prosecutions brought against them by the

     H F S G as and when such costs and expenses are incurred and irrespective

     of the outcome of the prosecution and any application for costs -mufe

     against the private prosecutor;

4.   A Declaration that the respondent has vires to provide financial         assktanrp


     to David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray in relation to their costs and

     expenses of defending the private prosecution brought against them by the

     H F S G irrespective of whether they have attempted to obtain or could

     obtain financial assistance by way of Legal Aid and/or a declaration that the

     availability or otherwise of legal aid is an irrelevant consideration;

5. A Declaration that the Respondent has vires to provide financial assistance

     to David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray in relation to the costs and

     expenses of any Judicial Review proceedings brought by either of them
                                                                    J r-

     relating to the decision of the Director of Public Prosecutions not to

     intervene in the private prosecution;

6. A Delaration that David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray have a legitimate

     expectation that their costs an expenses of defending the criminal

     prosecution will be met by the Respondent as and when such costs and

     expenses are incurred




     AND UPON READING the                    affirmation of Ian Daines (Assistant

Chief Constable of South Yorkshire affirmed the 10th day of February 1999
together with the exhibits referred to therein filed on behalf of the Applicant in

support of this Motion




     AND UPON READING the affidavit of                  William James Wilkinson

sworn the 26thday of February 1999 filed on behalf of First Respondent; Ann

Marie Adlington sworn the 26thday of February 1999, 10th day of March 1999;

and Dennis Luty sworn the 5th day of March 1999 on behalf of the Sefton

Magistrates together with the exhibits referred to therein




    AND UPON HEARING Counsel for the parties Mr                     Nigel Baker

QC with Ms Louise Varty          on behalf of the Applicant and Ms Presiley

Baxendale QC with Mr Mark Shaw on behalf of the Respondent, Mr Alun

Jones QC with Mr James Lewis on behalf of the Second Respondent, and Mr

Michael Harrison QC with Mr Simon Myerson on behalf of Duckenfield and

Murray




    IT DECLARED

“ that a police authority has the statutory power, but subject to ordinary

law principles, to provide financial assistance to police officers and former

police officers in respect of their costs and expenses incurred in relation to

private prosecutions brought against them and judicial review proceedings

in which they participate”




    rr IS FURTHER ORDERED                       that the costs of    the Judicial
Review funding question in Duckenfield and Murray be paid by Ms A M

Adlington, and that there be no other order as to costs




[This matter occupied the time o f the Court from 1029 to 1032 on 22 March

{999, 1030 to 1300 and 1400 to 1505 on 24 March 1999, and 1030 to 1150 on

*25March 1999 and0955 to 1037 on 31 march 1999]




By the Court




                              5
                                 DATE 31st March 1999
                                 IN THE HIGH COURT OF
                                 JUSTICE
                                 QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION
                                 DIVISIONAL COURT
                                 LORD JUSTICE LAWS
                                 MR JUSTICE CRESSWELL
                                 MR JUSTICE LATHAM

                                 THE QUEEN
                                     V
                                 (1) SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                     POLICE AUTHORITY
                                 (2) H F S G
                                 EX PARTE C C SOUTH
                                 YORKSHIRE
                                 DUCKENFIELD
                                 MURRAY (INTERESTED
                                 PARTYS)

                                      ORDER
                                      CO/582/99
Interested Party - Duckenfield
Winckworth Sherwood________      Applicant's Solicitors
DX 2312                          Hammond Suddards
Victoria                         2 Park Lane
                                 Leeds
Interested Party - Murray        LS3 1ES
Walker Morris                    Ref: PCM. SB .CHI. 57-9
Kings Court
12 King Street                   ■1* Respondent's Solicitors
Leeds                            Garretts
LSI 2HL                          1 City Square
                                 Leeds
                                 LSI 2AL
                                 Ref: NJP.EC

                                 2nd Respondent’s Solicitor
                                 HFSG
                                 1st Floor
                                 Central Buildings
                                 41 North John Street
                                 Liverpool
                                 L2 6RR
       SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY




  Report on the outcome of the Chief Constable's judicial review of the Police

A uthority’s decisions m ade on 5 February 1999 in relation to the fu n d in g of legal

        expenses of form er Police Officers and further assistance sought

                               tow ards such expenses




                                     13 M ay 1999


                      NOT FOR PUBLICATION £3 it
                      contains exemp^formauon
                      within para    .«..*£./.&»........ of
                      Sch. 12A to ins Local Government
                      Act 1972 as amended




                              G arretts
                                    1    City Square
                                   Leeds, LSI 2AL
                                   Ref: NJP.AG.EC
CONFIDENTIALITY NOTICE




THERE IS MATERIAL IN THIS TEXT AND THE APPENDICES WHICH IS
CONFIDENTIAL. IT CONTAINS INFORMATION DISCLOSED BY MR
DUCKENFIELD, MR MURRAY AND THEIR ADVISORS WHICH, IF IT IS
DISCLOSED AT THIS STAGE, COULD PREJUDICE THEIR LEGAL POSITION.
MEMBERS ARE THERFORE REQUESTED TO KEEP THIS REPORT SECURE
AND DISCUSS ITS CONTENTS WITH NO ONE OUTSIDE THE MEMBERS OF
THE POLICE AUTHORITY, ITS OFFICERS AND ADVISORS.




                               1
                                      CONTENTS


    1 PURPOSE OF THIS REPORT                                                 1

    2 RECOMMENDATIONS                                                        2

    3 THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER - KEY EVENTS FROM 15 APRIL 1989      3

    4 THE POWERS JUDICIAL REVIEW                                             9

    5 THE LITIGATION FOR WHICH FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE IS SOUGHT               17

    6 PRESENT APPLICATIONS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE                         24

    7 LEGAL FEES INCURRED IN THE CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS UP TO 5 FEBRUARY 1999 28

^   8 THE MERITS OF THE APPLICATIONS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE               34

    9 OPTIONS OPEN TO THE AUTHORITY                                         49




                                         1
1      PURPOSE OF THIS REPORT

The purpose of this report is to consider:

1.1    the judgm ent of the High Court on 31 March 1999, in response to the Chief
       Constable's application for judicial review of the Authority's decisions taken
       on 5 February 1999 ("The Powers Judicial Review"), that the Authority does
       have legal power to provide financial assistance to current and former police
       officers, so long as that power is exercised on norm al public law principles;

1.2    the legal effect of decisions taken by the Authority in 1998 to provide financial
       assistance to Mr David Duckenfield (who was the Divisional Commander,
       then holding the rank of Chief Superintendent in charge of the police
       operations on the day of the Hillsborough Stadium disaster) and Kir Bernard
       M urray (who was the Sub-Divisional Commander, then holding the rank of
       Superintendent, who was also on duty at the match) in relation to private
       prosecutions alleging manslaughter, wilful neglect of a public duty' and
       (against Mr Duckenfield) intentionally perverting the course of justice (the
       ' Leeds Criminal Proceedings" and the "South Sefton Criminal Proceedings")
       brought by Ms Ann Adlington, Solicitor, on behalf of the Hillsborough
       Family Support Group ("HFSG");

1.3    the legal effect of the decisions taken by the Authority on 5 February 1999 to
       reverse the earlier decisions to aw ard funding for the criminal proceedings to
       Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray;

1.4    new applications for financial assistance from Mr Duckenfield and Mr
       Murray to meet their respective legal costs and disbursements in the
       following proceedings:

       1.4.1    the South Sefton Criminal Proceedings, which were discontinued on
                jurisdictional grounds;

       1.4.2    the Leeds Criminal Proceedings which are continuing;

       1.4.3    the judicial review (the "DPP Judicial Review"), judgm ent in respect
                of which was given on 31 March 1999, of the decision of the Director
                of Public Prosecutions not to intervene to take over the conduct of
                the private prosecutions referred to in paragraph 1.2 above which
                resulted in the charge of wilfully perverting the course of justice
                 against Mr Duckenfield being w ithdraw n but no intervention in the
                 other criminal proceedings against the former officers;

        1.4.4    the Powers Judicial Review, in which an aw ard of the former officers'
                 legal costs was made against Ms Adlington (so that only the balance
                 of their legal costs, after Ms Adlington's contribution, would be
                 payable by the Authority if it grants the former officers’ application);
                 and

        1.4.5    a potential judicial review ("the South Sefton Judicial Review") of an
                 adverse ruling by the Clerk to the South Sefton Justices (should one
                 be made) in respect of claims m ade for the payment of Mr
                 Duckenfield's and Mr Murray's costs from central funds (which to
                 the extent that the Authority is legally bound to provide assistance in
                 relation to the South Sefton Criminal Proceedings would effectively
                 be for the benefit of the Authority).


        RECOMMENDATIONS

The Authority is recommended to consider this report, the appendices to it and all
other relevant material p u t to it and:

       subject to being satisfied on the issues referred to in paragraph 7.6.7 below, to
       resolve to pay Mr Duckenfield's and Mr M urray's reasonable and proper
       legal expenses incurred up to 5 February 1999 in relation to the Leeds
        Criminal Proceedings and to request a legal costs draftsman to review the
       expenses claimed a n d /o r apply to the court for an assessment of the costs
       under section 71 Solicitors Act 1974 so as to have those reasonable and proper
       costs determined;

       defer a decision in relation to the costs of the South Sefton Criminal
       Proceedings and the South Sefton Judicial Review until the Court Clerk's
       decision in relation to the paym ent of Mr Duckenfield's and Mr M urray's
       costs from central funds is known;

2.3    defer a decision on the application for financial assistance in respect of the
       Powers Judicial Review, pending assessment and paym ent of Ms Adlington's
       contribution to those costs; and




                                            9
consider the options set out in paragraph 9 of this report in relation to the
applications for financial assistance for costs incurred in the DPP Judicial
Review and, since 5 February 1999, in the Leeds Criminal Proceedings and if
the Authority decides to approve financial assistance for those costs to do so
on terms which limit the Authority's financial exposure.


THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER - KEY EVENTS FROM 15
APRIL 1989

15 April 1999:    FA Cup semi-final between Liverpool Football Club and
N ottingham Forest Football Club at Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield
W ednesday's ground.       Only six minutes into the game, play was stopped
w hen it was realised that spectators on the terraces behind the Liverpool goal
had been severely crushed. As a result, 96 people died and over 400 received
hospital treatment.

17 April 1989: Lord Justice Taylor was appointed

''to carry out an inquiry into the events at Sheffield W ednesday Football
G round of 15 April 1989 and to make recommendations about the needs of
crowd control and safety at sports events".

17 April 1989: Geoffrey Dear QPM, Chief Constable of W est M idlands Police,
appointed to carry out independent investigation of the disaster and gather
evidence.

19 April 1989: West M idlands Police assumed responsibility for the inquiry.

HM Coroner opened and adjourned inquests on 95 deaths that had already
occurred as a result of the disaster (the death of the last victim to die, Mr Tony
Bland, occurring at a later date).

4 A ugust 1989:       Having head the oral testimony of over 170 witnesses
between 15 May and 19 June 1989, Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report was
m ade public. He found that the immediate cause of the gross over-crowrding
which had taken place, and thus of the disaster, had been the failure to cut off
access to the central pens behind the goal (which were already over full)
w hen gate C was opened. He found also a num ber of contributing factors
including the Club's "confused and inadequate signs and ticketing", police
planning, police operations on the day, "the presence of an unruly minority
who had drunk too much" and interaction of parties responsible for safety
issues. In respect of police operations on the day, Lord Justice Taylor in his
Interim Report, said (at paragraph 278)

"although there were other causes, the main reason for the disaster was the
failure of police control".

The then Chief Constable, Peter Wright, referred the questions of
manslaughter, by criminal negligence, to the Director of Public Prosecutions
for a decision as to criminal liability.

15 August 1989:      Director of Public Prosecutions recommended that the
matter should be subject of a criminal investigation. Mr Dear, Chief Constable
of West M idlands Police, was invited to undertake this investigation. He was
also asked that if he discovered any matters against the Police (Discipline)
Regulations, he should enquire into them on behalf of South Yorkshire Police.

30 November 1989: Peter Wright, Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police,
offered in conjunction w ith insurers to open negotiations with representatives
of the bereaved to resolve all bona fide civil claims for compensation without
having to await the outcome of legal hearings.

15 December 1989: Agreement reached w ith representatives of the bereaved
for settlement of civil actions without a decision as to liability.

December 1989: Full criminal and disciplinary investigation formally
commenced.

18 January 1990: Lord Justice Taylor's Final Report was published.

31 March 1990:      Mr Dear's report was submitted to Director of Public
Prosecutions.

6 August 1990: Two leading Counsel provide a joint opinion to the DPP
advising that there was insufficient evidence to w arrant prosecutions.

30 August 1990: Director of Public Prosecutions Allan Green QC, concluded
that there was insufficient evidence upon which a prosecution for
manslaughter, or any other criminal offence, could be brought against any
officer in the South Yorkshire Police, or any other person.
3-15   19 November 1990 to 28 March 1991: HM Coroner resum ed inquests on 95
       deaths in the Hillsborough Disaster. Jury returned a verdict of accidental
       death.

3-16   7 December 1990:        South Yorkshire Police Authority approved financial
       assistance for 6 officers including Mr David Duckenfield and Mr Bernard
       M urray in connection w ith legal proceedings relating to the inquest.

3.17   7 May 1991:      The Police Complaints Authority recommended discipline
       charges to be brought against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
       Superintendent Murray.

3.18   11 Tulv 1991:      The Police Complaints Authority directed that Chief
       Superintendent Duckenfield should face four disciplinary charges of Neglect
       of Duty and one of Discreditable Conduct.         In addition, Superintendent
       Murray should face one charge of Neglect of Duty.

3.19   November 1991:         Chief Superintendent Duckenfield retired on medical
       grounds, having been on sick leave for some time.

3.20   13 Tanuarv 1992: Police Complaints Authority gave leave not to proceed with
       the discipline charge against Superintendent Murray, as it w ould be
       inappropriate and unjust to pursue the charge against him alone, in the
       absence of his superior officer. Sometime thereafter, Superintendent Murray
       w ent on sick leave.

3.21   26 August 1992: Superintendent M urray retired on medical grounds.

3.22   6 April 1993: The relatives of six deceased were granted leave for judicial
       review into the inquest verdicts. They sought certiorari to quash the jury's
       verdict.

3.23   5 November 1993: The judicial review concluded that the inquest verdicts
       should not be overturned.

3.24   December 1993: Inquest held by HM Coroner for West Yorkshire into the
       death of Tony Bland (the 96th victim of Hillsborough). A verdict of accidental
       death was returned.

3.25   5 December 1996: The dram a "Hillsborough" w ritten by Jimmy McGovern on
       behalf of Granada Television was broadcast to the ITV Network. Following
       this programme further material was subm itted to the Home Office on behalf
       of the HFSG. That material related in particular to video evidence of the
       disaster and medical evidence about the time of death of the victims.

3,26   30 Tune 1997: The Home Secretary made an oral statement to the House of
       Commons during the course of which he stated:

                      "Madam Speaker, my Department, the office of the Attorney
                      General and the Crown Prosecution Service have considered
                      very carefully all the evidence which has been put forward in
                      recent months.

                      The Director of Public Prosecutions has taken the view that the
                      material so far presented to her w ould not justify fresh
                      criminal investigations. The then Attorney General also took
                      the view, again on the material presented to him, that any
                      application to the High Court for a new inquest w ould not
                      have any realistic prospect of succeeding.

                      Nonetheless, I am acutely conscious that the families of those
                      who died at Hillsborough and many others including Hon
                      Members of this House are very concerned that unresolved
                      issues remain. I am determined to go as far as I can to ensure
                      that no matter of significance is overlooked and that we do not
                      reach a final conclusion w ithout a full and independent
                      examination of the evidence.

                      I can therefore tell the House today that the Attorney General,
                      the Director of Public Prosecutions and I have agreed that it is
                      in the public interest that there should be an independent
                      scrutiny to ascertain whether there now exists any new
                      evidence relating to the disaster which was not previously
                      available. We are appointing Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, a
                      senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal, for that purpose".

3.27   18 February 1998: Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's Scrutiny Report was presented
       to the House of Commons. He concluded:

       3.27.1   None of the evidence he was asked to consider added anything
                significant to the evidence which was available to Lord Justice
                Taylor's inquiry or to the inquests;




                                           6
       3.27.2   There was no basis upon which there should be a further judicial
                inquiry or a reopening of Lord Taylor's inquiry;

       3.27.3   There was no basis for a renewed application to the Divisional Court
                or for the Attorney General to exercise his powers under the
                Coroners Act 1988; and

       3.27.4   There was no material which should be put before the Director of
                Public Prosecutions or the Police Complaints Authority which might
                cause them to reconsider the decisions they had already taken.

3.28   18 February 1998: The Home Secretary announced in the House that he, the
       Attorney General and the DPP had very carefully considered Lord Justice
       Stuart-Smith's report, and said "we have no reason to doubt his conclusions".
       Following publications of the Scrutiny Report, Trevor Hicks, the Chairman of
       the HFSG announced that he was disappointed w ith the Scrutiny's
       conclusions and that the HFSG were considering private prosecutions.

3.29   27 February 1998:     The Authority resolved to authorise the Clerk and
       Treasurer to consider applications for financial assistance from serving and
       retired officers in respect of possible criminal proceedings arising from the
       Hillsborough Stadium disaster.

3.30   5 March 1998: Application made by Mr Duckenfield for financial assistance
       with the Criminal Proceedings was approved.

3.31   24 Tune 1998: Informations laid in South Sefton Magistrates Court by Ms Ann
       Adlington that (i) Mr Duckenfield and Mr M urray had each committed two
       offences of m anslaughter and one of wilful neglect to perform a public duty
       and (ii) Mr Duckenfield had committed an act tending to pervert the course
       of justice (this charge was later discontinued by the DPP after being directed
       by the High Court to reconsider it in the DPP Judicial Review).

3.32   10 Tulv 1998:    The South Sefton Criminal Proceedings were w ithdraw n
       following a challenge to the jurisdiction of the court. The court ordered the
       costs of Mr Duckenfield and Mr M urray to be assessed and paid from Central
       Funds under Section 16, Prosecution of Offences Act 1985.

3.33   13 Tulv 1998: The Leeds Criminal Proceedings, alleging the same offences,
       were commenced.




                                           7
3.34   Tuiv 1998: Messrs Duckenfield and M urray requested DPP to take over and
       discontinue the Leeds Criminal Proceedings.

3.3d   18 December 1998: The DPP announced his decision not to take over and
       discontinue the Leeds Criminal Proceedings.

3.36   22 - 23 December 1998: Messrs Duckenfield and M urray applied for further
       financial assistance from the Authority as follows:

       3.36.1   To challenge the DPP's decision not to take over and discontinue the
                Leeds Criminal Proceedings;

       3.36.2   To challenge the decision of the Chief Clerk, South Sefton
                Magistrates' Court not to pay costs out of central funds should he
                decide not to do so (as he had indicated he w as considering); and

       3.36.3   To make an application to strike out the Leeds Criminal Proceedings
                on the grounds that they were an abuse of process.

3.37   22 December 1998:     Ms Adlington wrote to the Authority challenging the
       provision of financial assistance to Messrs Duckenfield and Murray.

3.38   5 January 1999: Ms Adlington wrote to the members of the Authority to make
       further points on the alleged impropriety of the financial assistance to
       Messrs Duckenfield and Murray. Following receipt of the letter, the Authority
       appointed Garretts, solicitors, to advise it in relation to Ms Adlington's
       challenge.

3.39   13 January 1999: Following legal advice, the Clerk and Treasurer wrote to the
       solicitors for Messrs Duckenfield and M urray informing them that the issue
       of financial assistance was being reviewed.

3.40   1 February 1999: The DPP wrote to the solicitors for Messrs Duckenfield and
       Murray with his reasons for deciding not to take over and discontinue the
       Leeds Criminal Proceedmgs.

3.41   5 February 1999:    The Authority resolved that it did not have powTer to
       provide financial assistance to Messrs Duckenfield and Murray, on the basis
       of advice from leading Counsel.




                                          8
3.42   10 February 1999:

       3.42.1      Garretts, solicitors for the Authority, wrote to die solicitors for
                   Messrs Duckenfield and M urray setting out the Authority's reasons
                   for its decision of 5 February 1999.

       3.42.2   The Chief Constable for South Yorkshire Police sought a ruling from
                   the court on the power of the Authority to provide financial
                   assistance.

3.43   11 February 1999: The Chief Clerk, South Sefton Magistrates Court, wrote to
       Messrs Duckenfield and M urray stating his provisional conclusion that, in
       view of the A uthority's decisions (in 1998) to provide financial assistance, it
       was not appropriate for paym ents to be made out of central funds to meet the
       costs ordered on 10 July 1998.

3.44   12 February 1999: Ms Adlington given leave to join as a party to the Powers
       Judicial Review.

3.45   12 March 1999:       Messrs Duckenfield and M urray sought leave to appear
       before the court in the Powers Judicial Review after Ms Adlington challenged
       the legal standing of the Chief Constable to bring the application.

3.46   15 March 1999: Messrs Duckenfield and Murray sought leave to challenge the
       decision of the DPP made 18 December 1998.

3.47   31 March 1999: The Divisional Court delivered its judgm ents in the Powers
       Judicial Review and DPP Judicial Review'.

3.48   12 April 1999: The DPP took over and discontinued the charge against Mr
       Duckenfield of acts tending to pervert the course of justice, after being
       directed to reconsider the issue by the court in the DPP Judicial Review.


4      THE POWERS JUDICIAL REVIEW

4.1    The circumstances resulting in the Chief Constable's application to the court
       to challenge a decision of the Authority to w ithdraw the funding for the
       Criminal Proceedings, which it had previously agreed to make available to
       Messrs Duckenfield and Murray, and the decisions of the Court were as
       follows:-




                                              9
  M eeting of the Police A uthority on I s*A ugust 1997

 At this meeting, the Clerk and Treasurer and the Chief Constable submitted a
 joint report informing members of the appointm ent of Lord Justice Stuart-
 Srruth to conduct a scrutiny into aspects of the Hillsborough disaster. The
 Authority" made the following resolutions:


  "1 - That approval be given to the provision o f up to £500,000from resents for
 expenditure likely to be incurred in respect o f the scrutiny.


 2 - That approval be given to a commitment to provide financial assistance for legal
 representation for officers (serving and retired) in connection with Lord Justice
 Stuart-Smith's scrutiny in accordance with the principles set out in the Home Office
 Circular 77/87 Financial Assistance to Police Officers in Legal Proceedings.

 3 - That the Clerk and Treasurer be authorised to determine individual applications
 for financial assistance in considtation with the Chief Constable".

 M eeting of the Police A uthority on 27 February 1998

Shortly after the presentation of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's scrutiny report to
 the House of Commons, the members of the Authority agreed to consider an
item relating to Hillsborough. Assistant Chief Constable Daines gave an oral
report to the Authority on the findings of the scrutiny and advised members
that private prosecutions had been threatened against three of those who
w ere officers on duty at the time of the disaster. The general issue of the
provision of financial assistance to those concerned was addressed. It was
recognised that actual decisions about financial support could be made only
on individual application. Members were accordingly invited to delegate the
determination of individual applications to the Clerk and Treasurer.
Members resolved as follows:


 2 - That in the light o f the findings o f Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's inquiry and his
comments on the outcome, members do not believe there is any new evidence to cause
them to reconsider the Authority's previous view, and remain o f the opinion that the
officers acted in good faith.
2 - Tuat the Authority agrees to authorise the Clerk and Treasurer to consider
applications for friancial assistance from officers (sewing and retired) in accordance
with the provisions o f Home Office Circular 77/87, Financial Assistance to Police
Officers in Legal Proceedings".

A pplication of 28 February 1998 from M r D avid D uckenfield

On 28 February 1998, Kir Duckenfield applied to Assistant Chief Constable
Daines for financial assistance from the Authority for legal representation.
On 2 March 1998, Assistant Chief Constable Daines wrote to the Clerk and
Treasurer asking him to approve Mr Duckenfield's request. At the request of
the Authority's solicitor, Ms M aureen Oades, Assistant Chief Constable
Daines provided supporting information on 5 March 1998 to the Clerk and
Treasurer. These letters are attached at appendix 1. Following receipt of this
letter, the Clerk and Treasurer approved Kir Duckenfield's application for
financial assistance towards the costs of legal representation in the event of a
private prosecution being brought against him in connection w ith the
Hillsborough disaster.


M eeting of the Police Authority on 24 April 1998

On 24 April, the Chief Constable and Clerk and Treasurer submitted a joint
report to members requesting that members note the expenditure of £11,900
on the Chief Constable's costs in connection w ith the Scrutiny from the
earmarked reserve and requesting members to agree that the earmarked
reserve continue to be held for purposes related to the Hillsborough disaster.
The Authority resolved as follows:


"1 - That the use o f the funds to date be noted.

2 - That the Authority agree, for the time being, to maintain the earmarked resent
for future costs associated with the Hillsborough Stadium disaster, subject to periodic
reports on expenditure from the reserve".

A pplication of 28 June 1998 from M r M urray

By letter dated 28 June 1998, Mr M urray informed the Chief Constable that
his wife had accepted a summons on his behalf arising from the events of the
Hillsborough disaster and requested that the Police Authority reimburse any
legal expenses that he may incur in defending himself. The next day,
Assistant Chief Constable Daines wrote to the Clerk and Treasurer setting out
the reasons for his support of Mr M urray's application and the application
was approved by the Clerk and Treasurer that day. (Copies of these letters
are attached at appendix 2 to this report.)


The Clerk and Treasurer's decisions

In approving both of these applications, the Clerk and Treasurer consulted
the Authority's legal advisor and          took into account a number of
considerations which were detailed in the Garretts' report which the
Authority considered at its meeting on 5 February 1999. (Appendix 3).

Challenge by Ms A dlington

On 22 December 1998, followring a report by the BBC that the Authority had
agreed to pay the legal costs of Messrs Duckenfield and Murray, Ms
Adlington wrote, on behalf of the HFSG, to the Clerk and Treasurer to the
Authority (appendix 4) challenging the Authority's pow er to provide such
assistance on a num ber of grounds, including the following:


•       that there was no legal power under statute for the Authority to pay
        the legal costs of a police officer (serving or former) in relation to
        criminal proceedings against h im /h e r (a view dismissed by the Court
        in the subsequent Powders Judicial Review); and

•       that even if such pow er existed, it had been exercised improperly in
        this case as the Authority had taken into account a number of
        irrelevant considerations, ignored a num ber of relevant considerations
        and delegated powers, which it should itself have exercised, to the
        Clerk and Treasurer.

Legal advice received by the Authority

4.9.1    On 5 January 1999, the solicitor to the Authority sought preliminary
         advice from barrister, Mr Bernard Phillips. He confirmed that the
         general principle of w hether to afford assistance at all was a matter
         for the discretion of the Authority. In the light of the representations
         received from Ms Adlington, however, he believed that the decision
         should be reconsidered by the Authority.
On 5 January 1999 Ms Adlington wrote a further letter to all the
members of the Authority (in appendix 5) making additional points
about the propriety of the decision to make financial assistance
available to the officers. She subsequently supplem ented that letter
w ith a fax to Garretts, the solicitors instructed by the Authority,
dated 29 January 1999 (appendix 6).

On 12 January 1999 the solicitor to the Authority took legal advice on
the two letters received from Ms Adlington from Leading Counsel,
Richard Mawrey QC.

His advice was that there was a pow er to provide financial assistance
to police officers in legal proceedings. However, this could only be
exercised in appropriate circumstances and only to cover "out of
pocket" expenses (but not expenditure which would otherwise be
paid from central funds or by the Legal Aid Board). He added that
the HFSG m ight seek to challenge the procedure by which such
powers had been exercised because it covered more than "out of
pocket" expenditure, with some prospect of success and that
accordingly the Authority should be asked to reconsider its original
decision in order to ensure it took take account of all relevant
considerations, including those Ms Adlington alleges might have
been overlooked earlier.

On 15 January 1999, the Authority instructed Garretts, solicitors, to
advise the Authority in reconsidering its decision to make financial
assistance available to the officers for the criminal proceedings and
considering the new applications for financial support for judicial
review proceedings. Garretts, whose advice is also referred to below
in more detail, expressed its own concern about the statutory power
to give financial support to officers in these circumstances and
recommended that a second opinion be sought from Miss Presiley
Baxendale QC and Mr Mark Shaw.

Counsel advised that whilst they had initially been attracted by the
argum ent that the Authority had pow er to pay "out of pocket" legal
costs and expenses of officers in all types of proceedings, where they
had acted in good faith and it was otherwise appropriate, there were
powerful arguments against this interpretation, particularly in the
light of the relevant case law in respect of public authorities'
           ancillary powers to incur expenditure to facilitate the discharge of
           their principal functions.

4.9.7      Counsel stressed that they had both found this issue difficult and
           that there was no guarantee which way a Court would decide.
           There were certainly strong policy reasons why the Authority should
           have power to support its officers (current and former) in this way.

4.9.8      Accordingly, their recommendation was that the Authority should
           resolve that it has no pow er to provide the financial assistance which
           had been sought. It should then co-operate with the Chief Constable
           in bringing the matter before a court for an early decision on whether
           that view of their legal powers was correct.

D ecision of the Police Authority on 5 February 1999

4.10.1    On 5 February, in addition to the legal advice received, the Authority
          considered a report from the Chief Constable and submissions and
          presentations from:

•        Mr T Hicks and Ms A Adlington on behalf of the Hillsborough Family
         Support Group;


•        Mr S Eastwood of Winckworth Sherwood, Solicitors on behalf of Mr
         Duckenfield; and


•        Mr R M anning of Walker Morris, Solicitors on behalf of Mr Murray.


4.10.2    Following consideration of the reports and representations made to
          it, the Authority resolved as follows:

          "2 - In the light o f legal advice, including advice from leadmg Counsel, that
          on balance, the Authority has no legal ■power to provide financial assistance
          to M r D Duckenfield or M r B Murray o f South Yorkshire Police in relation
          to their costs and expenses o f defending the private prosecutions brought
          against them by the Hillsborough Family Support Group, by Information
          dated 10 Jidy 1998 and accordingly to determine that any previous decision
          o f the Authority or any officer acting under its Authority, to make such
          assistance available is m dl and void.
                2 - In the light o f legal advice, including advice from lending Counsel, tint,
                on balance, the Authority has no legal power to provide financial assistance
                to M r D Duckenfield or M r B Murray in relation to the costs o f any judicial
                review proceedings brought by either o f them whether relating to the
                decision o f the Crown Prosecutions Sewice, not to take over the conduct of
                the private prosecutions and discontinue such prosecutions, o f to any
                decision o f the Clerk to the Sefton Magistrates' Court to challenge the
                payment of the officers' costs o f proceedings before that court from central
                funds, or to any other decision o f any court, authority or body arising from
                such prosecutions; and, accordingly, that the applications o f M r
                Duckenfield and M r Murray for financial assistance in relation to such
                proceedings be rejected.

                3 - In recognition o f the fact that legal advice provided to the Authority is
                that it remains arguable that power exists to provide the assistance referred
                to in 1 and 2 above, to take such action as the Clerk and Treasurer, in
                consultation with the Chief Constable, the Authority's legal advisors and
                the Chairman o f the Authority may decide as appropriate to have the
                decisions referred to in 1 and 2 rexnewed by the High Court and to expedite
                such a review with a view to clarifying the Authority's powers in this
                regard.

                4 - To defer consideration o f the procedural issues raised by M s Adlington,
                in her letters o f 22 December 1998 to the Clerk and Treasurer and 5 January
                1999 to the members o f the Authority, until the legal poxver o f the Authority
                to provide financial assistance referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 has been
                resolved to the satisfaction o f the Authority”.

       4.10.3   The solicitors for Messrs Duckenfield and M urray were informed of
                the decision following the meeting on 5 February 1999.                  On 10
                February 1999, Garretts, the solicitors instructed by the Authority,
                wrote to the solicitors for Messrs Duckenfield and Murray setting out
                the Authority's reasons for its decision. Copies of these letters are in
                appendix 7. Similar letters were w ritten to Ms Adlington and the
                solicitors for the Chief Constable.

4.11   The Chief Constable's A pplication

       The Chief Constable applied on 10 February 1999 to the High Court for a
       judicial review of resolutions 1 and 2 above. However, Ms Adlington was




                                             15
 given leave to be joined as a party to the proceedings and challenged the legal
 standing of the Chief Constable to make such an application. As a result, Mr
 Duckenfield and Mr Murray also applied to be joined as parties to the
litigation as there was no doubt that they had legal standing to challenge the
Authority's decision. On 31 March 1999, the Court gave its judgm ent at the
same time as it gave judgm ent in respect of the DPP judicial review.

The D ivisional Court's decision

4.12.1    The Court declared as follows:

          "A police authority has the statutory power, but subject to ordinary public
          law principles, to provide financial assistance to police officers and former
          police officers in respect of their costs and expenses incurred in relation to
          private prosecutions brought against them and judicial review proceedings
          in which they participate".

4.12.2    It is significant that the Court did not quash the resolutions of 5
          February 1999, although the Court did observe, in the proceedings
          following delivery of the judgment, that the Authority is to revisit
          the decision. Therefore, the resolutions of 5 February 1999 which
          declare the previous decisions to provide financial assistance null
          and void remain in force.

4.12.3   The Chief Constable's application to the Court also sought guidance
         on how the Authority should exercise its power to grant financial
         assistance if the Court held that such power existed, and in particular
         w hether the availability of legal aid was relevant to the decision on
         funding to be taken by the Authority. The Court declined to give
         any guidance on how the Authority should exercise its power to
         provide financial assistance to current or former officers in legal
         proceedings arising from the conduct of their duties, other than by
         confirming that general public law principles applied. During the
         proceedings immediately following judgment, however, Lord Justice
         Laws observed that:-

         "... I think it is very important, in truth in the interests o f everyone
         concerned in this matter, that the Court should not attempt to steer public
         authorities such as [the Authority] into any particular course o f action on
         the merits".
                   and:


                      " the parties knoxvfrom the judgment that has been delivered that the vires
                   [power] exists in principle and it will then be for the [Authority] to decide,
                   subject to ordinary public law rules ... when and how they may use that
                  power".


          This makes it clear that although the Authority does have the basic power to
          support officers and former officers costs in legal proceedings arising from
          the performance of their duties, how this pow er is to be exercised is a matter
          for them.



£   5     THE LITIGATION FOR W HICH FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE IS SOUGHT

    5.1   The South Sefton Criminal Proceedings and the proposed South Sefton
          Judicial Review

          5.1.1   On 24 June 1998, informations were laid before the South Sefton
                  Magistrates Court by Ms Adlington, the Solicitor representing the
                  HFSG, alleging:

                  (a)       against both Mr Duckenfield and Mr M urray offences of
                             manslaughter of two of those who died as a result of the
                             Hillsborough disaster, John Anderson and James Aspinall
                             and an offence of wilful neglect to perform a public duty; and

                  (b)       against Mr Duckenfield alone, a further offence of perverting
                             the course of justice, said to consist in his having lied about
                             the circumstances in which gate C of the football ground
                             became open.

          5.1.2   Following representations from the parties, the Clerk to the Justices
                  took the view that the South Sefton court had jurisdiction to deal
                  w ith the offences, but that there was an argum ent that the
                  summonses were ineffective unless the defendants submitted to the
                  jurisdiction of the court. It was agreed that the proceedings w ould
                  be brought forward to 10 July 1998 and that Ms Adlington would
                  apply for them to be withdrawn.




                                                 17
5.1.3   On 10 July 1998, in the absence of all parties, the South Sefton
        Criminal Proceedings were w ithdraw n and the court made an order
        for Mr Duckenfield's and Mr Murray's costs to be assessed and paid
        from central funds in accordance w ith Section 16 of the Prosecution
        of Offences Act 1985.

5.1.4   In September 1998, the solicitors for Messrs Duckenfield and Murray
        (being W inckworth Sherwood and Walker Morris respectively) each
        submitted their claims for costs.

5.1.5   On 11 February 1999, the Clerk wrote to the solicitors for Messrs
        Duckenfield and Murray.       He stated that, as the Authority had
        agreed to pay Messrs Duckenfield and M urray's costs in relation to
        the South Sefton Criminal Proceedings, they had not themselves
        incurred any costs and were not entitled to be reimbursed from
        central funds. He based this view on the decision in R -v- Miller
        (Raymond) and Another (1993) 3 All ER 186 ("Miller").

5.1.6   He drew attention to the fact that he was aware of the pending
        judicial review in relation to the Police Authority’s decision of 5
        February and advised that he w ould await the outcome of that
        hearing before he made a final decision. A final decision is expected
        from the Clerk shortly.

5.1.7   Both Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray have stated their intention to
        seek a judicial review of the Clerk's decision should it be
        unfavourable to them and have sought financial assistance from the
        Authority so to do - see further paragraph 6.2.1 below To the extent
        that the Authority is legally bound to provide assistance in relation
        to the South Sefton Criminal Proceedings (an issue on which Garretts
        advise in paragraph 7.6 below), the South Sefton Judicial Review
        w ould effectively be for the benefit of the Authority in reducing the
        costs it is liable to pay.

The Leeds Criminal Proceedings

5.2.1   On 13 July 1998 and 10 July 1998, fresh informations, alleging the
        same offences as the South Sefton Criminal Proceedings were laid by
        Ms Adlington before the Leeds Petty Sessional Division and
        summonses in respect of these offences were issued by the
stipendiary magistrate against Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray.
Copies of the summonses are in appendix 8.

Following the discontinuance on 12 April 1999 of the charge of
perverting the course of justice against Mr Duckenfield, the
remaining charges against both officers are of manslaughter and
wilful neglect to perform a public duty.

The legal elements of these alleged offences are basically as follows:-

(a)    M anslaughter

       M anslaughter may be classified as voluntary or involuntary.
       Involuntary manslaughter may be committed as follows:-


       (i)    A person upon w hom the law imposes a duty or who
               has taken upon himself any duty, tending to the
               preservation of life, and who, regardless of the life,
               safety, welfare and health of others, neglects to
               perform that duty or performs it negligently and
               thereby causes the death of another person may be
               guilty of manslaughter.

       (ii)   Similarly, a person wrho acts recklessly in such a
               m anner as to create an obvious and serious risk of
               causing physical injury to some other person and who
               thereby causes the death of any person may also be
               guilty of manslaughter.

      It is im portant to note that a higher degree of negligence is
      necessary to render a person guilty of m anslaughter than to
      establish civil liability against him and mere carelessness is not
      enough. The num ber of persons affected by a single act of
      negligence does not affect the degree of negligence. This
      offence is punishable by im prisonment for life or any shorter
      term at the discretion of the court.
(b)     W ilful neglect to perform a public duty

        A public officer who wilfully and w ithout reasonable excuse
        or justification neglects to perform a duty imposed on him
        either by common law or by statute may be guilty of this
        offence. The    penalty       for   the   offence is   a fine   and
        imprisonment at the discretion of the court and loss of office.

Leading Counsel for Messrs Duckenfield and M urray have provided
to the Authority a joint opinion on the merits of the prosecution
dated 26 April 1999. In a letter dated 30 April 1999 from Walker
Morris to Garretts a copy of Mr M urray's representations to the DPP
was enclosed (appendix 9).

Committal proceedings are due to commence on 5 July 1999. It is
understood that they have been given an estimate of 3 weeks. A
number of hearings on ancillary matters, such as a witness summons
requiring the Chief Constable to produce various statements and
documents, were heard on 10 May.

At the committal hearing, Counsel for Messrs Duckenfield and
Murray will argue:

(a)    There is no prim a facie case of manslaughter or wilful neglect
       to perform a public duty; and

(b)    That the prosecutions are oppressive and an abuse of the
       right of private prosecutions.

If either submission succeeds, the Leeds Criminal Proceedings will
come to an end and an order for paym ent of the officer's costs out of
central funds is likely to be made.

If both submissions fail, the Leeds Criminal Proceedings will
continue to a Crown Court trial. There is currently no estimate of the
length of the trial. If Messrs Duckenfield and M urray are acquitted,
an order for paym ent out of central funds is likely to be made unless
the presiding judge were to decide that Messrs Duckenfield and
Murray:
        (a)    brought the prosecutions upon themselves for example by
               suspicious behaviour; or

        (b)    were acquitted on a technicality; or

        (c)    had not incurred any costs (for example because the
               Authority paid their costs - see further paragraph 5.2.8
               below).

5.2.8   Messrs Duckenfield and M urray have requested financial assistance
        for the Leeds Criminal Proceedings.           If the Authority provides
        financial assistance, there is a risk that the Chief Clerk of the Leeds
        Crow n Court might conclude that, on the basis of Miller, they had
        not incurred costs and are not entitled to be re-imbursed out of
        central funds, although so long as the arrangements between the
        former officers, their lawyers and the A uthority are properly
        structured, this risk can be reduced if not entirely eliminated. (See
        further paragraph 8.11.3 below).

The DPP Judicial Review

5.3.1   In July 1998, Both Mr Duckenfield             and   Mr Murray made
        representations to the Director of Public Prosecutions that he should
        exercise his pow er under Section 6(2) of the Prosecution of Offences
        Act 1985 to take over the conduct of the Leeds Criminal Proceedings
        and then discontinue all charges under Section 23(3).

5.3.2   Following representations from Mr Duckenfield, Mr Murray and the
        HFSG, the DPP communicated his decision not to intervene by letter
        of 18 December 1998. It stated:

        "We have considered the evidence, the representations made by the
        parties and all the relevant circumstances of the case. We have
        concluded that we should not intervene to take over any of the
        charges".

5.3.3   The respective solicitors of Mr Duckenfield and Mr M urray asked for
        reasons to be given. There followed a letter of 1 February 1999 from
        the CPS Case Work Director, Mr Newell, to Mr Murray's solicitor (a
        copy of which is included at appendix 10).
Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray applied in March 1999 for a judicial
review of the DPP's decision. The DPP opposed the application. Ms
Adlington was given leave to intervene to support the D PPs
decision. Mr Newell made an affidavit expanding on the reasons
given in his letter of 1 February 1999. A copy of the affidavit is in
appendix 11.

On 31 March 1999 the Divisional Court delivered its decision on this
application. A copy of the judgm ent is in appendix 12.

The Divisional Court dealt w ith the application in two stages:

(a)   The charges against Messrs Duckenfield and Murray of
       m anslaughter and wilful neglect; and

(b)   The charge against Mr Duckenfield of perverting the course
       of justice.

M anslaughter and w ilful neglect

(a)   The DPP concluded that there was no reasonable prospect of
       conviction on these charges.      This is consistent w ith his
       previous conclusions and the outcome of the scrutiny.

(b)   However, the DPP stated that he

      "could not say there was clearly no case to answer. It was not
      right therefore, for [him] to take over the proceedings w ith a
      view to terminating them"

(c)   The Divisional Court decided there was no reason for it to
       interfere w ith the DPP's decision. Lord Justice Laws (with
       w hom the other judges agreed) concluded

       "the DPP might, in m y judgment, lawfully have decided to
       discontinue. The tragic events of Hillsborough have been the
       subject of repeated, detailed and thorough enquiries. Nearly
       10 years have passed. But, the judgm ent was for the DPP to
       make. If w e acceded to [Counsel for Messrs Duckenfield and
       Murray's] submissions, we would I think usurp the role of
       the primary decision maker".
                  (See the judgm ent in appendix 12 at page 16)

5.3.8     Perverting the course of justice

          On this charge, the DPP concluded

          "that there was clearly no case to answ er..."

         But he decided not to intervene for 3 reasons:

         (a)     He did not think partial intervention was appropriate or
                 desirable;

         (b)     Mr Duckenfield could invite the magistrate to dismiss the
                 charge (at committal) on the grounds that there was no case
                 to answer; and

         (c)     The charge arose out of the same events which gave rise to
                 the other charges which would be scrutinised in any event.

         The Divisional C ourt rejected this approach. It held that Mr
         Duckenfield was entitled to expect that the DPP w ould consider
         whether intervention was appropriate on each charge individually.
         Therefore, the D P P s decision on this charge alone was quashed and
         the DPP invited to reconsider it.

         On 12 April 1999, the DPP decided to take over and discontinue this
         charge (See the letter from Mr Newell to W inckworth Sherwood
         Solicitors in appendix 13).

5.3.9    Costs

        Mr M urray was ordered to pay the D P P s costs. Mr Duckenfield wras
        ordered to pay 80% of the D P F s costs of the DPP Judicial Review.
        This reflects the fact that he enjoyed partial success in his application
        in having the charge of perverting the course of justice referred back
        to the DPP (who subsequently intervened to quash the charge). As it
        is not usually appropriate to aw ard costs in favour of a party which
        has intervened to support the decision under review, Ms Adlington
        did not seek costs against Messrs Duckenfield and Murray. She did
        peek costs from central funds but these were refused.




                                    23
5.3.10   Messrs Duckenfield and M urray have applied for financial assistance
         from the Authority to meet both their own legal costs of their
         application to challenge the D P P 's decision of 18 December 1998 and
         the costs of the DPP's legal advice which were awarded against them
         (see paragraph 6.2.3 below).

The Powers Judicial Review

5.4.1    The events leading up to the Powers Judicial Review and the
         judgm ent of the Court in relation to that review are summarised in
         paragraph 4 above.

5.4.2    Despite succeeding w ith their legal arguments in the Powers Judicial
         Review, neither the Chief Constable nor Messrs Duckenfield and
         M urray sought an order for costs against the Authority.       Messrs
         Duckenfield and Murray did, however,         seek an order for costs
         against Ms Adlington, which she opposed.       The basis of the costs
         application against Ms Adlington was that Messrs Duckenfield and
         M urray w ould not have commenced their own application for
         judicial review against the A uthority's decision if Ms Adlington had
         not contended in her affidavit and skeleton argument that the Chief
         Constable did not have legal standing to challenge the Authority's
         decision.   In the light of tills submission, the court ordered Ms
         Adlington to pay Messrs Duckenfield and M urray's costs.

5.4.3    Mr Duckenfield and Mr M urray have applied to the Authority for
         financial assistance in respect of their costs in these proceedings to
         the extent not met by the costs aw arded against Ms Adlington.

5.4.4    It should also be noted that Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray were
         offered support in relation to the Powers Judicial Review from the
         Police Superintendents Association. The terms of that support are
         summarised in a letter from the Police Superintendent's Association
         of England and Wales to W inckworth Sherwood Solicitors dated 5
         March 1999 (appendix 14).


PRESENT APPLICATIONS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE

Following the judgm ent in the Powers Judicial Review, the Authority's
solicitors, Garretts, sought clarification from Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray
                 ot their application for financial assistance by letters dated 7 April 1999 and 30
                 April 1999. Copies of the responses from Mr Duckenfield dated 16 April 1999
                 and Mr Murray dated 22 April 1999 to the Authority, together with responses
                 from Walker Morris (solicitors to Mr Murray) to Garretts dated 7 May 1999
                 and Winckworth Sherwood (solicitors to Mr Duckenfield) dated 13 May 1999
                 are at Appendix 15.

           6.2   Their applications are for financial assistance to meet their legal costs and
                 disbursements in the following proceedings:

                 6.2.1   The South Sefton Judicial Review

                         (a)     As noted above in paragraph 5.1.7 both Mr Duckenfield and
                                 Mr Murray have stated their intention to seek a judicial
                                 review of the decision of the Clerk to the South Sefton Justices
                                 should he refuse to allow their costs to be paid from central
                                 funds.    The solicitors representing Mr Duckenfield have
                                 provided a cost estimate of £5,000 to £7,000 (excluding VAT
                                 and disbursements) for such judicial review. The risk of the
                                 Respondent's costs being awarded against Mr Duckenfield
                                 and Mr Murray if the Clerk's view on costs is vindicated
                                 should, however, be borne in mind.

                         (b)     To the extent that the Authority is legally bound to provide
                                 assistance in relation to       die South Sefton       Criminal
                                 Proceedings, (as to which see paragraph 7.6 below) the South
                                 Sefton Judicial Review would effectively be for the benefit of
                                 the Authority. However, the Authority is recommended to
                                 defer its decision in respect of this part of the applications
                                 until the decision of the Clerk to the Justices and reasons for
                                 that decision are known. Any decision of the Authority to
                                grant financial assistance before then could be open to
                                 potential challenge on the ground of irrationality, as it is not
                                possible to properly consider the merits of the case until the
                                Clerk's decision and reasons are known.




                                                   25
TlLT 'ON                                       &6SZLL 93c TO - BdHnOS-'.lIjT          £c=£T         66 5 0 t l
6.2.2   The South Sefton C rim inal Proceedings and the Leeds Criminal
        Proceedings

        Both Mr Duckenfield and Mr M urray have applied for financial
        assistance in respect of costs and disbursements incurred in the
        conduct of their respective defences in the criminal proceedings
        referred to in paragraphs 5.1 and 5.2 above. As noted at paragraphs
        4.4   and   4.6 above, Mr Duckenfield and Mr M urray were each
        informed in writing in 1998 that their reasonable expenses in respect
        of the criminal proceedings (that is, both the South Sefton Criminal
        Proceedings and the Leeds Criminal Proceedings) w ould be m et by
        the Authority.

        The legal costs and disbursements incurred by Mr Duckenfield in
        respect of the South Sefton Criminal Proceedings am ount to
        £8,716.63 (including VAT). Legal costs and disbursements incurred
        by Mr M urray in respect of the South Sefton Criminal Proceedings
        am ount to £5,874.40 (including VAT). It is not yet know n how much
        (if any) of these costs and disbursements the Clerk to the South
        Sefton justices will allow to be paid from central funds and it is
        recommended that the Authority defer any decision in relation to the
        funding of the South Sefton Criminal Proceedings until this is
        known.

        The Authority has not paid any sums pursuant to the 1998 decisions
        to provide financial assistance to Messrs Duckenfield and Murray.
        An invoice for £34,492.16 (including VAT) for work up to 18
        September 1998 has been submitted by Mr Duckenfield's solicitors.
        A costs breakdown of the fees and expenses which their client has
        incurred or is expected to incur in the criminal proceedings, DPP
        Judicial Review (excluding costs of the DPP aw arded against Mr
        Duckenfield) and Powers Judicial Review has, however, been
        provided by them as follows:

         Period                Type of Expense          A m ount (£)
                                                        (inclusive of VAT)

         Up to 1 2/1 /9 9      O w n fees and            56,000
                               disbursements
        Up to 4 /1 2 /9 8      Counsel's fees            40,000




                                26
 1 /1 /9 9 to 2 8/3/99      O w n fees                56,400
                            Counsel's fees            78,725
                            Disbursements              2,350
                            (criminal proceedings,
                            DPP Judicial Review
                            and Powers Judicial
                            Review - excludes
                            taking judgm ent on 31
                            March 1999)
 Anticipated costs up       O w n fees, Counsel's,   146,875 to 176,250
 to Commital                fees and
                            Disbursements

No invoices have been submitted by Mr Murray's solicitors, Walker
Morris. A costs breakdown of the fees and expenses which their
client has incurred or is expected to incur in the criminal
proceedings only has, however, been provided by them as follows:-

 Period                      Type of Expense         A m ount (£)
                                                     (inclusive of VAT)

 5 /7 /9 8 to 1 2 /1 /9 9    Own fees                121,832.81
                             Disbursements             1,133.48
                             Counsel's fees           51,222.66
 13 /1/99 to 31/3/99         O w n fees (Criminal     58,573.75
                             Proceedings, DPP
                             Judicial Review and
                             Progress Judicial
                             Review)
                             Disbursements           Information not
                                                     supplied
                             Counsel's fees          Information not
                                                     supplied
 Anticipated further         O w n fees               47,000 to 58,750
 expenses up to
 committal
                             Counsel's fees           64,625 to 99,875




                             27
 6.2.3   The DPP Judicial Review

         Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray have both applied for financial
         assistance in respect of their legal expenses incurred and those costs
         aw arded against them in the judicial review (referred to at paragraph
         5.3 above) of the DPP's decision not to take over and discontinue the
         prosecutions.

         Mr M urray was ordered to pay the D PFs costs. As Mr Duckenfield's
         application to the court was partially successful, in that the decision
         not to take over and discontinue the charge of perverting the cause of
         justice was quashed, he has been ordered to pay 80% of the D PFs
         costs. The DPP has not yet provided an account of his costs.

6.2.4    The Powers Judicial Review

         Mr Duckenfield and Kir M urray have also both applied for financial
         assistance in respect of any legal expenses incurred in the judicial
         review of the Authority's decisions that it had no power to provide
         the financial assistance sought by the former officers, but only to the
         extent not reimbursed under the costs award made against Ms
         Adlington.

         Both officers applied to be joined as parties to these proceedings after
         Ms Adlington disputed the Chief Constable’s legal standing to bring
         the application. Ms Adlington has been ordered to pav their costs of
         the application.

         It is recommended that the Authority- defer its decision on this part
         of the applications pending assessment and payment of Ms
         Adlington's costs liability to Messrs Duckenfield and Murray.


LEGAL FEES INCURRED IN THE CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS UP TO 5
FEBRUARY 1999

As noted above at paragraphs 4.4 and 4.6 the Authority originally agreed in
1998 to meet the reasonable expenses of Messrs Duckenfield and Murray in
the South Sefton Criminal Proceedings and Leeds Criminal Proceedings. (See
the letters in appendices 1 and 2 )
On 13 January 1999 the Clerk and Treasurer wrote to Messrs Duckenfield and
M urray's solicitors stating that the Authority w ould be reviewing the issue of
financial assistance and that the Clerk and Treasurer was not in a position to
authorise payments in respect of the private prosecutions. In response to a
query from Mr M urray's solicitors, Walker Morris, the Clerk and Treasurer
wrote to Walker Morris on 14 January 1999 stating

"you should not incur further costs pending the meeting of the Authority and
that, if you do so, it will be at your own risk".

Copies of the Clerk and Treasurer's letters are attached at appendix 16. On 5
February 1999, the Authority resolved that it had no legal pow er to provide
funding and, accordingly, that its previous decisions to provide funding were
null and void.     Whilst the High Court held on 31 March 1999 that the
Authority did in fact have a statutory power to provide funding, the decisions
of the Authority on 5 February 1999 were not quashed by the High Court.
Therefore, the resolutions remain in force in effect although the court expects
the Authority to revisit the resolutions. It is the opinion of Garretts that Mr
Duckenfield and Mr M urray both have a strong case that they have a legally
enforceable right to recover from the Authority their costs in the Leeds
Criminal Proceedings and the South Sefton Criminal Proceedings incurred up
to 5 February 1999 (to the extent that those costs are reasonable).

In relation to the costs incurred by Messrs Duckenfield and Murray in the
Leeds Criminal Proceedings since 5 February 1999 and in the DPP Judicial
Review, Garretts' opinion is that the Authority may decide to offer assistance
to Messrs Duckenfield and Murray on the same or different terms as
previously given, or it may decide not to provide assistance. This report deals
further w ith these questions in paragraphs 8 and 9 below.

The rem ainder of this paragraph 7 explains why Mr Duckenfield and Mr
M urray may have a strong claim for the costs of the criminal proceedings up
to 5 February 1999, b ut not after, and the principles on which the strength of
that claim should be judged.

Legitimate expectation

7.6.1    Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray may allege that they have a
         "legitimate expectation" in respect of the costs they have incurred in
         the South Sefton Criminal Proceedings and the Leeds Criminal




                                     29
Proceedings up to 5 February 1999.         The concept of "legitimate
expectation" has developed through a num ber of cases and has
emerged as an enforceable right which may arise when a public
authority seeks to w ithdraw from an assurance previously given by
it concerning the way in which it will exercise its powers.

While "legitimate expectation" is now capable of giving rise to
substantive rights, the concept of a legitimate expectation was
initially formulated to ensure that a person w ould not have a right or
interest which had been granted by a public body w ithdraw n or
varied w ithout an opportunity to make representations. Therefore, it
was appropriate that the Authority heard from Messrs Duckenfield
and Murray when it met on 5 February 1999 and did not w ithdraw
funding of the criminal proceedings from them until that date.

While the boundaries of legitimate expectation are still developing,
the elements needed to be established in this case are:

(a)    a clear and unam biguous representation to Messrs
       Duckenfield and M urray that they w ould receive funding;
       and

(b)    that they acted in reliance on the representation to their
       detrim ent (there is some question as to w hether reliance to
       detrim ent is a necessary ingredient. However, recent cases
       indicate that it is necessary).

The concept is always subject to the right of public bodies to
w ithdraw from a position in appropriate circumstances.          This is
consistent w ith a principle that there cannot be a fettering of a public
authority's discretion by a fixed policy. But if a public body wishes to
w ithdraw from a position it has taken, it may be required to honour
undertakings or assurances it has given on which someone has relied
up to that date, unless there is an overriding public interest
consideration against so doing.

The concept is also subject to a public body acting within its power.
A public authority cannot be required, nor is it entitled, to do
something outside its basic statutory powers, even if it has given an
assurance so to do. If the public body has the basic statutory power,
however, b ut exercised it irregularly in giving the relevant assurance,
then it may still be bound by that assurance. The decision of the
Divisional Court on the Powers Judicial Review has confirmed that
the Authority has the basic statutory power to meet current and
former police officer's legal expenses in appropriate circumstances.
Therefore, an enforceable legitimate expectation may well have
arisen in favour of Mr Duckenfield and Mr M urray that their legal
expenses of the criminal proceedings up to 5 February 1999 (when
the original decision to meet those expenses was reversed) w ould be
m et by the Authority, even if there were procedural irregularities in
the original decision.

It is im portant to note that Messrs Duckenfield and M urray's
application should be considered separately and in particular
w hether they relied on the assurances given to their detriment. It is
conceivable that one m ight establish an enforceable legitimate
expectation whereas the other m ight not.

W hat the Authority needs to decide, therefore, is whether the officers
case for funding up to the 5 February 1999 satisfies the following
condi tions:-

(a)    Clear and unam biguous representation

        There seems little room to doubt that the letters of 5 March
        and 29 June to Messrs Duckenfield and M urray constitute a
        clear and unam biguous representation that their legal costs of
        the criminal proceedings w ould be met.

(b)    Reliance to detrim ent

      It will be for each of the former officers to establish whether
      they have acted in reliance to their detrim ent on the letters
      from the Authority. It is likely that they did so, however, by
      instructing solicitors to represent them, w ithout applying for
      legal aid. While it is not too late to seek legal aid, it will not be
      granted retrospectively (i.e. will not cover costs they have
      already incurred w ith their solicitors) but, if granted, will only
      meet future costs and then subject to the former officers
      making substantial contributions from their own resources.
(c)     Are there any public interest factors w hich should override
        a decision to meet such expenses?

        The Authority should consider whether any circumstances
        such as public policy or other overriding factors in the public
        interest exist which w ould mitigate against meeting the
        former officer's costs up to 5 February 1999. Garretts have
        not, however, identified any such circumstances.

If Messrs Duckenfield and M urray establish the three elements for
legitimate expectation, which it appears likely that they will, it is
difficult to see that the Authority has any real alternative but to meet
their reasonable expenses of the Leeds Criminal Proceedings up to
the time the Authority effectively reversed its previous decisions on
financial assistance for the Leeds Criminal Proceedings.         Having
regard to the requirements of reasonable notice and their right to be
heard, it is submitted that the date the Authority effectively reversed
its decision and to which therefore reasonable expenses of the
criminal proceedings should be met, is 5 February 1999. This was the
first opportunity that representatives of Messrs Duckenfield and
M urray had to be heard on the issue of w hether funding was to be
w ithdraw n and an unam biguous decision was taken by the
Authority to w ithdraw funding for the Leeds Criminal Proceedings.

It is submitted that the Authority was entitled, as from 5 February
1999 to w ithdraw the assurances given to the former officers about
funding their legal costs of the Criminal Proceedings, on the basis of
the legal principle that in areas of ongoing public expenditure, a
public body m ust not fetter its discretion. Therefore, it is entitled to
revoke, vary or suspend an expenditure commitment after proper
notice and an opportunity to challenge that decision has been given
to those affected by the change of policy. The Clerk and Treasurer's
letters of 13 and 14 January 1999 (referred to in paragraph 7.2 above)-
and the opportunity afforded to Messrs Duckenfield and Murray to
be heard on 5 February 1999 w ould appear to meet the requirements
of notice and opportunity to be heard.
Recom m endations w ith regard to costs of the C rim inal Proceedings up to 5
February 1999

       A.       If the Authority are satisfied following presentations made by
                or on behalf of Mr Duckenfield, Mr M urray and Ms
                Adlington at their meeting that:-

                (i)      a clear and unambiguous assurance of funding for the
                         Criminal Proceedings was given by or on behalf of the
                         Authority;

                (ii)     the former officers relied on that assurance to their
                         detrim ent (for example by not seeking funding from
                         other sources such as legal aid); and

                (iii)    that no overriding public interest factors exist which
                         means it would be inappropriate to confirm such
                         funding

                Garretts' recommend that the Authority should meet Mr
                Duckenfield's and Mr Murray's reasonable legal expenses for
                the Leeds Criminal Proceedings up to 5 February 1999. A
                decision on the South Sefton expenses should be deferred
                pending the decision of the Clerk to the Justices of the South
                Sefton Magistrates Court as to w hether Messrs Duckenfield
                and M urray are entitled to be reim bursed out of central
                funds.

       B.       In order to assess the reasonableness of the legal expenses
                claimed, the costs incurred should be reviewed by a legal
                costs draftsm an specialising in criminal costs. If his or her
                advice be that the costs claimed are not reasonable, the
                Authority should apply to the C ourt to have the costs
                assessed under Section 71 Solicitors Act 1974 (assessment of
                costs on application of third parties liable to pay costs) unless
                the costs to be paid can be agreed. However, it should be
                noted that the Court is not bound to grant an application by
                the Authority for such assessment.
    THE MERITS OF THE APPLICATIONS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE

    It will be recalled that:

    8.1.1    On 22 December 1998 and 5 January 1999, Ms Adlington wrote
              letters challenging the A uthority's decisions on 2 grounds namely:

              (a)     There was no power for the Authority to pay tire legal costs in
                      relation to criminal proceedings against officers; and

              (b)     Even if such pow er existed, it had been exercised improperly
                      in this case. (See paragraph 4.8 and 4.9.2).

    8.1.2    O n 5 February 1999 the Authority resolved, amongst other things

              "4 - To defer consideration of the procedural issues raised by M s Adlington,
              in her letters o f 22 December 1998 to the Clerk and Treasurer and 5 January
              1999 to the members of the Authority, until the legal power o f the Authority
              to provide financial assistance referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 has been
              resolved to the satisfaction o f the Authority".

8.1.3        The Divisional Court has recognised that the Authority has
             committed itself to revisiting its decision to grant (and revoke)
             financial assistance in the light of the finding of power.                  The
             application     for   financial    assistance       for   the   Leeds   Criminal
             Proceedings (after 5 February 1999 only) and the DPP Judicial
             Review should now be considered afresh by the Authority.

In making the decision whether to exercise its discretion to grant such
financial assistance to Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray, the Authority m ust
bear in m ind that, whilst the court has confirmed that it has tire power to
grant such financial assistance, it by no means follows that the Authority
should grant such financial assistance.

In deciding whether to meet the legal costs of Mr Duckenfield and Mr
Murray, (whether in relation to the criminal proceedings or any of the other
proceedings referred to above) the Authority is subject to the public law
principles of decision making. Briefly, these are that it m ust (amongst other
things):

•           act within whatever statutory powers conferred upon it by Act of
            Parliament;
®       act with procedural fairness (including by giving a hearing to directly
        interested parties);

•       take all relevant considerations into       account;

•       ignore all irrelevant considerations;

•       not act irrationally;

•       not fetter its discretion; and

•       not unlawfully delegate the decision making function.

Failure to comply w ith any of these principles will expose the decision to
challenge by judicial review. The Authority m ust individually consider each
of Mr Duckenfield's and Mr Murray's applications in respect of each separate
set of proceedings (and, in the case of the criminal proceedings, each charge)
separately.     All relevant considerations should be taken into account and
weighed against each other.       Garretts consider that the major considerations
include:-

8.4.1    w hether the Authority is satisfied that the former officers acted in
            good faith in directing the police operations on the day of the
            disaster;

8.4.2    w hether the former officers exercised their judgm ent reasonably, in
            the light of the circumstances they faced, and if not, whether other
            relevant factors outweigh this consideration;

8.4.3    w hether it is appropriate to require Mr Duckenfield or Mr Murray to
            look to alternative sources of finance to pay their legal costs, such as
            legal aid, the Police Superintendent's Association or their own
            resources, given the likely adverse financial effects for them of
            seeking legal aid;

8.4.4    the seriousness of the charges and whether it is appropriate to agree
            to provide funding, before a verdict is reached on them;

8.4.5    the Authority's view on the merits of the charges;

8.4.6    The impact on the Authority's resources of funding the former
            officer's costs and the "knock on" effect on policing in South
          Yorkshire (the Chief Constable will be present to advise on this at the
          meeting); and

8.4.7     the impact of a refusal to provide financial support on police morale
          and on the confidence of officers to exercise their judgm ent in
          difficult circumstances.

Factors which may assist in reaching a decision include:-

•       Guidance in Home Office Circulars;


•       The circumstances of the Hillsborough Stadium tragedy as recorded,
        inter alia, in:


         (a)      The interim report of Lord Justice Taylor into the
                  Hillsborough Stadium disaster; and

         (b)      The Scrutiny of Lord Justice Stuart Smith into the
                  Hillsborough Stadium disaster.


•       The decision of the DPP in 1990 that there was insufficient evidence
        upon which prosecution for m anslaughter or any other criminal
        offence could be brought against any officer in the South Yorkshire
        Police or any other person.


•       The decision of the Director of the Public Prosecutions in 1997 that the
        material so far presented w ould not justify fresh investigations.


•       The decision of the Director of Public Prosecution in 1999 that in
        respect of the charges of manslaughter and wilful neglect to perform a
        public duty, the Director of Public Prosecutions was not satisfied that
        there was clearly no case to answer and decided not to take over and
        discontinue the prosecutions.


•       The fact that the D PFs decision in 1999 not to take over and
        discontinue the prosecution of Mr Duckenfield for perverting the
        course of justice was quashed by the High Court on judicial review
                  and remitted to the DPP for reconsideration, and that the DPP has
                  now taken over and discontinued this charge.


          •       The inquest findings of accidental death.


          •       The fact that disciplinary charges of neglect of duty were directed by
                  the Police Complaints Authority against Mr Duckenfield and Mr
                  M urray but were never determined due to the retirement of Mr
                  Duckenfield.


          •       The fact that after several years of service to the police force, each of
                  Mr Duckenfield and Mr M urray retired w ith clean disciplinary
                  records.


          •       The likely costs of the financial assistance.


          •       The financial resources of Messrs Duckenfield and Murray.


          •       Relevant representations p u t to the Authority by the Chief Constable,
                   Mr Duckenfield, Mr M urray and the HFSG.


    8.6   Guidance on a num ber of these matters was given in the Divisional Court
          decision of R - v - Derbyshire Police Authority ex parte Wilson & Dalton (1989).



•   87
          Hom e Office Circulars

          In Wilson and Dalton, the court considered the relevance of the Home Office
          circular then in effect in relation to the funding of police officers' costs, HOC
          77/87. A copy of HOC 77/87 and the replacement circular, HOC 4/1998 are
          in appendix 17. The following principles emerged on the relevance of Home
          Office guidance:

          8.7.1     Circulars do not have statutory force but are a good indication of the
                     matters to be taken into account.




                                                37
 8.7.2     Lord Justice Gibson further commented

           1that is not to say that in consideritig an application for reimbursement of
          costs by an officer, a Police Authority is necessarily limited to factors in the
          circular."

 8.7.3    The central principle in HOC 4/1998 is

          it is important that police officers should be able to carry out their duties in
          the confidence that their Police Authority will support them, if they act in
          good faith and exercise their judgment reasonably".


G ood Faith and Reasonableness of Conduct

8.8.1     In draw ing any conclusions as to good faith and reasonable exercise
          of judgment, the Authority m ust consider all relevant evidence
          including the findings of the various investigations and reports. It is
          also   im portant that the          Authority      does    not limit itself to
          consideration of good faith but also considers whether Mr
          Duckenfield or Mr M urray exercised their duties reasonably. If the
          A uthority decides either or both of them acted unreasonably,
          however, it may still decide that other factors pointing to supporting
          the relevant former officers outweigh this consideration (whilst it is
          difficult to envisage circumstances justifying supporting an officer
          who the Authority considers acted in bad faith).

8.8.2    On the relevance of the conduct of the officers in Wilson and Dalton
         and more specifically on "good faith" and "reasonable exercise of
         judgment", Lord Justice Ralph Gibson commented



          if, therefore, there was, on the part o f the officer, negligence, i.e. failure to
         exercise such care as was reasonably to be required in the circumstances of
         an officer o f his rank and experience, doing his job in the force, then in m y       '
         view, the Police Authority is entitled to have regard to it i f such negligence
         ivas connected to the subject matter o f the legal proceedings, or to the
         causing o f the legal proceedings to be taken, that it can fairly be regarded as
         a substantial cause o f the incurring of the costs. 1 have no doubt that a
         Police Authority, if satisfied o f good faith on the part o f the officer, would
         normally act, and be pleased to act, on the central principle stated in the
        circular [i.e good faith]; but the discretion is given to the Authority and it is
         impossible, in m y view, to hold that, once good faith is established, a Police
        Authority must disregard clear evidence o f negligence or a failure to
         "exercise judgment reasonably". So to hold would mean that a Police
        Authority would be required to disregard acts o f substantial negligence,
        such that it could fairly be said that, although acquitted on bad faith, the
        officer had "brought the proceedings upon himself'.



8.8.3   The decision w hether the evidence of such negligence in a particular
        case justifies w ithholding reimbursement, wholly or in part, is,
        therefore, entrusted to the Police Authority.

8.8.4   While the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police has admitted
        negligence in certain civil actions which have been brought, it m ust
        also be remembered that:

        (a)     the admissions were in respect of civil, not criminal liability;

        (b)     the other parties who were held responsible contributed to
                 the damages paid to the victims; and

        (c)     there was no finding that Messrs Duckenfield and Murray
                 were themselves individually negligent and responsible for
                 the disaster.

8.8.5   Whilst all the relevant factors m ust be considered as a whole, it is
        w orth draw ing attention to the following from Lord Justice Taylor's
        interim report and Lord Justice Stuart Smith's Scrutiny as relevant to
        an assessment of Mr Duckenfield and Mr M urray's behaviour:

(i)     From Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report (appendix 18) -
        "Postponement of kick off"

"226 - At various stages in his evidence, Mr Duckenfield gave three accounts
of why he thought it was too late to postpone kick off. Once it was that one of
the teams had already come onto Lite pitch. Then it was that a group of
photographers at the tunnel had wrongly led him to think that the teams
were coming out. Finally, he did not know w hy he thought the teams were
      coming out. They did not in fact come on to the pitch until 2.54pm, two
      minutes after gate C was opened. Police Constable Buxton had asked for a
      postponem ent of kick off before gate C was opened. It should not, however,
      have needed a police constable in the thick of the crowd (and there were
      others of like mind) to think of postponing the kick off. The need should have
      been clear in the control room.

      227 - The truth was that Mr Duckenfield applied inflexibly the policy he had
      discussed w ith Mr Murray. Kick off w ould not be postponed unless there
      was some major cause for delayed arrivals e.g. a jam on the m otorway or fog.
      I accept that the thinking behind this policy was not callous or punitive. If
      kick-off is postponed whenever a proportion of fans choose to leave the
      public houses late, the practice may grow and kick off times w ould become
      meaningless. But, a commander m ust deal w ith the problem of the day.
      Faced w ith a situation which was becoming dangerous, crowd safety should
      have been his param ount consideration. Kick off should have been delayed.


Summary

      228 - The layout of the turnstiles and the num ber they were required to serve
      left no margin of safety against an uneven flow of fans. Because police
      strategy in advance and on the day did not cater for it, the arrival of a large
      num ber of supporters between 2.30pm and 2.40pm created an unmanageable
      crush. The presence of a substantial minority of fans who had drunk too
      m uch aggravated that problem. Having lost control and rejected the option
       of postponing kick off, the police were faced w ith the serious danger of
      deaths or injuries. They were left therefore w ith no alternative but to open
       the gates. Superintendent Marshall was right at that stage to ask for it and Mr
       Duckenfield was right to agree. But the possible effects of so dramatic a step
      required other action.


The blunder on opening the gates

      229 - The decision to order the opening of the gates was not accompanied or
      followed by any other order to deal w ith the consequences. W hen gate C
      was opened, a steady stream of about 2000 fans poured through it over some
      five minutes. Clearly they were going to go into the ground somewhere and
     . unless they were diverted their likeliest route was through the tunnel for
      reasons already given. No w arning was issued from the control room that the
      gate was to be opened. Serials on the concourse were not alerted. Neither the
      Club control room, nor the Chief Steward at the Leppings Lane end was
      warned. N ot even Mr Greenwood, the Ground Commander, was informed.
      From 2.47pm w hen Mr Marshall m ade his first request until 2.52pm w hen Mr
      Duckenfield acceded to it, there were five minutes in which orders could have
      been given as to how the influx was to be absorbed. It was not done. In
      evidence, Mr Duckenfield began by saying that no officer m ade any wrong
      decision b ut he later conceded he had erred in this regard. He said he did not
      consider w here the people w ould go w hen the gate opened. Even after it
      opened, w hen he could see the influx on the television screen, no order was
      given to steer the fans to the wing pens. Mr Duckenfield said it did not cross
      his mind to detail officers on the concourse to shut off the tunnel. Those
      officers could not have known from their position how full pens 3 and 4 were.
      That was a matter for the control room to monitor from its ow n observations
      and using intelligence from around the ground."

      "231...it should have been clear in the control room where there was a view of
      the pens and of the crowd at the turnstiles that the tunnel had to be closed. If
      orders had been given to that effect w hen gate C was opened, the fans could
      have been directed to the empty areas of the wings and this disaster could
      still have been avoided. Failure to give that order was a blunder of the first
      magnitude".

"The Officers in Command

      250 - Even when realisation of the problem came to officers on the track, it
      was some minutes before it reached the control room. W hen spectators first
      appeared on the track, the immediate assum ption in the control room was
      that a pitch invasion was threatened. This was unlikely at the beginning of a
      match. It became still less likely w hen those on the track made no move
      tow ards the pitch. Mr Motson, the BBC commentator, recognised and said
      well before the match was stopped, that the trouble seemed to be
      overcrowding and not misbehaviour. Still, the assum ption to the contrary
      persisted in the control room. Until Mr M urray radioed for a fleet of
      ambulances, about 3.06pm, Mr Duckenfield continued to treat the incident as
      a threat to the pitch and to public order."

      "281 - Mr Duckenfield leant heavily on Mr M urray's experience. Between
      them they misjudged the build up at the turnstiles and did little about it until
      the received Mr Marshall's request to open the gate.           They did not, for
      example, check the turnstile figures available from Club control or check with
      Tango units as to the numbers still to come.             They did not alert Mr
      Greenwood to the situation at the fringe of his area of command. They gave
      no instructions as to the management of the crowd at Leppings Lane.
      Inflexibly, they declined to postpone kick off.

      282 - When Mr Marshall's request came, Mr Duckenfield's capacity to take
      decisions and give orders seemed to collapse. Having sanctioned, at last, the
      opening of the gates, he failed to give necessary consequential orders or to
      exert any control w hen the disaster occurred. He m isinterpreted the
      emergence of fans from pens 3 and 4. When he w as unsure of the problem, he
      sent dow n others to "assess the situation" rather than descend to see for
      himself. He gave no information to the crowd."


      (ii)             From Lord Justice Stuart-Sm ith's Scrutiny Report (appendix 19)

Chapter 1

      "25. The Director of Public Prosecutions had the responsibility' of deciding
      whether criminal proceedings, in practice charges of manslaughter, should be
      brought against any corporate body or individual. In their submissions to me
      Counsel for the Family Support Group have only invited me to make a
      recommendation to the DPP in the case of Mr Duckenfield and Mr M urray...


      26. the DPP, accepting the advice of two very experienced Queen's Counsel,
      concluded in 1990 that there was not sufficient evidence to justify such
      charges against either of these officers. The fresh evidence, therefore, would
      have to be of sufficient significance that there is, in my view, a real possibility
      that in considering it the DPP might change her mind and institute
proceedings for manslaughter, or any other offence, against one or both of
these officers".


"52. I have read the joint opinion of Counsel dated 6 August 1990 which gave
advice to the Director of Public Prosecutions on the possible criminal
proceedings against Mr Murray and Mr Duckenfield, amongst others.
A lthough the material available to Counsel was more extensive than that
which was placed before Lord Taylor, because by that time the criminal
investigation carried out by the West M idlands Police had been completed,
Counsel stated that
"the criminal investigation, for all his thoroughness, has not significantly added to or
contradicted Lord Justice Taylor's findings. In our judgment, therefore, the Taylor
analysis o f the facts is as firm a base as any from which to approach the question o f
Criminal Liability1'


53. Counsel then set out a full, detailed and careful resum e of the facts based
on the evidence then available. I have not found any error or omission in this
resume, nor in my view is any particular aspect understated or exaggerated. I
have also considered the statement of the law set out in the opinion. Counsel
considered both the offences of m anslaughter and culpable misfeasance in
public office. They were plainly correct to consider that the latter offence
w ould be no easier to establish than m anslaughter in the circumstances of the
case.


54. In order to recommend that the DPP reconsider the decision not to
prosecute, therefore, I m ust be satisfied that any fresh evidence establishes, or
may establish, facts not previously considered by Counsel or the significance
of which was not appreciated, which makes it more likely that charges of
m anslaughter could be established. Essentially this relates to Mr
Duckenfield's and Mr Murray's knowledge and appreciation of the risk of
injury in doing w hat they did or omitted to d o ....

55. From my meetings with the bereaved families and their representatives, I
am left in no doubt that there was w idespread disappointm ent at the DPP's
decision not to prosecute. They find it difficult to understand in the light of
Lord Taylor's trenchant criticisms of the South Yorkshire Police and the fact
that the force have been paying compensation.

56. W hat the Director of Public Prosecutions had to bear in mind, however, is
the significantly different and greater degree of culpability which is involved
in manslaughter, or culpable misfeasance in public office, as against the
degree of negligence which gives rise to liability', and compensation
payments, under civil law. Any prosecution of an individual police officer
w ould have to establish his individual responsibility. It w ould not be enough
simply to prove the composite failure of the police operation.

57. The causes of the disaster were many and complex. So far as these two
officers were concerned, the prosecution w ould have to prove to the high
standard required for a criminal conviction [i.e. beyond reasonable doubt]
that the failure to give the order to close off the tunnel w hen gate C was
opened am ounted to the serious degree of recklessness necessary to constitute
manslaughter".

Chapter 7

"5....I have come to the clear conclusion that there is no basis upon which
there should be a further Judicial Injury or a reopening of Lord Taylor's
Inquiry. There is no basis for a renewed application to the Divisional Court
or for the Attorney General to exercise his powers under the Coroners Act
1988. I do not consider that there is any material which should be p u t before
the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Police Complaints Authority which
might cause them to reconsider the decisions they have already taken..."

"6. ..None of the evidence I was asked to consider added anything significant
to the evidence which was available to Lord Taylor's Inquiry or to the
Inquests".


The nature of the charges against the form er officers and the m erits of the
charges

8.9.1     Each of Messrs Duckenfield and Murray face two charges of
          m anslaughter and one charge of wilful neglect to perform a public
                duty. Paragraphs 5.2.3 (a) and (b) above set out the elements of these
                offences.

       8.9.2    The Authority has requested Leading Counsel for each of the former
                officers, namely William Clegg QC for Mr Duckenfield and Michael
                Harrison QC for Mr Murray, to provide an opinion on these matters.

       8.9.3    In appendix 9 is a copy of their joint opinion and a copy of Mr
                M urray's representations to the DPP.

8.10   The likely costs to the A uthority of providing financial assistance sought
       for the Leeds Criminal Proceedings

       These are referred to in paragraph 6.

8.11   Availability of alternative sources of fu nd in g

       8.11.1   In Wilson and Dalton, the court considered w hether the fact that Mr
                Wilson and Mr Dalton's costs had been m et by the Police Federation
                was a relevant consideration which could be properly taken into
                account in considering whether to reimburse those costs to Mr
                Wilson and Mr Dalton. The report of the Police Authority's decision
                in that case stated "any reim bursem ent of costs would in effect be a
                reim bursem ent to the Police Federation of its costs". The court held
                that the fact that an officer has been provided w ith legal
                representation by the Federation was an irrelevant consideration.
                Lord Justice Ralph Gibson said
                "Mr Underhill [Counsel for Mr Wilson and Mr Dalton] submitted
                that this was wholly irrelevant; the fact that these two officers had
                been supported by thi; Federation did not affect in any relevant way
                the merits of their applications, and, if their applications were good,
                so that they were entitled to reimbursement in whole or in part, they
                should be allowed. It is, of course, a commonplace of the exercise of
                discretion as to costs in our courts that in general, no attention is paid
                to the fact that a plaintiff or defendant is entitled, in right of his
                membership of a trade union, to legal representation. His right to an
                order for costs depends in the ordinary case, upon the merits of his
                claim thereto. The fact that his union supports him is as irrelevant as
                the fact, if it should be the case, that he borrowed the money for his




                                            45
         costs from his parents on terms that he w ould not be expected to
         repay it.... for my part I have no doubt that Mr Underhill's primary
         submission is correct and that, having regard to the terms of the
         circular, the mere fact that an officer has been provided w ith legal
         representation by the Federation is irrelevant to the question whether
         an application for reimbursement should be granted....that
         conclusion does not mean that a Police Authority could in no case
         w hatever have regard as to w hether the Federation had provided the
         legal representation or whether it had been paid for by the officer
         personally. An application m ight be very finely balanced, having
         regard to the various factors to be weighed. If, in a particular case, a
         Police Authority was minded to take into account, in support of a
         plea based on severe financial hardship, that an officer was
         personally liable for the costs, I consider the Authority w ould be
         entitled to have such regard to it as it w ould think proper in the
         circumstances".

8.11.2   In Garretts' opinion, the availability or otherwise of Legal Aid should
         be considered in light of the following:

         (a)    The fact that Legal Aid is not available to Mr Duckenfield and
                 Mr M urray in the judicial review proceedings and that a
                 significant personal contribution may be required in respect
                 of the Leeds Criminal Proceedings and the South Sefton
                 Criminal Proceedings may add weight to any plea from the
                 former officers of severe financial hardship in support of their
                 applications;

         (b)    It is arguable that both R v Gloucestershire County Council and
                 another, ex parte Barry [1997] 2 ALL E.R. 1 and R v Chief
                 Constable o f Sussex, ex parte International Trader's Ferry Ltd
                 [1997] 2 ALL E.R. 65 indicate that the availability of funding
                 sources other than the Authority's ow n resources would be
                 relevant.   Both cases emphasise the fact that the legal duties
                 of an authority are qualified by the resources available to that
                 authority. It is acknowledged that where an authority has a
                 limited budget to satisfy various demands which it has a duty




                                    46
                 to fulfil, it is entitled to decide how to best allocate that
                budget to the maximum advantage of the maximum num ber
                 of persons who are entitled to its services, and m ust weigh up
                 the needs of one such person against another;

         (c)    Given the acknowledgement in these cases of the need for
                 police or other relevant authorities to spread limited
                 resources between a num ber of different obligations, and to
                 weigh up the needs of one potential beneficiary against
                 another, it w ould seem inappropriate to exclude from
                 consideration the fact that the officers, in this case, might
                 receive financial support from the legal aid fund to mitigate
                 their costs, whilst paying the costs m ight deprive the force of
                 the funds required for other police purposes;

         (d)    Any assistance provided by the Authority in respect of future
                 legal costs will be added to Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray's
                 capital resources in assessing their eligibility for legal aid. In
                 effect this means that any funding by the Authority will
                 correspondingly reduce any contribution which the Legal Aid
                 Fund w ould otherwise make to their costs; and

         (e)    It is unlikely that Legal Aid will be aw arded retrospectively
                 and accordingly the former officers costs after 5 February
                 1999 may be recoverable from no-one, if the Authority are
                 unwilling to meet these costs.

         We have asked the Solicitors for Mr Duckenfield and Mr M urray to
         provide details of their clients eligibility for legal aid, b ut this is still
         awaited.

8.11.3   Criminal Costs - Central Funds

         If Messrs Duckenfield and M urray w ere tried but acquitted, or the
         charges against them were dismissed at committal, or otherwise did
         not proceed to trial in the Crown Court, an order for costs in their
         favour to be paid out of central funds will be made unless there are
         positive reasons for not doing so. Examples of such reasons include:




                                      47
•       circumstances where their conduct has brought suspicion on
        themselves and has mislead the prosecution into thinking that
        the case against them is stronger than it is; and

•       circumstances where there is ample evidence to support a
        conviction but they are acquitted on a technicality which has
        no merit.

It will be recalled that such an order for costs was made in the South
Sefton Criminal Proceedings but that the Clerk to the Justices of the
South Sefton Magistrates' Court is considering w hether Messrs
Duckenfield and Murray should have their costs reimbursed.           The
Clerk to the Justices has based his reasoning on the decision in Miller.

In Miller, the Defendant was acquitted of causing an affray
w hereupon an order was made in his favour for paym ent of his costs
out of central funds. When the costs were submitted for assessment
by the court, the court declined to assess the costs on the grounds that
the Defendant had not "incurred" costs as these had been met bvj his
employer.

On appeal to the High Court, it was held that a Defendant has
incurred costs if he is responsible for their payment, even though his
employers w ould have met the costs. In order to show that costs were
not incurred by the Defendant, it was necessary' to establish that there
was an agreement binding on the solicitors that they w ould in no
circumstances seek to recover costs from the Defendant.

The Clerk to the Justices contends that, in the light of Miller, the
assistance evidenced by the Authorities letters of 5 March 1998 to Mr
Duckenfield and 29 June 1998 to Mr M urray establishes that they have
not incurred legal costs. The solicitors for Messrs Duckenfield and
M urray have challenged this view, and Garretts opinion is firmly that
their challenge is correct (unless of course they have entered into
agreements with their respective clients to the effect that they will not
seek to recover costs from them).

Therefore, if the Authority were to re-instate the financial assistance
granted in 1998 in respect of both past and future costs, Messrs
Duckenfield and Murray should not be denied payment of their costs
             out of central funds on the principle enunciated in Miller. However,
             as the South Sefton Case shows, it is not uncom m on for a court to
             deny a successful party its costs if another party is meeting these costs.
             There is therefore a risk that, even if Messrs Duckenfield and Murray
             are acquitted, the Authority will not be reimbursed the costs it has
             funded, even though Miller indicates this is wrong.

             Whilst the former officers could challenge such a refusal, there is also
             a danger that, were a further challenge to the High Court to be made,
             it might be held that Miller was wrongly decided and that Messrs
             Duckenfield and M urray should not have their costs paid out of
             central funds. Further, even if such a challenge were made and failed,
             this will entail further applications to the court which the Authority
             w ould need to support as the Authority w ould be directly affected by
             the outcome.

             It should also be observed that were Messrs Duckenfield and Murray
             to be convicted, orders for the prosecution costs may be made against
             them where a court is satisfied that the convicted person has the
             means and ability to meet the costs. A court may be more inclined to
             find that Messrs Duckenfield and M urray had the means to meet the
             prosecution costs if it were aware that the costs of their Defence were
             being met by the Authority.

             In the light of these matters, we recommend that, if the Authority
             wishes to grant financial assistance in respect of the Leeds (and South
             Seftonj proceedings, Garretts be instructed to draw up an agreement
             w ith each of Messrs Duckenfield and Murray. This agreement should
             try to minimise the likelihood of the court declining reimbursement
             on grounds that Messrs Duckenfield and M urray had not incurred
             costs.


9     OPTIONS OPEN TO THE AUTHORITY

9.1   South Sefton Crim inal Proceedings

      As noted above, it is likely that Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray have a strong
      case that the Authority is legally bound to pay their reasonable costs incurred
      in the South Sefton Criminal Proceedings. However, in view of the fact that
      the Clerk to the South Sefton Justices has yet to make a decision as to



                                         49
paym ent of the costs from central funds, the Authority is recommended to
defer its decision on the costs of these proceedings until the Clerk's decision is
known.

South Sefton Tudicial Review

The Authority is recommended to defer consideration of w hether to provide
assistance in the proposed judicial review of the decision of the Clerk to the
South Sefton Justices w hether to pay the former officers' costs from central
funds until it is know n w hat his decision is.

The Leeds Criminal Proceedings

9.3.1    As noted above, Mr Duckenfield and Mr M urray have a strong case
         that the Authority is legally bound to pay their reasonable costs
         incurred in the Leeds Criminal Proceedings up until 5 February 1999.
         The Authority is therefore recommended to pay these costs and to
         ask a legal costs draftsman to review the expenses claimed a n d /o r
         apply to the Court for an assessment of the costs under Section 71
         Solicitors Act 1974.

9.3.2    In relation to costs incurred since 5 February 1999, the options open
         to the Authority include:-

         A.        Rejection

         B.         D eferring consideration of the costs of the charge against
                    Mr D uckenfield of tending to pervert the course of
                    justice to await the outcome of his application to central
                    funds for costs

         C.         D eferring consideration on the other charges un til after
                    the conclusion of the proceedings or the conclusion of
                    the committal proceedings on the grounds that only then
                    can the Authority know            the   circumstances   of the
                    prosecution cases against Messrs Duckenfield and Murray,
                    and the likely cost of granting financial assistance.

         D.        A pproving     the   application     subject   to   term s   and
                    conditions, e.g:-
that an agreed overall budget for the defendant's maximum
costs should be fixed and other conditions for meeting the
legal costs imposed including:-

       (i)   that the num ber of solicitors working on the case
             should not exceed a specified number, nor should
             there be more than a specified num ber of partners;

       (ii) the hourly rates payable for each level of fee earner is
             fixed;

       (iii) rules on attendance of solicitors at hearings, meetings
             and interviews are set;

       (iv) the circumstances in which Counsel and Leading
             Counsel may be used, and the hourly or daily rates
             payable for Counsel is agreed;

 (v)         that the costs of any other party which are aw arded
             against Mr Duckenfield or Mr M urray will not be met
             by the Authority;

 (vi)        that the costs be m onitored on a regular basis,       1j

 (vii)       that the Authority's contribution to Mr Duckenfield or
             Mr Murray's legal costs may be w ithdraw n a n d /o r
             clawed back if they have misled the Authority about
             their case, failed to provide adequate evidence of the
             costs they have incurred or otherwise conducted their
             case unreasonably;

(viii)       that the Authority reserve the right to have the former
             officer's costs up to Committal reviewed by a legal
             costs draughtsm an appointed by the A uthority and to
             pay such costs only to the extent that the Authority
             advise these have been reasonably and properly
             incurred.

 The Authority approves funding, at this stage, only up to the
 conclusion of the committal hearing, when the prosecutions
 may in any case come                  to   an end, further relevant
                circumstances come to light and the costs of funding to a full
                trial become easier to predict by the Authority.

        E.      T hat the A uthority w ill m eet a specific proportion of the
                costs only.




        F.      That financial assistance is approved in principle, subject to
                the outcome of the proceedings. For example, it might be
                provided that costs be met upon acquittal of the officers and
                equally, costs could be conditional on conviction because,
                arguably, Messrs Duckenfield and M urray would not require
                financial assistance if they were acquitted because their costs
                will be met out of central funds. However, it w ould appear
                unreasonable or irrational to provide assistance conditional
                on conviction, and w ould increase the likelihood of a costs
                order being made against Messrs Duckenfield and M urray if
                it were known that their costs on conviction were being met
                by the Authority.

        G.      to provide financial assistance by w ay of loan on the basis
                that if Messrs Duckenfield and M urray are acquitted, they
                should have the funding to repay the authority' from the costs
                aw ard made from central funds.

9.3.3   Taking no decision, pending any decision by the Legal Aid
        Authorities as to whether, and if so on w hat terms, to make legal aid
        available to Messrs Duckenfield and M urray w ould appear not to be
        an option, as we are told by their solicitors that the legal aid
        authorities are not willing to decide on any application from them
        for funding, unless and until the Authority itself rejects funding
        them.

9.3.4   It is recommended that, if financial assistance is to be provided, it
        should be provided:-

        (a)     until the end of committal only at which time any further
                applications should be considered afresh;




                                    52
         (b)    under an agreement w ith Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray
                which makes the Authority's obligation to reimburse their
                costs subject to specific limits and conditions such as these set
                out at paragraph 9.3.2 D above; and

        (c)    w'ithin a structure designed to fall within Miller so that, as far
                as possible, an order for costs from central funds is not
               precluded in the event of an acquittal.

The DPP Judicial Review

9.4.1   The options for the Authority are to

        (a)    reject the applications; or

        (b)    grant the applications subject to assessment of the costs by a
               legal costs d raftsm an; or

        (c)    aw ard a proportion of the costs, for example by refusing to
               pay the costs aw arded against Messrs Duckenfield and
               M urray in favour of the DPP.

9.4.2   The application should, however, be deferred pending details of the
        costs claimed bv the DPP against Messrs Duckenfield and Murrav.
                        V-          O                                       j




The Powers Tudicial Review

It is recommended that the application for Messrs Duckenfield and Murray's
costs for these proceedings be deferred to await assessment and paym ent of
the costs order obtained against Ms Adlington.




GARRETTS
                                    APPENDICES

  NOTE:-

 The num bering of the Appendices relates to the relevant paragraphs of this report.

 1.     Copy letter from A.C.C Daines to Mr Duckenfield dated 27 February 1998
        with application from Mr Duckenfield to A.C.C. Daines dated 28 February
        1999 marked upon it.

 2.     Copy letter from Mr Murray to the Chief Constable dated 28 June 1998. Copy
        letter from A.C.C Daines to the Clerk and Treasurer of the Authority dated 29
        June 1998.

 3.     Copy Garretts' report to the Authority dated 1 February 1999.

 4.     Copy letter from Ms Adlington to the Clerk and Treasurer of the Authority
        dated 22 December 1998.

 5.    Copy letter from Ms Adlington to the members of the Authority dated 5
       January 1999.

 6.    Copy fax from Ms Adlington to Garretts dated 29 January 1999.

 /.    Copy letters from Garretts to solicitors to Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray
       dated 10 February 1999.

8.     Copy summonses against Mr Duckenfield and Mr M urray before the Leeds
       Petty Sessional Division dated 10 July 1998 and 13 Julv 1998 respectively.

9.     Copy joint opinion of William Clegg QC and Michael Harrison QC dated 26
       April 1999. Copy of Mr M urray's representations to the DPP dated 2 October
       1998.

10.    Copy letter from Mr Newell (CPS Case Worker Director) to Walker Morris
       dated 1 February 1999.

11.    Copy affidavit sworn by Mr Newell dated 23 March 1999.

12.    Copy decision of the Divisional Court dated 31 March 1999.

13.   Copy letter from Mr Newell to Winckworth Sherwood solicitors dated 12
      April 1999.




                                         54
      Copy letter from the Police Superintendent's Association of England and
      Wales to W inckworth Sherwood Solicitors dated 5 March 1999.

15.   Copy letters from Garretts to Walker Morris dated 7 April 1999 and 30 April
      1999. Copy letter from Mr Duckenfield to the Authority dated 16 April 1999.
      Copy letter from Mr M urray to the Authority dated 22 April 1999. Copy
      letter from Walker Morris to Garretts dated 7 May 1999.

16.   Copy letter from Clerk and Treasurer to the Authority to Mr Duckenfield and
      Mr M urray's solicitors dated 13 January 1999. Copy letter from Clerk and
      Treasure to the Authority to Walker Morris dated 14 January 1999.

17.   Copy Home Office Circular 77/87 and Home Office Circular 4/1998.

      Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report.

19.   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's Scrutiny Report.




                                        55
                             S outh Y orkshire

                             POLICE                                        Ian Daines,     BA(Hons) DiP.Ed
                             JUSTICE       with    COURAGE
                                                                               Assistant Chief Constable




            Mr D Duckenfield                                                               Ref. ACC/I n /N!''H

                                                                                           27 February 19S3
            Corset




            Dear Mr Duckenfield

            Leoal Assistance

                   r
                 is letter is addressed in identical terms to David Duckenfield and Trevor Bichard.

            Home Office Circular 77/37 provides for Police Authorities to provide financial assistance
            tor iega! representation for police officers (serving or retired).

            *            ie puoiscaiion, on io reoruary 1923, or Lord Justice Siuart~Sfr..’tr .'3 Scrutiny
            report on the Hiilsbcrough Disaster leading members of the Hillsborough Family Suocort
               -/up h<=ve spoken openly or prosecuting people for alleged offences in connection with
            that disaster.

            ■ ney rersr to prosecuting;

            a)         David Duckenfield for manslaughter

            b)         Trevor Bichard for perjury.

            We cannot be sure whether they will follow through into action nor can we be sure of when
            they may act.

-       ,   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s Scrutiny report reviews the process by which the Director of
\ j         Public Prosecutions (DPP) decided, in 1990, not to prosecute for manslaughter. Sir Murray < y \
    X       Stuart-Smith finds no fault in the decision making process and says that no new evidence
            has come to light since that decision was made.
                                                                       f

             I he allegation of perjury is more recent and revolves around the assertion by some
            members of the Hillsborough Family Support Group that Trevor Bichard lied on oath about
            the functionality or the C C i V system. Sir Murray dismisses any suggestion that Trevor
             i old lies.




                             Police Headquarters
                             S cig Hill       ^
                            Sheffield S3 SLY
                            Tteh 0114 220 2020 Fax: 01 14 252 3243
                            Direct Dial No: r.
    The members of the Police Authority have resolved to make the offer of fi------   inancial
    assistance for legal representation to officers who may be in jeopardy from Hillsborou g'n
    Disaster related prosecutions. If you wish to use this facility you must apply.

     The members have agreed to allow the Chairman, the Clerk and I to decide on such
     applications on their behalf. For simplicity, I suggest that you endorse this letter with words
     to the effect of, “I wish to apply for financial-assistance for legal representation as outlined
     in this letter” , sign and date. As soon as I receive your reply the Clsrk and I can consider
     your application.

     The Chief Constable has used Winckworth Pemberton Solicitors, 35 Great Peter Street,
     Westminster, London, SW1P 3LP (Telephone 0171 5935000) in connection with Sir
     Murray’s Scrutiny. They came v/ell recommended and have been of great assistance. Nick
     Owston, Ails a Lawrence and Simon Eastwood have mastered the complexities or the
     disaster and subsequent enquiries. I suggest that you use their services.

     if ycur application for financial assistance is approved and you are happy to use
     W'inckworth Pemberton their bills will come direct to us.

     I have already asked Simon and Ailsa to research the procedures by which a private
     prosecution is initiated; who does what, where, when and how. If you are content to use
     their sen/ices, Simon suggested a meeting at an early opportunity. It would help me to be
     at that meeting and perhaps the three of us-could attend together.

     if I can be of any assistance, please do not hesitate to contact me. This must be a worrying
     time for you. i am cn leave 2-6 March 1998 but v/e are not going away and my secretary,
                        i/ill phone me daily with any news.

     Yours sincerely




         ian Daines
         Assistant Chief Constable




                                 lo




th e n
                S outh Y orkshire

                POLICE                                                       Ian Daines,          BA(Hons) Dip.Ed.
                JUSTICE              ui:k         COURAGE                            Ass;s:an; Chief Co:is.'ah!e




    Ref: ACC/ID/NMH

    23 June 1SS3

    W J Wilkinson Esq
    Clerk and Treasurer
    South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
    PO Box 37
    Regent Street
    Barnsley
£   S7G 2FQ

    For the attention of Maureen Oades




    Retired Police Superintendent Bernard MURRAY

    The South Yorkshire Police Authority recently resolved to provide, financial assistance for
    legal representation of serving and retired police officers who face private prosecutions
    arising out of the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster of 15 April 1333. The members or the
    Authority delegated to you the power to deal with specific requests.

    Chief Superintendent (retired) David Ducksnfield and Sergeant Trevor Bichard applied for
    financial assistance for legal -representation.- and it-was-granted. - I attach an application
    from Superintendent (retired) Bernard MURRAY. Tie was second in command to Mr
    Duckenfield at Hillsborough Stadium. Mr MURRAY has received summonses to appear
    before Bootie Magistrates on 17 July 1338 to answer criminal cnarges arising out or tne
    disaster. Mr Murray received_the summonses on 27 June 1338.

    In 1330 the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) ruled that there should be no
    prosecutions arising from the disaster. In February 1338 Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, an
    Appeal Court Judge, found no reason to recommend that the DPP reconsider his ruling.

    Mr Murray acted in good faith in his policing of the footbaT! match that became the
    Hillsborough Disaster. Nine years after the tragedy he faces a prosecution for unlawful
    killing which can carry a prison sentence. He will contest the charges, it would be
    damaging to the morale of the Force if Mr Murray were left to meet his legal costs without
    assistance.




                   r e : ; - ; .*iiscqu 2.rtors
    V !
                   Sc:g Kill
                   Sheffield S3 SLY          ^
                   Tel: 0114 220 2020 F a x tO lli 252 3243
                   Direct T .. 1 N'c:                   Dircc: F-.\: DIM 252.'-;SI
                                    ' HI M 2523-105
 t




1 susccri Mr Murray's application fcr financial assistance for legal representation . I would
be cbliaed if you could write to him as scon as possiuie at nis norne accress and rax your
letter to nis solicitor;

       Mr Richard Manning
       Walker Morris Solicitors
       Kings Court
       12 King Street
       Leeds
       LS1 2HL

        "el: 01132 832500
        :ax: 01132 45S412

Ycurs sincen




!sn Daines
Assistant Cniwi CcniLd^tc




                                                           /
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY




 Report on Financial Assistance granted to
       form er officers tow ards their
  Legal Expenses and further Assistance
   sought by such officers tow ards such
                  expenses


             1 February 1999




         G arretts
              1 City Square
             LEEDS, LSI 2AL

               NJP.DH.AG
NOTE: THERE IS MATERIAL IN THIS TEXT AND THE APPENDICES WHICH
IS CONFIDENTIAL. IT CONTAINS INFORMATION DISCLOSED BY MR
DUCKENFIELD, MR MURRAY AND THEIR ADVISERS W HICH IF IT
BECOMES GENERALLY AVAILABLE AT THIS STAGE COULD PRETUDICE
THEIR LEGAL POSITION.                                    MEMBERS ARE THEREFORE REQUESTED TO
KEEP THIS REPORT SECURE AND DISCUSS ITS CONTENTS W ITH NO-ONE
OUTSIDE THE MEMBERS OF THE POLICE COMMITTEE, ITS OFFICERS AND
ADVISERS.

PURPOSE OF THE REPORT

To consider:

i)         the decisions taken in principle on 27th February 1998 to provide financial
            assistance to Mr David Duckenfield and Mr Bernard M urray in relation to
            certain criminal proceedings taken against them and to review and decide
            w hether to reverse or confirm those decisions;

ii)        further applications for financial assistance from Mr David Duckenfield and
            Mr Bernard Murray to meet their respective legal costs and disbursements in
            proposed proceedings for judicial review of:

            a.            the decision of the Crown Prosecution Service not to intervene to take
                          over the conduct of the private prosecutions brought against them by
                          Ms Ann Adlington, Solicitor, on behalf of the Hillsborough Family
                          Support Group ("HFSG");

            b.            an adverse ruling by the Clerk to the South Sefton Justices on claims
                          made for the paym ent of costs from central funds;

iii)         written representations submitted by Ms Adlington, on behalf of the HFSG,
             to the Authority;

RESOLUTIONS OF THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY ON
FRIDAY, 5 FEBRUARY 1999

1.         In the light of legal advice, including advice from leading Counsel, members
          are recommended to resolve that, on balance, the Authority has no legal power
          to provide financial assistance to Mr David Duckenfield or Mr Bernard Murray
          in relation to their costs and expenses of defending the private prosecutions
          brought against them by the HFSG, by Information dated 10 July 1998, and



J\G A R R E T T \ SOUTHYORK5HIRE PO LIC E/'F \'-00011.D O C    1
          accordingly to determine that any previous decision of the Authority, or any
          officer acting under its authority, to make such assistance available is null and
          void.

2.        In the light of legal advice, including advice from leading Counsel, members
          are recommended to resolve that, on balance, the Authority has no legal power
           to provide financial assistance to Mr David Duckenfield or Mr Bernard M urray
           m relation to the costs of any judicial review proceedings brought by either of
           them; whether relating to the decision of the Crown Prosecution Service not to
           take over the conduct of the private prosecutions and discontinue such
           prosecutions, or to any decision of the Clerk to the Sefton Magistrates' Court to
           challenge the paym ent of the officers' costs of proceedings before that court
           from central funds, or to any other decision of any court, authority or body
           arising from such prosecutions; and, accordingly, to reject the applications of
           Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray for financial assistance in relation to such
           proceedings.

3.         In recognition of the fact that the legal advice provided to the Authority is that
           it remains arguable that power exists to provide the assistance referred to in 1
           and 2 above, to take such action as the Clerk and Treasurer, in consultation
           with the Chief Constable, the Authority's legal advisers and the Chairman of
           the Authority, may decide as appropriate to have the decisions referred to in 1
           and 2 reviewed by the High Court and to expedite such review w ith a view to
           clarifying the Authority's powers in this regard.

4.         To defer consideration of the procedural issues raised by Ms Adlington, in her
           letters of 22 December 1998 to the Clerk and Treasurer and 5 January 1999 to
           the members of the Authority', until the legal power of the Authority to provide
           the financial assistance referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 has been resolved to
           the satisfaction of the Authority.




J\G A R R ETT \SO U TH Y O R K SH IR EPO LIC E/F\'-Q 0011.D O C   2
CONTENTS

A     Hillsborough Stadium Disaster - Investigations/Decisions/Events Post 15
      April 1989.

B     The proceedings for which Financial Assistance is sought.

C     The decision making process to date.

D     The Potential Challenge.

E     Statutory' Powers.

F     Procedural Considerations.

A     THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER - INVESTIGATION/
       DECISIONS/EVENTS POST 15 APRIL 1989

1.     17 April 1989: Lord Justice Taylor was appointed "to carry out an inquiry into
       the events at Sheffield W ednesday Football Ground on 15 April 1989 and to
       make recommendations about the needs of crowd control and safety at sports
       events".

2.     17 April 1989: Geoffrey Dear QPM, Chief Constable of West Midlands Police,
       appointed to carrv out independent investigation of the disaster and gather
       evidence.

3.    19 April 1989: West Midlands Police assume responsibility for the inquiry.

4.    HM Coroner opens and adjourns inquests on 95 deaths that occurred at
       Hillsborough.

5.     4 August 1989: Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report m ade public. The then
       Chief Constable, Peter Wright, referred the questions of manslaughter, by
       criminal negligence, to the Director of Public Prosecutions for a decision as to
       criminal liability.

6.     15 August 1989: Director of Public Prosecutions recommended that the matter
       should be subject of a full criminal investigation. Mr Dear, Chief Constable of
       West Midlands Police, invited to undertake this investigation. Also asked that
       if he discovers any m atters against the Police (Discipline) Regulations, he
       enquires into them on behalf of South Yorkshire Police.



J-\GARRETT\SOUTHYORKSHIRHPOLICH/FN-00011.DOC   3
7.         30 November 1989: Peter Wright, Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police,
           offers in conjunction w ith insurers to open negotiations w ith representatives of
           the bereaved to resolve all bona fide civil claims for compensation without
           having to await the outcome of legal hearings.

8.         15 December 1989: Agreement reached w ith representatives of the bereaved for
           settlement of civil actions w ithout a decision as to liability.

9.         Full criminal and disciplinary investigation formally commenced.

10.        18 January 1990: Lord Justice Taylor's Final Report is published.

11.        31 March 1990 Mr Dear's report is submitted to Director of Public Prosecutions.

12.        30 August 1990 Director of Public Prosecutions, Allan Green QC, concludes
            that there is insufficient evidence upon which a prosecution for manslaughter,
            or any other criminal offence, could be brought against any officer in the South
            Yorkshire Police, or any other person.

13.        19 November 1990 to 28 March 1991 HM Coroner resumes inquests on 95
            deaths in the Hillsborough Disaster. Jury returns a verdict of accidental death.

14.        7 December 1990: South Yorkshire Police Authority approves financial
            assistance for 6 officers including Mr David Duckinfield and Mr Bernard
            Murray in connection with legal proceedings relating to the inquest..

15.        7 May 1991 the Police Complaints Authority recommend disciplinary charges
            be brought against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent
            Murray.

16.        11 July 1991 the Police Complaints Authority direct that Chief Superintendent
            Duckenfield should face four discipline charges of Neglect of Duty7and one of
            Discreditable Conduct. In addition, Superintendent M urray should face one
            charge of Neglect of Duty.

17.        November 1991 Chief Superintendent Duckenfield retires on medical grounds.

18.        13 January 1992 Police Complaints Authority gives leave not to proceed with
            the discipline charge against Superintendent Murray, as it w ould be
            inappropriate and unjust to pursue the charge against him alone, in the absence
            of his superior officer.




rG A R R E T A SO L T H Y O R K SH IR E PO L IC E /F N -O O C m .D O C   4
19.     26 August 1992 Superintendent M urray retires on medical grounds.

20.     The relatives of six deceased are granted an application for judicial review into
        the inquest verdicts. They sought certiorari to quash the jury's verdict.

21.     The judicial review concludes that the inquest verdicts were correct.

22.     Inquest held by HM Coroner for W est Yorkshire into the death of Anthony
        Bland (the 96th victim of Hillsborough). A verdict of accidental death was
        returned.

23.     5 December 1996 the dram a "Hillsborough" w ritten by Jimmy McGovern on
        behalf of Granada Television, is broadcast on the ITV Network. Following this
        programm e further material is submitted to the Home Office. Those
        representations related in particular to video evidence of the disaster and
        medical evidence about the time of death of the victims.

24.     30 June 1997 the Home Secretary made an oral statement to the House of
        Commons during the course of which he stated:



                  "M adam Speaker, my Department, the office of the Attorney General and
                  the Crown Prosecution Sendee have considered very carefully all the
                  evidence which has been p u t forward in recent months.


                  The Director of Public Prosecutions has taken the view that the material
                  so far presented to her w ould not justify fresh criminal investigations.
                  The then Attorney General also took the view, again on the material
                  presented to him, that any application to the High Court for a new
                  inquest w ould not have any realistic prospect of succeeding.


                  Nonetheless, I am acutely conscious that the families of those who died at
                  Hillsborough and many others including H on Members of this House are
                  very concerned that unresolved issues remain. I am determ ined to go as
                  far as I can to ensure that no m atter of significance is overlooked and that
                  we do not reach a final conclusion w ithout a full and independent
                  examination of the evidence.


                   I can therefore tell the House today that the Attorney General, the
                   Director of Public Prosecutions and I have agreed that it is in the public



 J \ GATSRHTTXj OUTHY ORKSH IREPOLICE/FN-OO OII.DO C   5
               interest that there should be an independent scrutiny to ascertain
               w hether there now7exists any new evidence relating to the disaster which
               was not previously available. We are appointing Lord Justice Stuart-
               Smith, a senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal, for that purpose".

25.      18 February 1998, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's Scrutiny Report is presented to
         the House of Commons. He concluded that:

         25.1 there was no basis upon wrhich there should be a further judicial inquiry
               or a reopening of Lord Taylor's Inquiry;

         25.2. there was no basis for a renewed application to the Divisional Court or
               for the Attorney General to exercise his powers under the Coroners Act
               1988;

         25.3 he did not consider there was any material which should be put before
               the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Police Complaints Authority
               which might cause them to reconsider decisions they had already taken.

B        APPLICATIONS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE


1        INTRODUCTION

1.1       Applications have been submitted to the Authority by Mr David Duckenfield
          and Mr Bernard Murray, formerly a Chief Superintendent and Superintendent
          respectively in the South Yorkshire Police Force, for financial assistance to meet
          the costs of their legal representation in three different sets of legal proceedings
          which will be referred to as "the Criminal Proceedings", "the CPS proceedings",
          and "the Sefton proceedings" in this report. The Criminal Proceedings take the
          form of private prosecutions by the HFSG relating to actions which the officers
          took whilst on duty at Hillsborough Stadium, on 15th April 1989. The HFSG
          alleges that those actions led to the deaths of certain fans attending a match
          between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest football clubs.            The other two
          proceedings would, if launched, arise out of the criminal proceedings.


2       THE CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS

2.1       The criminal prosecutions brought by Ms Adlington, the solicitor representing
          the HFSG, charge Messrs Duckenfield and Murray w ith the manslaughter of
          John Alfred Anderson and James Gary Aspinall, two of the deceased from the



r . GARRET r   HYOKKS*: IKE P O L IC E /F N - 00011.DOC   6
           Hillsborough disaster and also with wilful neglect to perform a public duty. In
           addition, Mr Duckenfield faces a charge of intentionally perverting the course
           of justice in lving about the circumstances in which Gate C at Hillsborough
          Stadium became open.

2.2        The essence of the m anslaughter and wilful neglect charges appear to be that,
           being in a position of responsibility for ground safety, both officers allegedly
           acted with recklessness or gross negligence in failing to take, demand or
           recommend obvious steps to avoid the overcrowding which led to the
           Hillsborough disaster and in taking steps which added to the danger.

2.3        The essence of the charge of perverting the course of justice is that Mr
           Duckenfield allegedly misled Mr Graham Kelly and Mr Glen Kirton of the
           Football Association and Mr Graham Mackrell of Sheffield Wednesday Football
           Club about the reasons for the disaster by claiming that Gate C had been forced
           bv supporters, knowing this not to be the case, and w ith intent to disguise the
           real cause of the Hillsborough disaster from any ensuing investigations or
           judicial proceedings.

2.4        All charges, if proven, are potentially punishable with imprisonment, at the
           discretion of the courts, and the charges of wilful neglect to perform a public
           dutv and intentionally perverting the course of justice are, if proven, also
           potentially punishable by any fine the court considers appropriate.

2.5        The committal proceedings, at which Leeds Magistrates' Court will decide
           w hether there is sufficient evidence against the two officers to justify a full
            criminal trial, is scheduled for early April 1999.

2.6         Copies of relevant correspondence relating to the applications submitted by Mr
            D uck'-nfeld and Mr Murray, which were supported by the Chief Constable, are
            attached at Appendices B1 and B2.                               As previously reported, the Clerk and
            Treasurer acting on behalf of the Authority (and on the basis of advice from the
            Assistant Clerk and Solicitor) approved the provision of financial assistance to
            meet such reasonable expenses as the officers m ight incur in defending the
            criminal proceedings.

2.7         The Authority has already paid £11,824 costs of the criminal proceedings
            (inclusive of VAT) to the solicitors representing Mr Duckenfield.                           A further
            invoice for £34,492.16 (inclusive of VAT) for work up to 18th September 1998 has




J\G A R R E T T \S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E P O L IC E /F N -0 00 :’ .DOC
        been submitted by Mr Duckenfield's solicitors but not paid by the Authority.
        No invoices have, to date, been subm itted by Mr Murray's solicitor.


3      THE CPS PROCEEDINGS

3.1     The Director of Public Prosecutions under the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985,
        has a discretion, but not a duty, to take over the conduct of private
        prosecutions. Having taken over such proceedings he may under Section 23 of
        the 1985 Act discontinue proceedings if the evidence is insufficient or if the
        proceedings would be contrary to the public interests or to avoid duplication or
        for any other good reason.

3.2      In July 1998, the solicitors acting for Mr Duckenfield and Mr M urray wrote to
        the Crown Prosecution Service asking it to take over the criminal proceedings
        brought against their respective clients by Ms Adlington on behalf of the HFSG.

3.3      On the 18 November 1998, the Crown Prosecution Service notified the solicitors
         that, having considered the evidence, the representations made by the parties
         and all the surrounding circumstances, it had decided not to intervene to take
         over an\7 of the charges.                   The Crown Prosecution Service has still, as at 1
         February 1999, not provided the reasons for this decision, despite an
         undertaking to do so l!in January 1999".

3.4      [Deleted]

3.5      [Deleted]


4      THE SEFTON PROCEEDINGS

4.1      The Criminal Proceedings above were initially commenced in the South Sefton
         Magistrates' Court.              However, as the alleged offences were not committed
         within that area and neither defendant resides w ithin that Court's area, the
         officers' solicitors objected to the prosecution being undertaken at that Court.
         Those objections were upheld by the Court and an order was made for the
         paym ent of the defendants' costs from central funds. The Clerk to the Justices
        has now questioned the claims which have been submitted for the officers'
        costs because the Authority has agreed to fund their legal representation (but
        the Clerk has not yet made a final ruling). The applications made for funding
         to pursue a challenge to an adverse decision are included within the papers
        which are attached as Appendices B3 and B4.


J\G ARRHTT\SOUTHYO RK SHIRH POU CH/FN -O OOi:.D OC          8
4.2        [Deleted],




 r\G A R R E T r\S O U T H V O R K SH IR E P O L IC E /FN -O O O n.D O C   9
 c           DECISION MAKING PROCESS TO DATE


1          MATTERS TO BE CONSIDERED BY THE AUTHORITY

1.1          In deciding w hether to meet the legal costs of former Chief Superintendent
             David Duckenfield and former Superintendent Bernard Murray, (whether in
             relation to the criminal proceedings or any of the other potential proceedings
             referred to above) the Authority is subject to the public law principles of
             decision making. Briefly, these are that it m ust (amongst other things):

               •       act within w hatever statutory powers are conferred upon it by Act of
                       Parliament;

               •       act w ith procedural fairness;

               •       take all relevant considerations into account;

               •       ignore all irrelevant considerations;

               •       not act irrationallv;

               •       not fetter its discretion;

               •       not unlawfully delegate the decision making function.

1.2          Failure to comply w ith any of these principles will expose the decision to
             challenge by judicial review.

1.3          The decision making process to date in respect of financial assistance to Mr
             Duckenfield and Mr Murray has been as follows:


2          MEETING OF THE POLICE AUTHORITY ON 1st AUGUST 1997

2.1 At this meeting, the Clerk and Treasurer and the Chief Constable submitted a
             joint report informing members of the appointm ent of Lord Justice Stuart-
             Smith to conduct a scrutiny into aspects of the Hillsborough disaster.

2.2        At that meeting, the Authority made the following resolutions:

                          "1 - That approval be given to the provision of up to £500,000from
                          reserves for expenditure likely to be incurred in respect of the scrutiny.




A G A R R E rc\S O L T H Y O R K S H IR E P O L IC E /F \'-O O O H .D O C   10
                        2 - That approval be given to a commitment to provide financial
                        assistance for legal representation for officers (serving and retired) in
                        connection w ith Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's scrutiny in accordance with
                        the principles set out in the Home Office Circular 77/87 Financial
                        Assistance to Police Officers in Legal Proceedings.

                        3 - That the Clerk and Treasurer be authorised to determine individual
                        applications for financial assistance in consultation w ith the Chief
                        Constable".


3          MEETING OF THE POLICE AUTHORITY ON 27™ FEBRUARY 1998

3.1        Shortly after the presentation of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's scrutiny report to
           the House of Commons, the members of the Authority agreed to consider an
           item relating to Hillsborough. Assistant Chief Constable Daines gave an oral
           report to the Authority on the findings of the Scrutiny and advised members
           that private prosecutions                                       had been threatened against three officers.   The
           general issue of the provision of financial assistance to the officers concerned
           was addressed.                           It was                 recognised that   actual decisions about financial
           support could be made only on individual application.                                              Members were
           accordingly invited to delegate the determination of individual applications to
           the Clerk and Treasurer. Members resolved as follows:

                         "1 - That in the light of the findings of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's inquiry
                         and his comments on the outcome, members do not believe there is any
                        new evidence to cause them to reconsider the Authority's previous view,
                         and remain of the opinion that the officers acted in good faith.

                         2 - That the Authority agrees to authorise the Clerk and Treasurer to
                         consider applications for financial assistance from officers (serving and
                         retired) in accordance w ith the provisions of Home Office Circular 77/87,
                         Financial Assistance to Police Officers in Legal Proceedings".

3.2            O n 28 February 1998, Mr Duckenfield applied to Assistant Chief Constable
            Daines Daines for financial assistance from the                                             Authority   for legal
            representation. On 2nd March 1998, Assistant Chief Constable Daines wrote to
            the Clerk and Treasurer asking them to approve Mr Duckenfield's request. At
            the request of the Authority's solicitor, Ms Maureen Oades, Assistant Chief
            Constable Daines provided supporting information on 5th March 1998 to the
            Clerk and Treasurer. These letters are attached at Appendix Bl.                                         Following


r.G A R R E m S O L T H Y O R K S H IR E P O L IC E /F N -O O O ll.D O C           11
         receipt of this letter, the Clerk and Treasurer approved Mr Duckenfield's
         application towards the costs of legal representation in the event of a private
         prosecution being brought against him in connection w ith the Hillsborough
         disaster.


4        MEETING OF THE POLICE AUTHORITY ON 24™ APRIL 1998

         On 24th April, the Chief Constable and Clerk and Treasurer subm itted a joint
         report to members requesting that members note the expenditure of £11,900 on
         the Chief Constable's costs in connection w ith the Scrutiny from the earmarked
         reserve and requesting members to agree that the earmarked reserve continue
         to be held for purposes related to the Hillsborough disaster. The Authority
         resolved as follows:

                    "1 - That the use of the funds to date be noted.

                    2 - That the Authority agree, for the time being, to maintain the
                    earmarked reserve for future costs associated with the Hillsborough
                    Stadium disaster, subject to periodic reports and expenditure from the
                    reserve".


5        APPLICATION OF 28™ JUNE 1998 FROM MR BERNARD MURRAY

          By letter dated 28th June 1998, Mr M urray informed the Chief Constable that his
          wife had accepted a summons on his behalf arising from the events of the
          Hillsborough disaster and requesting that the Police Authority reimburse any
          legal expenses that he may incur in defending himself. The next day, Assistant
          Chief Constable Daines wrote to the Clerk and Treasurer setting out the
          reasons for his support of Mr Murray's application and the application was
          approved by the Clerk and Treasurer that day.


6        THE CLERK AND TREASURER’S DECISIONS

          In approving both of these applications, the Clerk and Treasurer consulted the
          Authority’s legal adviser and took into account a num ber of considerations.
          These included:

6.1      The terms of the Home Office Circular 4/1998 relating to financial assistance to
          police officers in legal proceedings.



J\G ARRETT \SO U TH V O RK SH IREPO LICE/FX -O O O n.D O C   12
6.2       The principles for the exercise of an Authority's discretion to assist police
           officers w ith legal costs and expenses stated in R -v~ Derbyshire Police Authority
           ex parte Wilson and Dalton (1989) and in the earlier Home Office circular 77/87

6.3        The reports of:

           6.3.1         Chief Constable Peter W right to the Finance and General Purposes
                         Committee on 15th September 1989.

           6.3.2         Chief Constable Richard Wells to the Police Authority on 19th October
                         1990.

           6.3.3         The Deputy Chief Constable to the Police Authority on 2nd November
                         1990.

           6.3.4         The Clerk and Financial Officer and Chief Constable to the Police
                         Authority on 7th December 1990.

              and the opinions expressed in those reports.

6.4 The decision of the Director of Public Prosecutions in 1990 that there was
           insufficient evidence upon which prosecution for manslaughter or any other
           criminal offence could be brought
                                         O
                                             against
                                              O
                                                     anyj officer in the South Yorkshire
           Police or any other person.

6.5 The decision of the Director of Public Prosecutions in 1997 that the material so
           far presented w ould not justify fresh criminal investigations.

6.6 The inquest findings of accidental death.

6.7 The fact that disciplinary charges of neglect of duty directed by the Police
           Complaints Authority against Mr Duckenfield and Mr M urray were never
           determ ined due to the early retirement of Mr Duckenfield.

6.8 The Home Secretary's statement of 30th June 1997 announcing the appointment
           of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to conduct a Scrutiny.

6.9 The Scrutiny report of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

6.10 The letters from Assistant Chief Constable Daines supporting the applications.




)\G A R R ETT\SO U TH Y O R K SH IR EPO LIC E/FX -O O O n.D O C   13
D           POTENTIAL CHALLENGE


1        Ms Adlington, on behalf of the HFSG, has raised a num ber of questions about
         the decision making process to date and has indicated that she is considering
         commencing judicial review proceedings against the Authority.


2         On 22nd December 1998, following a report by the BBC that the Authority had
          agreed to pay the legal costs of Messrs Duckenfield and Murray, Ms Adlington
          wrote to the Clerk and Treasurer to the Authority (Appendix D l) challenging
          the Authority's power to provide such assistance on a num ber of grounds,
          including the following:

          2.1        that there was no legal authority under statute for the Authority to pay
                     the legal costs of a police officer (serving or former) in relation to criminal
                     proceedings against him /her;

          2.2        that even if such an authority existed, it had been exercised improperly in
                     this case as the Authority had taken into account a num ber of irrelevant
                     considerations, ignored a num ber of relevant considerations and
                     delegated powers, which it should itself have exercised, to the Clerk and
                     Treasurer.


3         On 5th January 1999, the solicitor to the Authority sought preliminary advice
          from barrister, Mr Bernard Phillips. He confirmed that the general principle of
          whether to afford assistance at all was a matter for the discretion of the
          Authority. In the light of the representations received from Mrs Adlington,
          however, he believed that the decision should be reconsidered by the
          Authority.


4         On 5th January 1999 Ms Adlington wrote a further letter to all the members of
          the Authority (which members have already received) making additional
          points about the propriety of the decision to make financial assistance available
          to the officers. She has subsequently supplem ented that letter w ith a fax to
          Garretts, the solicitors instructed by the Authority, dated 29 January 1999
          (Appendix D2).




J\G A R R ETT \SO U TH V O R K SH IR EPO LIC E/FN ‘-OOOn.DOC   14
5      On 12th January 1999 the solicitor to the Authority took legal advice on the two
       letters received from Ms Adlington from Leading Counsel, Richard Mawrey
       QC. His advice, which is referred to in more detail in Sections E and F below,
       xvas that there was a pow er to provide financial assistance to police officers in
       legal proceedings.              However, this could only be exercised in appropriate
       circumstances and only to cover "out of pocket" expenses, (but not expenditure
       which w ould otherwise be paid from central funds or by the Legal Aid Board).
       He added that the HFSG m ight seek to challenge the procedure by which such
       powers had been exercised because it covered more than "out of pocket"
       expenditure, with some prospect of success and that accordingly the Authority
       should be asked to reconsider its original decision in order to ensure it took
       take account of all relevant considerations, including those Mr Adlington
       alleges might have been overlooked earlier.


6      On 15th January 1999, the Authority instructed Garretts, solicitors, to advise the
       Authorityj in reconsideringO its decision to make financial assistance available to
       the officers for the criminal proceedings and considering the new applications
        for financial support for judicial review proceedings. Garretts, whose advice is
        also referred to below in more detail, expressed its ow n concern about the
        statutory power to give financial support to officers in these circumstances and
        recommended that a second opinion be sought from Presiley Baxendale QC
        and Mark Shaw . Their advice was then taken and, for the reasons set out
        below, they reinforced Garretts' concern about the existence of such a power.


7         [Deleted]




J \G A RRETT\SOUTHYO RK SHlREPOL!CE/F.V-00011.DOC   15
 E             STATUTORY POWERS


1         HOME OFFICE GUIDANCE

1.1 Home Office Circular 77/87 - (Financial Assistance to Police Officers in Legal
            Proceedings) (attached as Appendix El) specifically stated, in the context of
            private prosecutions that where a member of the public brings a prosecution
            against an officer, in circumstances where he has acted in good faith and
            exercised his judgem ent reasonably, the Authority should provide or fund legal
            advice a n d /o r representation. The Circular stated that an Authority had a
            discretion "to meet expenditure incurred by officers in all kinds of legal
            proceedings where the officers have acted in good faith in pursuance of their
            duties, or where the interests of the force as a whole are involved".

1.2 Circular 4/1998 (attached as Appendix E2) issued on 17 February 1998,
            replaced circular 77/87 with immediate effect. This circular, in common with
            circular 77/87 w ith immediate effect, also stated that it is im portant that police
            officers should be able to carry out their duties in the confidence that their
            Authority will support them if they act in good faith and exercise their
            judgem ent reasonably. However, it deals w ith the issue of an Authority's power
            to provide such assistance much less categorically than its predecessor.                            In
            particular, it states:

                       5. "Section 88(4) [of the Police Act 1996, which allows Police Authorities
                              to pay the costs of police officers who are sued for damages for loss or
                              damage caused to others by their alleged negligence or other torts]
                              does not apply to criminal proceedings, but police authorities may
                             wish to consult their legal advisers as to whether they have any other
                             pow er to provide such assistance (whether in respect of private
                             prosecutions or prosecutions brought by the CPS). In this context,
                             they may wish to note that section 111(1) of the Local Government Act
                             1972 enables police authorities to do anything "which is calculated to
                             facilitate, or is conducive or incidental to, the discharge of any of their
                             functions"                        It could be argued that to allow payment to be made
                             to officers (either former or serving) involved in criminal proceedings
                             w ould in some way facilitate or be conducive to a policy authority's
                             broad functions. For example, failure to provide financial assistance
                             could adversely affect the morale of the force if officers had to meet
                             their own costs after an acquittal.


f\G A RR £TT\SO L TH Y O R K SH IR E PO LIC E /FN '-0O O ll.D O C       16
               6. It is for individual police authorities to decide in the particular
                      circumstances of a case, and on the basis of legal advice, w hether to
                      make             financial                assistance   available   to   officers   in   criminal
                      proceedings."

  It will be noted that the latest Home Office Circular specifically invites Police
   Authorities to take legal advice w hether the pow er to provide such assistance
  exists, rather than asserting w ith certainty that it does in particular (non tort)
  cases.           Nevertheless, like its predecessor, the latest Circular does appear to
  contemplate that the Authority is capable of giving the assistance in the right
  case.


  ADVICE OF RICHARD MAWREY QC

  Richard Mawrey expressed the view that a power to provide financial
  assistance to officers and former officers in legal proceedings of all types was
  w ithin the scope of section 6(1) of the Police Act 1996 read writh section 111(1) of
  the Local Government Act 1972.

  Section 6 of the Police Act 1996 gives the Police Authority its basic duty to
  secure "the maintenance of an efficient and effective police force for its area".

  Section 111(1) of the Local Government Act 1972, which applies to police
  authorities as it applies to local authorities, states:

               "Without prejudice to any powers exercisable apart from this section but
               subject to the provisions of this Act and any other enactment passed
               before or after this Act, a local authority shall have pow er to do anything
               (whether or not involving the expenditure, borrowing or lending of
               money or the acquisition or disposal of any property or rights) which is
               calculated to facilitate, or is conducive or incidental to, the discharge of
               any of their functions."

   In this regard, Mr Mawrey relied upon R -v - Derbyshire Police Authority ex parte
   Wilson and Dalton (1989) in which two police officers challenged a decision of
   the Derbyshire Police Authority not to pay part of the legal expenses they
   incurred in being represented at an auditor's enquiry into illegal expenditure.
   In that case, Lord Justice Ralph Gibson overturned the decision of a panel of
   the police authority not to award reimbursement of costs on the grounds that
   the decision had been improperly taken by five members of the authority,



.f:T \SO L T H Y O R K SH lR E PO L lC E /FN '-O O O H .D O C           17
      rather than the whole authority.                     But he rejected a further contention that
      because the officers had acted in good faith, the authority should automatically
      have granted them financial assistance w ith their costs. Richard Mawrey QC
      thought that this indicated that the judge had implicitly accepted that a police
      authority could provide assistance with legal costs, (even in non tort cases
      which were outside the powers granted by section 88 of the Police Act 1996).


3     GARRETTS’ ADVICE

3.1   As already stated, Garretts were instructed to advise the Authority of the
      relevant factors to be taken into account in reconsidering the officers'
      applications for financial assistance w ith the criminal proceedings and the
      applications for support w ith the CPS proceedings and Sefton proceedings.

3.2   After they were instructed, however, they raised fresh doubts about the basic
      power of the Authority to meet the officers' costs of the criminal proceedings
      and related judicial review proceedings. In particular, they were concerned
      that legal cases, following the Wilson and Dalton case, on section 111(1) of the
      Local Government Act 1972, had considerably weakened the argum ent that the
      Authority had power under Section 6(1) of the Police Act 1996 and section
      111(1) of the Local Government Act 1972 to grant financial assistance to police
      officers in proceedings other than tort proceedings. In particular, they felt that
      the existence of section 88(4) of the Police Act 1996 (specifically allowing police
      authorities to pay such costs in tort cases) made it strongly arguable that such
      costs could not be paid in other types of proceedings.

3.3   Given these concerns, Garretts recommended that a second opinion be sought
      from Presiley Baxendale QC and Mark Shaw.


4     ADVICE OF PRESILEY BAXENDALE QC AND M R MARK SHAW

4.1   Counsel advised that they had initially been attracted by the argum ent that the
      Authority had power to pay "out of pocket" legal costs and expenses of officers
      in all types of proceedings, where they had acted in good faith and it was
      otherwise appropriate. The wide duty conferred on the Authority by section 6
      of the Police Act 1996 to maintain an effective and efficient police force, in
      conjunction w ith Section 111(1) of the Local Government Act 1972, appeared to
      give a very broad discretion to the Authority to preserve the morale of the
      police force w ithout which, an effective and efficient police force could not be



j\C   IT •. SOUTH'; G K K SH IR EPO U C E / FX-00011.DOC   IS
               maintained.                         Accordingly, if it was, in the Authority's view, genuinely and
               reasonably necessary, in order to m aintain police morale, to meet the out of
               pocket costs and expenses of police officers, incurred in defending themselves
               against criminal or civil proceedings, it was arguably w ithin Section 6 of the
               Police Act 1996, coupled w ith Section 111(1) of the Local Government Act 1972,
               to pay such costs.

4.2            Counsel also considered, however, that there were powerful arguments against
               this interpretation including the following:

               4.2.1             If there were a general pow er under section 6 of the Police Act 1996 to
                                 indemnify officers against the costs of legal proceedings arising from
                                 the performance of their duties, there would be no reason for section
                                 88(4) of the Police Act 1996 specifically to allow the recover)7 of such
                                 costs in tort proceedings. Section 88(4) w ould simply be unnecessary.

              4.2.2              The issue turns on the proper construction of the Police Act 1996. In
                                 London Borough o f Sutton -v - Morgan Grenfell & Co Limited (1996) the
                                 Court of Appeal stated that where Parliament had enacted specific
                                 provisions setting out how a local authority was intended to perform its
                                 functions, there was no room to imply other means of carrying out
                                 those functions under section 111(1) of the Local Government Act 1972.
                                 In particular, where a local authority was intended to have power to
                                 incur financial obligations that power m ust specifically be identified by
                                 statute. This was an example of a well established general principle of
                                 statutory interpretation: where Parliament specifies one particular
                                 matter, it impliedly excludes any other allied matters.             In addition,
                                 section 6 of the Police Act 1996 is so wide in its language that counsel
                                 doubt that recourse to section 111(1) of the Local Government Act 1972
                                 could usefully expand it. The real question is the relationship between
                                 section 6 and section 88.

              4.2.3              In the Wilson and Dalton case, both parties had accepted that the basic
                                 pow er to meet the officers' costs existed, and accordingly this did not
                                fall to be decided by the judge. The power to pay costs was therefore
                                 assumed not decided. Similarly, a Circular is only guidance. It does not
                                 define or modify the law and should not be assumed to be correct.

              4.2.4              Mr Justice Denning stated in Askey -v - Golden Wine Co Limited (1948) the
                                 public policy that the punishm ent inflicted by a criminal court is



! \ g a r r e t t \ s o u t h v o r k s h i r e p o l i c e / f : '- w i in .D o c   19
                     personal to the offender and that such an offender is not entitled to
                     recover from a third party an indemnity against the consequences of the
                     criminal proceedings w hether that be a fine, an aw ard against him of
                     the other party's costs or the accused's ow n legal costs. This public
                     policy helps to explain why section 88(4) of the Police Act 1996 does not
                     cover criminal proceedings.

          4.2.5      A judge w ould not necessarily consider it desirable for the Authority to
                     have such a power. Counsel considered that, in the light of As\&\j -p-
                     Golden Wine Co Limited, it was doubtful if a police authority was
                     intended to have power to indemnify officers against costs of a case in
                     which they were found guilty. An acquitted defendant would, in any
                     event, normally receive an aw ard that h is/h e r reasonably incurred non
                     legally-aided costs be paid in full out of central funds, unless the
                     accused was at fault in bringing suspicion on himself or was found not
                     guilty on a technicality see Practice Direction (Crime: Costs) (1991) 1 WLR
                     498. Accordingly, in the normal run, an acquitted police officer should
                     have no (or few) costs to pay himself/herself, which a police authority
                     w ould need to meet.

4.3      Counsel stressed that they had both found this issue difficult and that there
          was no guarantee which way a Court w ould decide.               There were certainly
          strong policy reasons why the Authority should have powrer to support its
          officers (current and former) in this way. Given the points summarised in
         paragraphs 4.2.1 to 4.2.5 above, however, they had considerable doubts about
          the power of the Authority to support the costs either of the criminal
         proceedings or the judicial review proceedings (neither being covered by
         Section 88(4) of the Police Act 1996), particularly before any judgem ent had
         been given in those proceedings.

4.4      Counsel are also mindful of the terms of the latest Home Office Circular. They
         do not lightly advise that it is w rong but it is m uch more hesitant that its
         predecessor. Counsel sense, therefore, that the Home Office may have its own
         doubts about the existence of this power.

4.5      Accordingly, whilst they w ished to review the m atter further in the light of any
         representations made on behalf of the officers, the Chief Constable or the
         HFSG, their current recommendation was that the Authority should resolve to
         reverse its earlier decision and decide that it has no power to provide the
         financial assistance which had been sought. It should then co-operate with


J\G ARRETT\SO LTH YORKSH IREPC>LICE/FNT-O00 i 1.   r>oc   20
         those parties in bringing the matter before a court for an early decision on
         w hether that view of their legal powers was correct. The Authority's solicitors,
         Garretts, agree w ith that recommendation and will be available at the next
         meeting of the Authority to discuss it w ith members.

F        PROCEDURAL CONSIDERATIONS

1.       Members will note from the correspondence from Ms Adlington that the
         decision to provide financial assistance to Messrs Duckenfield and M urray for
          their legal costs and expenses of the criminal proceedings is also challenged on
         procedural grounds. Representations are also made that it w ould not be
         appropriate to provide such assistance in relation to any challenge to the
          decision of the Crown Prosecution Service not to take over and discontinue the
         criminal proceedings or any other challenge to decisions taken in the course of
          the criminal proceedings, given the circumstances of these cases.

2.        Given the doubts about the underlying legal power of the Authority to provide
          such assistance at all, it is recommended that the Authority defers considering
          consequential procedural matters until the Authority has secured an
          authoritative (judicial) determination of the existence and extent of its
          underlying statutory power to provide the officers w ith financial assistance for
          criminal or judicial review proceedings.

3.        If the Authority accepts the recommendations set out in this report, it is hoped
          that all concerned will co-operate in an urgent judicial review application. If
          the existence of the pow er is then established, the Authority will need to
          proceed immediately to decide how it should be exercised. It is hoped that a
          hearing can be secured before the Court in late February or early March to
          enable all concerned to know where they stand before the committal hearing in
          the Leeds Magistrates' Court in April. It should be in everyone's interests to
          clarify the legal position as soon as possible. This can be done definitely only
          by the Court.




J,G A R RETT \SO U TH Y O RK SH IK EPO LICE/FX -O O O n.D O C   21
                                                              APPENDICES

Note:- the num bering of the A ppendices relates to the relevant sections of the
Report

B1            Application dated 28 February 1998 from Mr David Duckenfield for judicial
              assistance in relation to the criminal proceedings and supporting letters
              dated 2 March 1998 and 5 March 1998 from A C C Daines.

B2            Application dated 28 June 1998 by Mr M urray for financial assistance in
              relation to the criminal proceedings and supporting letter dated 29 June
               1998 from Assistant Chief Constable Daines.

B3 & B4 Applications on behalf of Mr M urray and Mr Duckenfield for financial
               assistance in relation to possible judicial review proceedings dated
               December 1998 and copies of advice received on the prospects of a
               successful judicial review of the decision of the Crown Prosecution Service
               not to take over the prosecution and discontinue it.

D1            Letter dated 22 December 1998 from Ms Adlington to the Clerk and
               Treasurer to South Yorkshire Police Authority.

D2            Fax dated 29 January 1999 from Ms Adlington to Garretts, solicitors.

D3         Letter dated 19 January 1999 from Walker Morris to Garretts.

D4         Letter dated 27 January 1999 from Walker Morris to Garretts.

El         Cancelled Home Office Circular 77/87.

E2         Home Office Circular 4/1998.




J\G A R RETT \SO U TH Y O RK SH IREPO LICE/FN -0001 l.D O C        22
                        Hillsborough Family Support Group




W J Wilkinson BA(Econ) CPF A
Clerk and Trer,surer
South Yorkshire Police Authority
P 0 Box 37
Recent Street
Barnsley
South Yorkshire S70 2PQ

22 December 1998

Dear Sir



AJiiii'-iton v Murray; A dlintito n v Duckenfield



       I am the prosecutor in the above case, in which the defendants are charged before tne
       Leeds Magistrate;) Court with serious offences arising out o f the disaster at the
       Hillsborough Football G round in April 19S9. I write on the advice o f leading counsel,
       as solicitor to the Hillsborough Family Support Group to express concern about the
       decision to fund the defence o f these two men. As you know, the defendants were
       senior police officers on duty at the ground when the disaster occurred. Both are
       charged with manslaughter o f two representative victims, and with misfeasance. Mr
        Duckenne'd is also charged with attempting to pervert the course o f justice.

        It has recently been admitted publicly by Mr lan Daines, Assistant C h ie f Constable,
        that the South Yorkshire Police Authority has agreed to fund the defence o f tr.ese two
        men. We have suspected this for some time. The purpose o f this letter is to argue tnat
        the decision to provide finance appears to h a v e b e t n made irrationally and unlawfully.

        We refer to the following documents, all o f which are in your possession.

        A.        The H om e O ffice Circular o f 4 ,h December 1987 No 7.7/87            -   -
        B         The H om e Office Circular o f 17Iil February 1998 H O C 4/1998
        C.        Minute 38 o f the S outh Yorkshire Police Authority M eeting o f 1st August
                  1097
        D.        Minute 62 o f the South Yorkshire Police Authority M eeting o f 19th September




               B i c a e 0151 2 3 6 1 91 9 . F a x 0 1 5 1 2 3 6 1936. E M ail in fo@ fafsg.org
             In F loor C e n tr a l^ 3 u ild in gs 4 1 N o r t h 'John Str&et L iv e r p o o l L 2 61RR
        1097.
E.      Minute 15 I o f the South Yorkshire Police Authority M eeting o f 27th February
       1003.
F.     Minute 174 o f the South Yorkshire Police Authority Meeting of 24th April
        I00S.
G.     The letter o f 25"' Septem ber 190S from Maureen Oades to me.
H.     N1iiil11■-_* 86 o f the South Yorkshire Police Authority Meeting o f 30th October
        I'WS.
I.     The South Yorksl'ire Police Authority Scheme o f Delegation.
J      A document headed "Standing Orders. Interpretation. Issued January 1996"
       on the headed pa per o f the South Yorkshire Police Authority.

The Hom e Office Circular No 77/87. suggests that, in the case o f a private
prosecution, where a police officer has been acquitted and has not been awarded all r.i:
costs, the police authority may make up the difference. It also suggests that, in tne
case o f a private prosecution, the authority should provide or fund legal advice and.-or
representation if the authority is “ satisfied * that the officer has acted in good faith
and has exercised his ju d g m e n t “ reasonably” .

The Home Office Circular o f 17"’ February 199S, 4/199S, replaces with immediate
effect the 1987 circular, and suggests that under the very wide terms o f section 11
o f the Local Government Act 1972, “ it could be argued” that payment o f money to
"officers (either former or serving) involved in criminal proceedings would in some
way facilitate or be conducive to a police authority s broad functions. The Circular
emphasises that a police authority must take its own advice. It is noticeable that the
“ miidance" has been prepared after consultation w'ith " A C P O , the Superintendents
Association, the Police Federation, and the Association o f Police Authorities', it does
 not purport to be an independent legal opinion.

 This Circular seems to have coincided almost exactly with the report o f the “ Scrutiny
 o f Lord Justice Stuart-S mith in February o f this year. I note that on 2 7 ,h February tr.is
 year, your authority agreed to authorise the Clerk and Treasurer to consider
 applications from officers, serving or retired, for financial assistance in relation to
 possible private prosecutio ns arising out of the “ Scrutiny .

 For n reason winch, is nut clear,.the. Resolution was taken under the replaced 19S7 _
 Circular. There is therefore no lawful authority to validate the decision taken on tnat
 day. The assertion, recorded in the minutes, that the members of the Authority
 “remain o f the opinion'that the officers acted in good faun is extraordinary. The
 Enquiry o f Lord Justice Taylor o f 1989 found., that there had been negligence, and
 blamed the two defendants (am ong other police officers). The failure o f these two to
 seal o f f the tunnel to the central pens at the Leppings Lane end o f the ground was a
 "blunder o f the first magnitude", and the immediate cause o f death. The then Chief
 Constable o f South Yorkshire Police, unequ'ivocabiy. accepted these fin dings,.... . . . .

 Further. Lord Taylor found, at page 16, paragraph 98 o f his Interim Report that Mr
 Duckenfield misled Graham Kelly and Glen Kirton o f the F A and G ra ha m Mackrell of
   Sheffield W ednesday, at a time when he knew there were fatalities (and that there
   would therefore be an inquest and no doubt other formal inquiries). Duckenfieid
   indicated that a gate had been forced and there had been an inrash o f supporters, and
   pointed out to them the fate allegedly forced on the screen.

   In 1998, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith upheld these findings after, his “ Scrutiny", referring
   scathingly to Duc kenfield's “ disgraceful lie".

   In July 1991, the Police Complaints Authority directed that charges o f neglect o f duty
   be preferred against both men. These charges were never determined because the
   Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire retired Mr Duckenfieid on “health grounds", and
   it was thought to be unfair to try M r Murray,

   It is impossible in the light o f this history to understand how your authority could have
   been satisfied in February 1998 that “ the officers had acted in g o o d faith"; and also
   impossible to understand how the other condition In the 1987 Circular, namely, that
   the officers had exercised their judgm ent reasonably, could be thought to have been
   satisfied. The minutes s h o w that this condition was not even considered.

I'J'JS Circular    -------

   Ti'.e I99S Circular was not applied Lf.it had been, it would.have_become clear in rr.y
   'view that its terms were not met, and t h a r th e r e was no lawful authority for the
   provision ofta x-paye rs" money in this way to fund the defence in this case. There is
   no statutory authority. There is a limited pow er in relation to civil proceedings to pay
   damages and costs; but no pow e r even in civil proceedings .to fund an action brought
   against an individual officer. Section SS o f the Police Act 1996 deals with “ Liability
   for wrongful acts o f constables", and allows for the provision o f costs incurred and not
   recovered

   Parliament has not provided for the payments o f any fines incurred by constables; or
   for reimburseivfent o f costs incurred and not recovered. T c have done so would have
   been surprising, since criminal liability is individual and personal. Y ou will note that
   the Circular indicated at the highest that “ it couid be argued" that to allow the payment
   to be made to officers, {either former or.retired)- rnvoivedjn criminal proceedings
   would “in some way facilitate or be conducive to a police authority's broad functions.
   For example, failure to provide financial assistance could adversely affect the morale or
   the force if officers had to meet their costs after acquittal.”

   This is legal nonsense. The case law indicates that section 111(1) o f the 1972 Act
   cannot be used in this way. T h e practice in relation to costs incurred by an acquitted
   person is set out in the Practice D irect ionA '.asts in C rim inal Proceedings) 92 Cr.
   App.R.8 which provides that a person acquitted after trial bn indictment should
   normally have his costs paid out o f central funds except where the defendant has
   brought s u s p i c i o n u p o n himself andTias misled the prosecution into thinking the case
   against him is stronge r than it is; or where he has been acquitted on a meritless
   technicality. H o w can it be said that police morale would suffer if the ofticers o f a
   force heard that one o f its members had been refused its costs on one o f the reasonable
   grounds set out in this direction?



   In any event the South Yorkshire Police Authority seems to have gone way beyond
   this highly dubious guidance in the 1998 Circular and authorised, in February 1998,
   any financial assistance to be given by the Clerk and Treasurer in respect o f
   applications from serving or retired officers for potential and future criminal
   proceedings, in which, o f course, a defendant could be convicted. (Is counsel
   instructed on this basis able to advise that a defendant plead izuilty?).



gallon a n d Exclusion o f the public

  Maureen Oades letter to me ot 25"' Septem ber 199S says that the public were
  excluded from that part of the meeting when this matter was dealt with as it was a
  matter relating to “ any action taken in connection with the prevention, investigation or
  prosecution of any crime. ’ It seems to have been the basis for granting the financial
  assistance that there was no crime at all, and that the officers had acted in eood faith.
  In any event it is submitted that paragraph 14 of Schedule 12A to the Local
  Government Act 1972,'refers to prosecutions by South Yorkshire Police and not bv a
  private prosecutor against two form er police officers.

   Furthermore. I do not understand ho w such a decision, ever, if it could be lawfullv
  made, could be delegated to the Clerk and Treasurer. The Authority resolution o f 27
  Feorunry 1993 purports to delegate, absolutely, the decision making process to the
   ClerK and T i e a s u r s r who is one and the same person. -The report presented to the
  Authority on 50"' October was a joint report o f the Clerk and T reasurer and the Chief
  Constao; j . 1 understand that the Clerk and Treasurer is not a Solicitor. It is implicit in
  >our s e n d i n g o rder 5.2.5, that any consideration of applications for financial assistance
  for legal proceedings ought to b i underfaxen by a person w h o is legally qualified ar.d
  would thus understand the danger o f granting open-ended financial provision.

features of i/ic current crim inal proceedings

 \ o u also 3uggesi in that letter that this delegation “was not viewed as a delegation
 winch would extend beyond six m onths” . This may have been because M r Daines,
 nssiSiHiw C met Constable of the South Yorkshire Police, publicly asserted earlier this
 year that he believed that any private prosecutions would “fall at the first hurdle” . Did
 he repeat this at the meeting o f 2 7'h’February? We do not k n o w what applications have
 be^n m ade by M r M urray and M r Duckenfield, but w e assume, for reasons that appear
 below, that authority has been given for any judicial review proceedings o f the CPS
 decision not to discontinue the case, and for leading and j u n io r counsel to appear at
 old style committal proceedings, as well as at'trial.

 On 18"' D e c e m b e r 1998. the C ro w n Prosecution Service; after five m onth s o f careful
 study, rejected the applications o f the defendants to take over and discontinue the
prosecutions, it is clear that the criminal proceedings are now likely to be protracted,
complex and very expensive.




The prosecutions are straightforward. We enclose for your guidance a copy o f the
informations presented to the Leeds Magistrates Court last July on the basis o f which
the summonses were issued. You will see that the allegations are based upon the
findings of the Taylor Enquiry in 1989, s u p p o n e d by evidence that has come to the
Family Support G roup in 1997-98. Negligence has been admitted again and again by
 lie Chief Constable in c ourt proceedings. It has never been disputed that the acts
alleged
     ucu against the defendants were the acts o f neuliizence that caused the deaths o f th;
96 people.

Before the decision o f the C r o w n Prosecution Service was announced on IS11'
December, the solicitor for M r Murray indicated that it was highly likely that an
adverse decision o f the C P S would be challenged by judicial review proceedings. At
tiie hearing o f the case before the Leeds Magistrates Court on 21s' December, it was
made clear by leading and j u n io r counsel for Mr Murray, in the presence o f his
solicitor, Mr Manning, and by junior counsel for M r Duckenfieid, that a decision had
already been made to seek judicial review"j'f’the CPS decision. The magistrate was
told this by counsel for the defendants when he was dealing with the questions o f
timetable and voluntary disclosure o f documents.

How ever, it was also made clear, although a concluded decision had been made to
apply for judicial review, that the defendants had asked the CPS for their '’reasons";
alternatively, their "policy" behind the decision, and that those reasons'o r policy might
be received by 2-1"' December.

No legally-aided lawyers could proceed in this way. Professional obligations exist
which require that a lawyer must assess the prospects o f success before committing
hard-pressed public funds to an expensive application for judicial review. I am advised
by leading counsel that-the prospects o f quashing the CPS decision in such proceedings
are smali on the following', a m ong other, grounds. The CPS have told us all what
criteria they were-applying; the defendants -argued'thar the CPS w ere in a good
position to assess the public interest involved in the prosecution; the CPS, Police
Complaints Authority and C o ro n e r were aii misled by a cover-up by the South
\ orksnire police, the m agnitude o f which has become apparent only after the Home
O m ce ordered the release o f documents,this year; and the defendants have alternative
remedies in the M a g is tra te s ’ c o u n .

The fact that' the court w-as assured that applications for judicial review would be made
suggests that the South Yorkshire Police Authority has already agreed, before t h e CPS
decision, to fund these applications, irrespective o f their merits. Counsel would not
have told the court that the applications would be made, if funding was not in place.
Neither would they have told counsel for South Yorkshire Police o f their decision to
apply to the High Court; they knew that the fact o f impending applications was


                                         -5-
       material to decisions that the South Yorkshire police and the CPS were making that
       day about voluntary disclosure to the prosecution o f documents in their possession,
       is clear that both those bodies decided to defer any decision on voluntary disclosure
       because o f the assurance from counsel that judicial review applications would be
       lodged ("in the first tw o weeks o f January” ) on behalf o f both defendants.



       Ti'.e prosecution and the Court have also been told that both defendants have estimate’
       that four weeks at least will be needed at committal proceedings. Tne court nas set
       aside four weeks beginning 19:h April 1999, and the time was chose to accord with the
       convenience o f leading counsel for the defence. The court has been told that two
       leading counsel will appear, one for each defendant. No doubt tw o juniors will also
       appear, and two solicitors. Leading counsel for M r Murray has indicated that there
       will also be an abuse o f process application to the magistrate to stay the proceedings.
       He intends to a rg u e that this should be heard on a different occasion from the
       committal, and before it. I suspect that the defendants will seek leave to move for
       judicial review o f any adverse decision upon this issue. This is hardly surprising as
       your Authority does not appear to have placed any restriction as to the amount or
       duration o f the financial assistance to the defendants.

26.     1 am advised by leading counsel that the prosecution has a"strcng prima facie case on
        the charges alleged; and that an abuse o f process application is likely to fail. We have
        a mass o f evidence in o u r possession which has come to us in the last year, indicating
        that the South Yorkshire Police force has_coyered up facts which are embarrassing as
        to the nature and extent o f its admitted negligence, and that the CPS, Coroner and
        Police Complaints Authority, inter alia, were misled when they were pursuing their
        various enquiries b e tw e en !9S9 and 1992, 1 shall willingly help you further acout this
        on request.

27      O f course, the trial o f this matter could take many months. From ail these facts, you
        will see that the e x p o s u re o f the South Yorkshire taxpayer (in relation to its own costs,
        let alone ours) is o f the o rder o f millions o f pounds. I should make it clear that neitner
        1 nor the Hillsborough Family Support Group, on whose behalf I act, wish in any way
        to deprive either defendant o f the means to conduct a proper defence to these charges.
        They should surely apply, like anyone else, for legal aid if they are unable to func,U
        costs o f the defence themselves. In that event they would be subject to the usu
        restraints and disciplines o f the legal aid system. I believe that the defence, with acces;
        to pubiic fur.ds'from y o u r authority, are seeking at present to inflict unnecessary'
        expenses upon us by recourse to every possible type o f legal hearing, in the knowledge
        that we do not have such access, and are instead dependent on private donations and
        fund-raising events. Neith er defendant lives in South Yorkshire, but the South
        Yorkshire Police has a strong interest o f its ow n in the discharge or acquittal o f these
        defendants.

( '(inclusion

28.     The decisions taken pursua nt to the Resolutions o f the South Yorkshire Police


                                                   -6-
       Authority appear, on the information available to me, to be unlawful, irrational, ultra
       vires and procedurally improper on various grounds. We have an interest, as do you
       and South Yorkshire taxpayers, in ensuring that public money is not wasted or spent
       wrongly in the course o f this criminal litigation. I look forward to your reply. You
       will appreciate that w e are obviously considering an application for judicial review
       ourselves, s upported by some South Yorkshire tax-payers, and an approach to tr.e
       District Auditor. W e invite you to reply by the 15"’ January 1999.



Yours sincerely




Ann Adlington
Solicitor




                                                -7-
            H illsborough F am ily S u p p o rt G roup


All members o f the South Y o rkshire Pohce Authority
South Yorkshire Police A uthority
P.O. Box 37, Regent Street,
Barnsley, South Yorkshire
S70 2PQ

5 January 1999

Dear Member,

Adlinuton v Murray; Adlineton v Duckenfield


1        I am the p r ose c utor in this case, and the solicitor to the Hillsborough Family Support
         G roup (“ H F S G ” ), an association w hose members are families o f the victims o f the
         Hillsborough disaster o f April 1939. The prosecutions w e re c o m m e n c e d in the Leeds
         Magistrates Court in July 1 9 9 8 . 1 am writing to you about the decision taken pursuant
         to the Resolution o f y o u r authority o f February 1998 to fund the defence o f these two
         former senior officers in these criminal proceedings. M u c h o f the contents o f tms
         letter is based u p o n submissions and facts that have been supplied by the H F S G to the
         C row n Prosecutio n Service on the advice o f leading counsel, w h o has also advised on
          the present funding issue. I understand that the subject m atter o f last February s
          Resolution, and o ther discussions and decisions later in the year, are to be considered
          at your meeting o f 8lh J a n u ary 1999. Attached to this letter is a bundle o f documents
          to which I shall refer in this letter.

 2       A n n e x A is a copy o f a letter that I sent to M r W. J. Wilkinson, Clerk and Treasurer^
          on 2 2nd D ecember, setting o u t objections in law to the g rant o f the funding, and to th*.
          w ay in w hich decisions were, taken. T ha t letter may conveniently be read first. At
          A n n e x B are copies o f earlier correspondence betw een Miss O a d e s and myself and the
          two circulars from the H o m e Office in relation to these issues, to w h ic h reference was
          made       A n n ex A.

 3       Y o u will appreciate that my a rgum e nt is that decisions to grant funding pursuant to the
          Resolution last February w e re unlawful, irrational and procedurally improper, and that
           a further such decision w o u ld n o w b e unlawful in any event.




                                                                   1
    P h o n e 0151 2 2 6 1 9 1 9 . F a x 0151 2 3 6 1 936. E Mail m fo@ hfsg.org
 I jj F l o o r C e n t r a l B u i l d i n g s 4 1 N o r t h J o h n S t r e e t L i v e r p o o l L 2 6 R R
                                           « « * *      r     ^ w                    j s s ^ s e *
                             That in the li^<-r^Pt’na        ,-•,
                            comments on the outc«™ * 7 ^ , ° ‘ ~ ? d Jus**c®— art-Smith’s incuiry ar* Me
                           to cause them to l e c o n s i d ^ w , ^           ti'~! ~ ere is 4 ’ e v id ic -'
                           opinion that the officers u M l ’Z   Z % ^ l*ema$ **"’ ^ « a * > of the
                                                            O w w w **“ *•* .

    ~         Lord Ju^C«..U^w cruEri-orr^n
                              ^hiart O—,_**!_ rAinfXr^^^
                                                * *      *t r- *-
              * * * » report was p u b ^ r A ^ t ^                                      o fI“ d               « * o » orisina!
              COBS- that you have re^arH ^                                       f ' ? 0ms 0ffic€ S”id“ =* « q i i ^ of
             does not see™ m haw* w               r-rticular circumstances o f * *        a1;h^ *
                 ..           ““ve s~en recode*/-? k, , - d i •               ----- -~e, aitnouc"
             decisions were made Ln nripr;nU^ 7 “- 7         ^solution of last Feb-ary, w h ^ '
             proses>+»H pnH         •r *”'*'*~> ~*re it was known wh<"» if anvnn* 1- *’ -
                    — , a~_, -o r e Importantly, for what offences.           'J      — g0u2S to be

            ■ L!i C-ear from {he rnFnm^t: oftl-iA <;vr> A
            *at Mr Daines made a                              ° fIa? * * " « * P«* < A f a « *
            -utaonty made its decision. MemW 7 ^ 7 7 ^                  "*   fac£ua! b^ is the
            attitude o f the South Yorkshire ^         ~ 7 ^ ^ £ J “ * « * » to be aware of the
            Court on 21 “ December 1998 in conn <7+; ~~*-7        ° “'*e       District Masi'ctr* fAC
                                                                                                         fa>\the p       ~        t
                       Varty, instructed by Hammond S i i d d a ^ J .9               w«~»w
                                                                                                    p° SSSSS10n-             Ms

                      “South Yorkshire P o^ * m-«                   . ,
                      i ^ e s within it and                                       ofthis Prosecution aH * .
                      relevant.”            .......... *" 818 nGt abIe *> say or agree what is or is not

7         So that the Authority car. iafona i i ^ f „ r tL •
          2S1 , n ^ o r m a 4 e .
           • ^ o n a e d s 0urc^ -_i atte^ f * **'***++. 0 * _ ISSLiSS
                                                                    - —                       rrroofor* r\ n a
                                                                                              ©.eats:  confidence, and fr«m
          manslaughter and m is fe a s a ,c 7 ;C 7 7 7 ; !        ° fthe       on t h e W ^ f
          tne Taylor Report zs A nnex n ^ W h ? ^ " C’ Md a C°?' o f            relevant - 7 7
r        .                                    ThS CharSS£ * * so- % b«ed in law a** f ,7 r~ “ °*
Lr.s a ttitu d e o f th e South. Y o r k s h ir e p Qj { ^ frt t i       „
                                                      0i*c-   to tn s a lle g a tio n o f n e g lig e n c e
R            ,._ O^A-n^^
             2J1 _/v*.        t -r~i   f        - .



         Lords decision in R v*'                                                         accordmg to the IQQ5 W n„«
        breach o f that                                                                  ? r° VS: (a> 2 d^ y
        essence o f the m atter                                      ^       &                      o f d e a i (c) ^ # "
        L“ n s i o f <tel> invclvsd the cr-d .'T o ? ,tJl7 J? ,Jf ' :0n’ “ " ” *J:er              r ^ - ^ ’to
        C T O a s a a c * ac t0 am ount L e t ' l l                      r a 50       » all t t e
        Mackay LC n o o ^ i t a /->        " “ J'"s'SI^ e n tto a c rim m y !a/^        . .
              J ■l.'- Li9yij 1 A.C. 187E.                                        o r on2lss’on. per Lord

        It is subm’V^H that -,n
                            all elements but the last have never bee-                                    *■     ,
                                                                                                 enousiy disputed. The


                                           vj
                                           v;
                   remaining eiArnAr,t j         ,    .
                 acceptance                                                         & * inherent in the
                 •he police were under a        0f                        “ * ~*e vanous negligence cases t h ,t
                causative o f death. See a * - r " 7 ; /         - 7 ? ~ erew as a ^ e a c h o f that dutv,
                H 9 9 7 j 1 AI1.E.R. 540,                                         ^       ^
                the ground, per R ose LJ; ■      ’   '“ y            C oun actIOn Dr°ught by police ofScers a*

                         £;The immediate cause o f th» h ;« «=♦*- t— c ,            •
                         the outer w
                                   satew * * * „ L»i I LLiLLi"^ HTT 'j/'/'flPf. *L, « ° ~ Cer’s
                                                                                            _ . _* *** ** t o^-------
                         and injuries o f t h o - c n ^ 3w cV T - "                   per~- Liab^ t y for the dea*«
                         * * ° f Wh0- -                                               * ths * « * defendants, the


               C a s L b l e o f t h i X , ? l th^ S £ ofp - y ds ^PPeal in the same case (W hite v r w
                                               — LOfKShire P nhn»y m ecem*naT. 1QQj^           -----



                                                                    * » * e events were caused * * .
                           - =             & t p0lCe 12 * & * « 8 4 . overcrowding o f two s p e c i a l s . ”
    m

            19S9; i d a S h e " S - w                ^ 0^      ” ° f South          in A u - s t
           rightly blamed as negli^em "O nY orvT w - r i ^             * * D ucke^ d hadbeer
           1993 this exchange took place!            TeI^ o n ’s “ Camera” on 18- February


                       Interviewer;       “Well if somebody has h ~ n tn Wa_ wfin . _
                                                          j ------------ ciame, wno is that person?”
                       \\Za1J^'           CCT-v •*1
                                          n « ’        v ef ;!d fcas b5“ b!^ - ed. ^ Lord t e f c e Tayw
                                          ^   7 “ “ '“ * -r.<smre pohce are culpable, in the s e ^ o r
                                                                                day. W e've s a i d ^ ' ~
                                           -i        -j .




         Taylor Sndinas stra™'-- .n J I                             ~ SUPP°— d the omana!
         made. CoP; « c f r - U v ^ r " 'Pf f    the          « M » poBe* that had fc~;
         be appreciated * = n w w ™ h         f f ? ' 1 bt m~ S avaHabk °= « q “« t T V —
         Sman-Snnth r         -        ™        * • » ® » do not in any way contr»d:„ T J
         c r w , , r ‘ r ~;~ i h ~ ^ based upon the original fc v W c nf tht>t , , ......... .........

                             S    tLS ^ A S T F? ? ^                          hs ^       i o TS          S       25
        Justice St^art-^mith                            ~     ‘—**• - ~s set out below T
                  ---------- J. referred m w£henag ,CTS t0 DucJcenfield's “disgrace&i eF
Attempting to p e n e rt ,he courss ofJustj:e

p       Tr *   *

        wii! noTbe7 - n l t ! ! £fr“' tr*.eXten£p f * e evide!’-ce L- --FPort ofthis charge            i-
        against Jfr                                                                      ^ ^
                            ——              tie iied to a nurnber
                                                           — c. c- rrif>oni<a        i.-
                                                                       eopie, either himself or thrcuah



                                      V
                  o.r-e.% m.the hour after the disaster, in a careful and « t a d » w W a« th . !**«..
                  were being earned away fiom the field and terraces. He d=d
                  persons or courts who would investigate the circu— c ~
                  tJijt t'ns cnnnnrtsro             t. . t                                          01 ine Gisaiier. He alle^'-t
                    “7 7 7 r *“ “ ; h- d burst tr~ gates opened, whereas he had hiins^f afW
                   w-.ii-erajon, ordered that they be opened. Ke failed to COm w tbi* i;*’a<CV
                 f co‘;- - “ ed» together with manys i i o r officers o ^ ~                                                  ^
                 allow tne he to have effect f«r cWflrai lW irc rh„ a • .* “ T‘“ * ....... .. " “ ° “ ce> to
                                 ,                       ~-------------- • • wCKS. i h c fiVldfiHCfi VI c i i n n n r f o f fhic /%U«
                 ■summarised
                 oiiiiiiiicii oSu. at
                                   s.l AftricSC
                                       A n n s ** v                                                                   c - L- s cnar.ae is

          •e d e c is io n o f th e C ro w n P r o s e c u tio n S e n d e e


     13
                 At the beginmg o f M y 1998 the solicitors for the defendant « '~ h ,h.
                 Prosecution Service to a k e over the prosecutions and d     i    s     c   o                                        .
                 entitled in law to take over any prosecution begun by a p r i v ^ i ^ , 1 1 K                                        “
                 t :     0^                                ofwhfch it has
                                                            n0 e :;f •=“ " *       « P-M e inlerest f a c e ' s
                justice.**^              *■-----             °r      Pro«oution is likely to damage the interests of

     14
               The CPS conducted a most painstaking and professional r         0<~r ,        „f     i
               sixmonths, before deciding on IS* Dec-mber 1°<39 , h „ " " , T '               f ~ ~ ly
               discontinue the case. The      0 f th . rp<^ tn ^ a,       * ° uId not ta-<e ov-r and
               j.* • •                    ■— Ci me '--is to make an m forr"^ anH hzimnaj
               d-C’sion was recognised by WLnkworth Sherwo«H f«r Mr D ^ v^        mT J T T -
               wrote to the CPS on 9* October 199S in these t e ^ ; ‘    ...... ’


                          £ J E S S ? . 1“ bih^ f o f ^                        * a t the power o f the D ir e c t I.
                                              J™                  o f fte evidence, and embraces a c—
                          o. the wider public interest. The Director is well placed to asses*
                         ru .jc interest lies havuig had involvement in the cas®                r -> n^nV-w"* V ‘
                         years and       having
                                   + .i • .     seen the Taylor r ^ o *   * * VtT.art  <^tjT
                                                           -•/— a-r u.., me iaiart-imiLh reoo*^     r ~**7I °~m m nw ’t
                          •'-*» th~
                         th&        Judgement o f the Division*’
                                 urh/i/-.*              j-         O. 2 ».w    th* ra,n-ao f*£'/l^«nca
                                                                        ■* L—rS'/iew           7 “7 anH .........

                         pro^cute.                    S C° “ Se! 0fctain‘ d w t e Lhe DLrector Bad* the decisSn'to
 i*
             io u t the strenofh of th /e^ *™ -^ 7 Prossca- or‘ ^----ded the above assertions
             i r* 1—
             Q^rpn^an+c K..+ . ^evi dence.
                                     t. *  *                     .             « Contrary arcmmAntc n ^rp
                                                                                             W6.fi OUi    nnt O
                                                                                                       lOrWET^ 1V

             i= d eii! t e W t h T s ^ X 1~ % T ~ Cted- t’- . V * * d0Ubt&1 t o ^                                              out
             pubfished                                              •therea-“
                                           L*w. jLI 15 narc to innomn^         -
                                                                        O nn\/o+^                                . *^       - *


            pu   iir 2 e ~ ;t                r r r ° 7 e “ faas aba- ^ ^            ,^ 7 ^
            p r o se c u ..^ 7          L° “‘        ’ ty “ 5te=I:e of ' * * allowed the
                            t- O ^r the first hurdle and fees the next hurdles with
Wl'lot
          public interest considerations.
16
            Th_ SYPA wiU no doubt wish, in accordance with paragraph 6 o f the Circular



                                              v>
                                               v;
             KQC/I99S, to “decide in tb »                      •
              of legal advice, whether ^          fin7*~:                            — case,zvA on the basis
             proceedings.” ’                      “ “~ C!2‘ ^sistance available to officers in criminal
             cons:de-3‘7nn ,1-    -r      w“ wu“ v       !S ° “v'l0"sly doubtful that sue’"
             cons1ce1auon was given on 27* February 1998 hu* t’— s v d a ■                     ‘ r7 “7 “
             to rund the defence La this ^      m-,ah          t u               ^ ^ m consiGenng whether
             maiters that w e~ n„t tn ,iZ T -Ps’iw x " S '                      ° f “ *e wider? ub!ic interests
             W . I: — Z Z -nsn       Z Zto cC P S ' o- & r: n!he r i "s ;w *i * decided
                                                                                   d      ^in the rp r o s e w ~w
                                                                                                                ** -,
             pohce themselves is dispassionate i d detechel*' ^                             °y toe Soath Yorksh^ -

  1'         t r ~ S “ ?inn.un^c
             preview      Ued by £he prosecuti°n        « to the
                                                              , +.UCPS that  r^ n ,*        „nf h* nia h
             ^•v#4ww«   **4wwiiiC3 rko*
                                   tiicl il2.nj ^vr*jj/r>of*A/4     vA   --------------net
                                                                           j           . oe placed
             which had return®^ w rr?w e                            — ”~^nts, sucn as the coroner’s inquest
             1 •                          *•***„,** *v»*w*v,kw accident?,? dsa*n                tn^         a   • * • ,^    7
             bnng prosecu+’^nc       TTio nrnc„_
                              **•“'« A OrOSe         *-    OT*(Yl|£>/4“V*’ ' x-v *J
                                                                       +K/1+            I f - -ecisicn in 1990 not ^
            HFSG sir''* th* n„K i;^tv r T ' T ‘                          at evlder-ce has been available to th*
            that the previous**inquiries ha^*                                       “ Febn-~"' 1993 which showed
            iM B        and d~...™ ~».                                     ,      -der ^ d e r a tio n s , are set cut in
            the South Vr,,Wh;r. 7 ^ r C ; ' ' ' - ' V - nSr; L" at              "“ G -"d '4 " " ~ — They show
            paoenvorV                                                  tsh t - nd U!^ s t£ e d control o f the
                                                           Were tmsIid- ~ th2t th e pw ctofaw .
     -      as                                         **» ™            * « f - - e 4 s in reality actir*
            interest a.      ° i Z**s^oerore
                                       £ J S tne
                                              S Tpubhc
                                                   S r P° - ~ 2 &re* « * * * I * « * Protection o/tts
                                                       interest

In e in te re s t o f th e p r ose c a tio n in th e f u n d in g is s u e


1S         I have already set out in A>,»*v j that rh» u r c n u
           a^ a CS ^ „ r i , , ,                            th~ ~ S G h a s no wish to deny
                                          r8?*fseatatir 1drew a"ention in that ^               ^ th e irrw
           s h o J S ^ ^                 ; ; f                  SY?A -               and indefinite f u n d ^ ' T ”
                                                     h2d              received written connnnation that Mr*
          of the CPS. I have^resunied ? w ? £ 2 ^ £orjudick! revie - ^ v e r the reasons
          pursuant t^            arra^    ***** “S '•eciil0n to a?Pv & r judicial review was
          February                  ^          -         rs~ ! “     S o lu t io n o f the SYPaI "
          hope th a the SYPA w™ H             Wf* * “ * “ ^         decision was made in & . m 7„
            1- n a i t n e b l PA would agree to fimd it .on «sJsauaiy next.      ‘


          hold the I^chiye ; “ t w ^ ^ f , ° £ f ! CSJ ™ ctian fce“"een “‘a d^ c e and those who
          (745. Aira,» r-h n      T                   ' h-eannss at the Leeds J f e s o » » Co...-,
          re&'ed to sJ—                     21“ DeCember) a e lawy ers for        defence have
         case by                                                            of          «   - the
          with Ztry                           u- “ '?,n° d° Ub£ t o this is because they beheve,
         d e fs-- k z :       V ^^ f '            arcblve v-- * = P—secution more than
         for                                            the defence in this c a s^ 'a sfc          ’
         the nni.v. , „ „ „ T 1------r —° r- w- ch u embarrassing to the South YorksW~
             r — . argued successfliily last year that the SYPA should fund that d e fa c e ------


         S   i:
         the a'.fhorifv if
                                                                   Yt ‘r rade ;o cl05er^ - I:
                                           q~ e w“ *' - - - - - - consequences would flow to
                                                                                                              ^
             a— onty if funding were not granted. If would have been quite
     agreement to have been made on the basis that funding by the SYPA was the best wav
     to ensure that the South Yorkshire force would not face further civil actions.

     Winkworth and Sherwood, who represent M r DuckenSeld, represented the South
     \ orkshire Police in the “ Scrutiny” last year. It is not known whether thev, or
     Hammond Suddards advised the SYPA last February, ucon this fundir.u Question.
     Generous funding arrangements have been sought and granted in an apparent attemot
     to exhaust the resources o f the prosecution, who do not have access to legal aid, and
     who have not applied for funding to the SYPA. I f the prosecution did so apply, as kin a
     for funding to maintain the morale o f the force, on the ground that junior officers
     would know that the negligent actions o f the senior officers o f the force would not be
     protected from a proper criminal inquiry, its claim would surely be more attractive than
     the present claim to fund the defence.

    So far, the substantial decision to authorise the funding in the two individual cases has
    been taken m private. B o th the defence and the SYPA has an interest in keeping as
    much o f the archive private as possible. The interest o f the public and the prosecution
    is different. The force is sitting on material'that is deeply discreditable to the integrity
    o f the previous investigations. That is why it has refused to disclose it to the
    prosecution, and why it now seeks to insist on the most demanding conditions.

a lu r r ia llv e o f le g a l a id f u n d in g


    It is submitted that there is no reason why the South Yorkshire taxpayers should
    provide such potentially large and apparently unlimited funds to defend people who are
    entitled, like every other citizen, subject to means, to the provision o f legal aid. Those
    taxpayers would surely be disturbed if they were given full information about this.
    The lawyers that would be instructed under legal aid would be subject to the ususal
    constraints and disciplines o f the scheme, but would at least be able to nive
    independent advice; even, if appropriate, to plead guilty. There can be no doubt that
    the legal aid fund w ould be less profligate with its public money than it appears the
    SYPA. has decided to be. The legal aid authorities would certainly have demanded
    down payments by w ay o f contributions from the defendants. They would have
    required a certification by the defendants7 lawyers that there were solid prosnects o f
    success for a judicial review, before authorising expenditure.

    N o doubt you will wish to show a copy o f this letter and the enclosures to your
    lawyers and to the police. O f course, I have no objection, and would encourage you to
    ask them to deal with the m atters I have set cu t in detail, and for which evidential
    references have been given. A good test o f the strength o f the arguments I have
    presented is whether the police will be able-to .answer them. Since millions o f pounds
    are potentially at stake, a proper and informed public debate can be expected, even if
    you have to postpone your hearing on 8* January. Members o f the H FSG will wish to
    attend that meeting, whenever it occurs, and I request that we be kept informed o f
    relevant dates. I shall be pleased to deal w ith any queries in advance that any member
    of the SYPA. might have, o r supply copies o f any documents to which I have referred.
    I shall myself send a copy o f these representations to the defendants’ solicitors, so that
tna' £‘h-e-v can make their ow n submissions.




Yours sincerely




Aim Adlinston
Solicitor




                                                7

                            V;
                    Hillsborough Family Support Group




 TO:       Q O /s r e tfs      J0                       flij! ^ r n H / c x £


 FAX NO:           O n ^        S o 'i   °i g   o   j




 FROM: /?/u*                / \d x


 DATE:                 L°[°[

 FAX NO:           0151 236 1936

 TELEPHONE NO:                       0151 236 1919

 NO OF PAGES TO FOLLOW: *7

MESSAGE: / W e




The information in this fax is confidential. Its contents are not to be disclosed to anyone
ether than the addressee except with the authority of the addressee. Unauthorised
recipients are requested to maintain this confidentiality and immediately to advise the
sender b y telephone/fax o f any error or misdirection in transmission.




    Phone 0 1 5 1 '23S 'I 9 1 9 . F s x 0151 236 1956. E M a ii m fo @ h fsg ,org
  1st F lo o r C e n tra l S u O d ln g s 41 N o rth John S treet L iv e rp o o l JL2 6R R
                                                                                            \,S20P.0£




    su?? c                                                                                    Su??0
                            Hillsborough Family Support Group



Y o u r Ref: D M H /C X B

29 January 1999

Garretts
1 City Square
Leeds LSI



Dear Sirs

Fpn-hgomin- meeting o f thft Members nr South Y orkshire Police Authorjiv

Further to my letter o f 27* January', Trevor Hicks has asked me to forward the following
material for circulation to the members and otner parties.-

C o p y note o f meeting betw een Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and Richard Wells on 2 y h
N o v e m b e r 1997,

 C c o y extract o f transcript o f meeting betw een Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and M r Donald
 Denton o n I"1 Decem ber 1997.

 1 have n o w had sight o f the Police Authority resolution o f 8!!’ January agreeing that the parties
 may ?.dc:ess the forthcoming meeting. How ever, tnere is no authority for ihe^me^tina iO^
 held in private. I should be grateful if you w o u l d confirm w he the r an appropriate resolution
 has been passed as required by Section 100A Local Government Act 1972.



 Y o u r s faithfully




 Ann A dlm gton
 Solicitor




                Phone 0151 236 ISIS. Fax 0151 236 1S36. E Mail info@hfsg>org
              I« Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6XR
 H IU -£ B £ R Q I1 £ E L £ ^


 Note of a meeting on 25 N cvesber 1397.


 Present -       Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
                  bir WclJs, Chief Officer cfScuih Yorkshire police
                 Mr Bar.e


Mr W ells visited Lord Justice Stuart-5 mith a: U S -S ’s recues t.


F zlict t u r n ' s

2.       Lord          Stuan-Smith remapped the process by which officers invclvad in
the disaster were asiced to pnrvicc ruJi izzoUcctozs of it, and these were then sent on,
ancr ‘vetting' to the W est M i^ar.ds police wio -w/ere collecting evidence for the
Taylor rriquiry. The ‘vetting’ consisted of ferr.crvz] of expressions of cpfeion and
intemperate language. Mostly this was quite proper be: there ■ft-as s tendency to
remove opinion. and intem perate language about senior police crnccrs tu t leave in
similar material about misbchavic-er by Liverpool feas.                 "       --------

3.      This plainly did not affect Lord Taylcr, because he —ace series criticisms of
senior officers. 3ut it was of concern that there seemed to be a pascra of changing
this rnavcrtsl m this way. I—JS-S cotes tnai Sheffield Wednesday FG also lock
sutements fi-om their people and couid cut out what they wanted so long as the
authors w ee prepared to sign them.


dssh&Ui£z fry Soir:h Yorkshire caHcr

       LJS-S had good cooperation from the South Yorkshire police. He wasn't
sware of any indication that the police were dragging their feel Ov~r requests for
information from him cr from the Hillsborough families.

5 •       RW said the force were committed to openness. There was zz element in, the
Family Support Group which seeraed to be trying to make thesn stumble 2nd appear
•■'s :rthoy were Uuldi" up rclciac of information * for tn<;**rg x recent request for
sheaves o f ‘body files’ had a slight feding of red herrjyjs being diav^n across the trail.
But the forec would still respcad as quickly as it eould.

fi.   LJS-5 said hwouk! help him to be able to show that the police ka2 acted
promptly ar. requajrts from the. £$niEes - the Support Group ralght wdl ray he had eut
                      5h0n bcfi3?c ^       ***** abl-             their material. RW woufd
          let —Ji-S have a schedule of what the force bad supplied the families with and when.


          &£rj2m:kcnf>.!<r

          7.      LJS-S sa;d that on* person he had met had said that RW bid tele them that Mr
          Duckenf.eld w^uld be prosecuted, and that it was arjtcur.ced very soon afterwards
          that he wouldn’t be.




          Usbfliix z xd crr.Te.rr-cxr 0r rrprr?

                  O S -S had. had no clear answer aa to whether South Yorkshire police had
         sdmined liability or sim ply accepted it - albeit that this v-ss, in legal lcr~.s, a
         cistmcticn
             ^
                      without a cl£rerence. RW recalled
                                                    ^
                                                           that be was ecntinuallv coins a* -cub-’c
                                                                                    O       **

         piauorms to express the force’s regret. An example was o f his TV interview cn the
         day o f the inqtasi v-rdiens. Ka give LiS-S a               o f this.

         ! 0.   RW acknowledged that Scui- Yorfcshire police bad ciade four rnzir. errors at
         K:!hborough. These were

                         r.ot breaking ckt. ef the assunipdoa that there had to be a 3 o'clock
                         kiek-cff

                         not foreseeing where the fans would go after Mr Marshall hid (rightly)
                         had Gate C opened (this was the critical error)
                                          ?

                         not noticing or taking full account c f the building up c f pressure
                         is the pens behind the gcal

                         not being able to disdnauiih between distress and disorder.

         1! i.   tJ S - S noted that these were the things which Lord Taylcr had criuciscd. The
         policy diipcted why they had lest control o f the crowd, outside the Leppings Lane
         gates.

          12.^ RW recalled that Lord Taylcr had drawn a distinction between junior and
         semcr police and berween those seder police who realised what was going on and did
         something about it and those who £d not. His aims in dya?fnf> with the issue over the
         years had been to be as open as possible, to express sorrow, both personal tad
         professional, over what had gene wrong tnd to make sure that the forte stayed
         csp&bU c f doing what it sheuld be doing.

■T



                                V

     :                                                                                                X
    t-?5~S Jiesqjhi tiat:   p o fics H id &tc=. rc"Jsi^ to   to
:                    scy    statfcjxaod ^ fr . ^ FS_              Tay lc r
        r*> r~ . * . .•


                  13 JSft Hcgac Scsaagy.
          I. h a v e n ’t actually seen that alteration.
          No.     I think one has to look at the whole statement rather
          than just the suggested alterations to cat the whole
          context of the suggested amendment..
          Here is another one.       This is dated 23rd May, a letter
          from Hammonds Suddards, and under Edmondson, there is a
          reference to CN?
      A   That, is removing ambiguity/ yes.          .Tnat is the meaning c_
          that particular term, yes.       A suggested n i s p n n t .   i am
          not too sure what he means there.           Or.e would have to see
          it, wouldn't one?
          I may have to look at some ot tnese.
          I think one has to look at the thing in the context of the
          whole statement really.
      Q   There acoear to be suggestions from Hammonds Suda<=.rds
          r a th e r   than actual striking things out or amencments.           it
■"J
          seems to be left to you to decide what is to be taker, out
          and what not?
              m e a nn the actual wording of wnat goes m .
          Yes.          ^articular example here is from Chief Inspector
          Warir.c isn   '■t . His oerceotions of the crowd position
          at page 5 do seem at odds with most other officers, but
          obviousIv this would not be altered ix.              is his c_-=-
          recoilection.        I wondered what other officers he saw on
          his walk down L-eppings Lane and perhaps details coulc oe
          included if he’ is wanting a          little bit or expansion, i-
          is possible to do so there.
          How did the alterations come to be made?            Did you cross
          cut what you thought should           not be in and then in^i--e i_..e
          officers to sign them?
          It was very much a joint affs-i-.           Tnis was a ht-ge tas.<
          because there were upwards of a thousand statements.                T&ev
          were being processed at quite a considerable rate daily,
           and we were urged to treat it in a timely fashion in order
           not to delay the Taylor Inquiry.           At the time that these_^
           were asked for, as I remember, there was a team vork-ng
           Police Headquarters actually transcribing these ve-s-o-s


                                           8'
    of events on to a computer system, the Homes Computer
    System.     That team was supplemented by other officers.
    We formed our own Inquiry team.         I didn't;          other people
    did, and I was aware that it was there. The things tr.at .
    came back from Mr, Metcalfe, in a word, -went to tr.at team
    Viio succsstl            nt~ 5.nci wrio tinsn wsriti ctiw,            s ——Ou.
    the team went out and saw the individual people, ar.c
    showed them,' or discussed with them- their revisions to the
    statement, and came back with their signec. statement ana
    that was sent to the West Midlands Police.
Q   You were in charge of this Inquiryteam?
A   I suppose, yes, one must say that.                I was real±y m Ci.ar^c
    of the transmission of information               to and irotr. Mr.
    Metcalfe, but I couldn’t obviously deal with it.                     I saw
    everything that came back from him, and it went to i_ne
    team, and it may well have been, certainly on one or two
    occasions, that the statements he was talking about were
    in fact reviewed and discussed between myself and members
    o - -tre te =m.   There were two C m e z        inspectors at tna-
       rticular time, Detective Chief Inspectors who were
    locking after this revision of statements:                 one Foster and
    one Phil it) uones. I mav well nave discussed Mr. Ms-Ca--- —
    comments with either of those, and we may have discussed
    how his comments might best nave been acnxevec xn v-e— s c~
    wording, but it was actually drafted by those people - by
     that team cf people - and finalised by tne officer r-i..i=el-
    who made the statement, in his presence anyway.
Q   Did you have any cases where a m e e r s           rerused to sign >_ne
     statements?
A    I do understand that there were one or two officers who

     were a little bit upset that their statements had been
     altered.  I am not too sure that I can r e m e m b e r anyone who

     refused to sign, to be honest.         I       imagine that that mignt
     well have been the case although           I    c a n ’t bring one to
     mind.    There weren't many, i- tnere were.




                                     9
     There certainly was some concern about; sicr.inc them
     because there is an explanation sent round which was
     approved by the solicitors.
     Oh, an explanation went round as to.what the purpose of it
     was, yes.    That was because of concern that they didn't
     know what was happening.      They r.ac j.sit anc. been as;<sc t;
     express themselves and suddenly, of course, these things
     were being turned into something which was rather
     different.   They knew that there was an Inquiry, and they
     wondered why and it had to be explained to them.
     That was explained to them.      Your recollection is tr.at
    you don't actually remember any individual cases of them
     refusing to sign?
     I d o n 't personally remember any individual cases or
     refusinc to sign although I certainly wouldn't .say we
     never had them.
Q    We have not found any cases.
     EGNZ:   We haven't fcunc any cases, no.
     I do know that there were people who expressed concern
     chat what thev said had been altered, or it was oeing
     suggested that it be altered, but I t m n k tr.e majority c_
     them, when they realised why and what in fact was being
     done, they certainly signed the statements and agreed wit:


LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    One of the   things that strikes me
     about the alterations thatI have      looked at   - and I have
     not looked -at all cf them - is .that there tends to be a
     removal of criticisms ci senior otticers but no
     corresponding removal of criticisms or tne fans.
A    I think one has to look at the light in which this was
     being done, sir.
Q    In what light is that?
A    This, as you say, wasin fact being done in a way which
      anticipated an Zncruiry and anticipated act-ons against             e
     Club, against the Police, and I think it would be fair to
     say that throughout the whole of this exercise - whilst
     there was nothing distinctly deliberate about it - the


                                 10


                                                                      a
10 irebruary 1999


Winckworth Shenvood                                                                                             Direct line U 113 39 9613$
Solicitors and Parliamentaryv Agents
                               C?
35 Great Peter Street                                                                                           Our ref    D H /K H
Westminster
London                                                                                                          Your ref
SW1P SLR

                                                                              For the attention of S Eastwood

Dear Sirs

South Yorkshire Police A uthority

We refer to the meeting-O on 5 Februaryy 1999 of the South Yorkshire Police Authority. You will
recall that the meeting considered whether the Authority had pow er to provide financial
assistance to Mr David Duckenfield and Mr Bernard M urray in relation to their costs and expenses
on the private prosecutions and various applications for judicial review.

The matter was considered in private meeting by the Authority, although submissions were heard
from or on behalf of HFSG, Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray. After giving careful consideration to
these submissions, the views of the Chief Constable and our advice, the Authority resolved that it
did not have power to provide the financial assistance. This resolution was in accordance with our
advice.

Our advice, which incorporated the views of Ms Presiley Baxendale QG and Mr Mark Shaw of
Counsel, was to the following effect:


1              Section 6 Police Act 1996, which confers on the Authority a w ide duty to maintain an
               effective and efficient police force, in conjunction with Section 111(1) Local Government Act
               1972, appeared to give a very broad discretion to the Authority to preserve the morale of the
               police force w ithout which, an effective and efficient police force could not be maintained.
               Accordingly, if it was, in the Authority's view, genuinely and reasonably necessary, in order
      ,        to maintain police morale, to meet the out of pocket costs and expenses of police officers,
               incurred in defending themselves against criminal or civil proceedings, it was arguably
               within Section 6 of the Police Act 1996, coupled with Section 111(1) of the Local Government
               Act 1972, to pay such costs.
2              However, that there were powerful arguments against this interpretation including the
               following:

           a                  If there were a general power under section 6 Police Act 1996 to indemnify officers
                              against the costs of legal proceedings arising from the performance of their duties,

                                                                          V


j : \ g j r r e t t ' s o u t h vc fk*fu rt ? police\l«f-WOCJ-<Joc\sfc»
                                                                        10 February 1999




         there would be no reason for section 8S(4) Police Act 1996 specifically to allow the
         recovery of such costs in tort proceedings. Section 88(4) w ould simply be unnecessary.

b        The issue turns on the proper construction of the Police Act 1996. In London Borough of
         Sutton -v - Morgan Grenfell & Co Limited (1996) the C ourt of Appeal stated that where
         Parliament had enacted specific provisions setting out how a local authority was
         intended to perform its functions, there was no room to imply other means of earn in g
         out those functions un der section 111(1) Local Government Act 1972. In particular,
         where a local authority was intended to have pow er to incur financial obligations that
         power m ust specifically be identified by statute. This was an example of a well-
         established general principle of statutory interpretation: where Parliament specifies
         one particular matter, it impliedly excludes any other allied matters. In addition,
         section 6 of the Police Act 1996 is so wide in its language that it was doubtful that
         recourse to section 111(1) Local Government Act 1972 could usefully expand it. The
         real question is the relationship between section 6 and section 88 Police Act 1996.

c        In R v Derbyshire Police Authority ex parte Wilson and Dalton (1989), both parties had
         accepted that the basic power to meet the officers' costs existed, and accordingly this
          did not fall to be decided by the co u rt The power to pay costs was therefore assumed
         not decided. Similarly, a Home Office Circular is only guidance. It does not define or
         modifv the law and should not be assumed to be correct.

d        Mr Justice Denning stated in Askey -v - Golden Wine Co Limited (1948) the public policy
         that the punishm ent inflicted by a criminal court is personal to the offender and that
         such an offender is not entitled to recover from a third party an indemnity against the
         consequences of the criminal proceedings whether that be a fine, an award against him
         of the other party's costs or the'accused's own legal costs. This public policy helps to
         explain why section 88(4) Police Act 1996 does not cover criminal proceedings.

e        A judge would not necessarily consider it desirable for the Authority to have such a
         power. In the light of Askey -v - GolderuWine Co Limited, it was doubtful if a police
         authority was intended to have power to indemnify officers against costs of a case in
         which they were found guilty. An acquitted defendant would, in any event, normally
         receive an aw ard that h is/h e r reasonably incurred non legally-aided costs be paid in
         full out of central funds, unless the' accused was at fault in bringing suspicion on
         himself or was found not guilty on a technicality see Practice Direction (Crime: Costs)
         (1991) 1 WLR 498. Accordingly, in the normal run, an acquitted police officer should
         have no (or few) costs to pay himself/herself, which a" police authority would need to
         meet.
    The issues raised were difficult and that there was no guarantee which way a Court would
    decide. There were certainly strong policy reasons why the Authority should have power to
    support its officers (current and former) in this way. Given the points summarised in
    paragraphs 2 (a) to 2 (e) above, however, there were considerable doubts about the power of
    the Authority to support the costs either of the criminal proceedings or the judicial review
                                              - 3   -                      10 February 1999




     proceedings (neither being covered by Section 88(4) Police A ct-1996), particularly before anv
     judgm ent had been given in those proceedings.
4    It was also necessary to be mindful of the terms of the latest Home Office Circular. One
      w ould not lightly advise that it is w rong but it is much more hesitant that its predecessor.
      Therefore, it was sensed that the Home Office may have its own doubts about the existence
      of this power.
5    Accordingly, whilst it was w ished to review the matter further in the light of any
     representations made on behalf of the officers, the Chief Constable or the HFSG, the current
     recommendation was that the Authority should resolve to reverse its earlier decision and
     decide that it has no pow er to provide the financial assistance which had been sought. It
     should then co-operate w ith those parties in bringing the matter before a court for an early
     decision on w hether that view of their legal powers was correct.

In disclosing the effect of our advice, the Authority shall not be regarded as having waived its legal
privilege whatsoever. This disclosure is m ade solely for the purpose of providing the Authority's
reasons.

VVe enclose:

1     The Resolutions of the Authority;

2     The Statement of the Chairm an of the Authority which was released following the meeting.

You may also be aware that the Chief Constable has announced his intention to seek judicial
review of the Authority's decision. You may wish to consider whether to make representations at
that hearing.


Yours faithfully




Enclosures
10 February 1999


Walker Morris                                                                                                                            Direct line   0113 3996136
Solicitors
Kings Court                                                                                                                              Our ref       D H /K H
12 King Street
Leeds                                                                                                                                    Your ref
LSI 2HL

                                                                                          For the attention of R ManningO
                                                                                                         - .......— ..................




Dear Sirs

South Yorkshire Police A uthority

We refer to the meeting on 5 February 1999 of the South Yorkshire Police Authority. You will
recall that the meeting considered whether the Authority had power to provide financial
assistance to Mr David Duckenfield and Mr Bernard M urray in relation to their costs and expenses
on the private prosecutions and various applications for judicial review.

The matter was considered in private meeting by the Authority, although submissions were heard
from or on behalf of HFSG, Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray. After giving careful consideration to
these submissions, the views of the Chief Constable and our advice, the Authority resolved that it
did not have pow er to provide the financial assistance. This resolution was in accordance with our
advice.

Our advice, which incorporated the views of Ms Presiley Baxendale QC and Mr Mark Shaw of _ .
Counsel, was to the following effect:


1                Section 6 Police Act 1996, which confers on the Authority a wide duty to maintain an
                 effective and efficient police force, in conjunction with Section 111(1) Local Government Act
                 1972, appeared to give a very broad discretion to the Authority to preserve the morale of the
                 police force w ithout which, an effective and efficient police force could not be maintained.
                 Accordingly, if it was, in the Authority's view, genuinely and reasonably necessary, in order
                 to m aintain police morale, to meet the o u t of pocket costs and expenses of police officers,
                 incurred in defending themselves against criminal or civil proceedings, it was arguably
                 within Section 6 of the Police Act 1996, coupled with Section 111(1) of the Local Government
                 Act 1972, to pay such costs.
2                 However, that there were powerful arguments against this interpretation including the
                  following:

             a                       If there were a general power under section 6 Police Act 1996 to indemnify officers
                                     against the costs of legal proceedings arising from the performance of their duties,




j : \ g j f f e t t \ s o u t h Y o r k s h ir e p o lk v \le * - 0 0 0 2 1 .d o c \s b
                                                                      10 February 1999




       there would be no reason for section 88(4) Police Act 1996 specifically to allow the
       recovery of such costs in tort proceedings. Section88(4) would simply be unnecessary.

b     The issue turns on the proper construction of the Police Act 1996. In London Borough of
       Sutton -v - Morgan Grenfell & Co Limited (1996) the Court of Appeal stated that where
       Parliament had enacted specific provisions setting out how a local authority was
       intended to perform its functions, there was no room to imply other means of carrvino-
       out those functions under section 111(1) Local Government Act 1972. In particular,
       where a local authority was intended to have power to incur financial obligations that
       pow er m ust specifically be identified by statute. This was an example of a well-
       established general principle of statutory interpretation: where Parliament specifies
       one particular matter, it impliedly excludes any other allied matters. In addition,
      section 6 of the Police Act 1996 is so wide in its language that it was doubtful that
      recourse to section 111(1) Local Government Act 1972 could usefully expand it. The
      real question is the relationship between section 6 and section 88 Police Act 1996.

c     In R v Derbyshire Police Authority ex parte Wilson and Dalton (1989), both parties had
       accepted that the basic power to meet the officers’ costs existed, and accordingly this
       did not fall to be decided by the court. The power to pay costs was therefore assumed
       not decided. Similarly, a Home Office Circular is only guidance. It does not define or
       modify the law and should not be assumed to be correct

i     Mr Justice Denning stated in Askey -v - Golden Wine Co Limited (1948) the public policy
      that the punishm ent inflicted by a criminal court is personal to the offender and that"
      such an offender is not entitled to recover from a third partv an indemnity against the
      consequences of the criminal proceedings whether that be a fine, an award against him
      of the other party s costs or the accused's own legal costs. This public policy helps to,
      explain why section 88(4) Police Act 1996 does not cover criminal proceedings.

        judge would not necessarily consider it desirable for the Authority to have such a
     power. In the light of Askey -v- Golden Wine Co Limited, it was doubtful if a police
     authority was intended to have pow er to indemnify officers against costs of a case in
     w hich they were found guilty. An acquitted defendant would, in any event, normally
     receive an award that h is/h e r reasonably incurred non legally-aided costs be paid in
     full out of central funds, unless the accused was at fault in bringing suspicion on
     himself or was found not guilty on a technicality see Practice Direction (Crime: Costs)
     (1991) 1 WLR 498. Accordingly, in the normal run, an acquitted police officer should
     have no (or few) costs to pay him self/herself, which a police authority w’ould need to
     m eet

The issues raised were difficult and that there was no guarantee which way a Court would
decide. There were certainly strong policy reasons why the Authority should have power to
support its officers (current and former) in this way. Given the points summarised in
paragraphs 2 (a) to 2 (e) above, however, there were considerable doubts about the power of
the Authority to support the costs either of the criminal proceedings or the judicial review
                                                                            10 Februaryj 1999




     proceedings (neither being covered by Section 88(4) Police Act 1996), particularly before anv
     judgm ent had been given in those proceedings.
4    It was also necessary to be m indful of the terms of the latest Home Office Circular. One
      w ould not lightly advise that it is w rong but it is much more hesitant that its predecessor.
      Therefore, it was sensed that the Home Office may have its own doubts about the existence
      of this power.
5    Accordingly, whilst it w as wished to review the matter further in the light of any
     representations made on behalf of the officers, the Chief Constable or the HFSG, the current
     recommendation was that the A uthority should resolve to reverse its earlier decision and
      decide that it has no pow’er to provide the financial assistance which had been sought. It
     should then co-operate w ith those parties in bringing the m atter before a court for an early
      decision on whether that view of their legal powers was correct.

In disclosing the effect of our advice, the A uthority shall not be regarded as having waived its legal
privilege whatsoever. This disclosure is made solely for the purpose of providing the Authority's
reasons.

We enclose:

1      The Resolutions of the Authority;

2      The Statement of the Chairman of the Authority which was released following the meeting.

You may also be aware that the Chief Constable has announced his intention to seek judicial
review of the Authority's decision. You may wish to consider whether to make representations at
that hearing.


Yours faithfullyj




Enclosures
                                                                                               flu. w-U*
                                                                                                    \




                                  SUMMONS TO DEFEND AN i

                            ^    T yrr. COUNTY Or WEST \ORKSHTRE

                           LEEDS CITY PETTY SESSIONAL DIVISION


                                       The 13^-day of                          1398




Lafcrmadons have been laid this day before me, the undersigned Justice of the Peace, by
ANN ADLINGTON, (Solicitor) acting an behalf of the Huljbcroug- . amuy             *
Grcup that you BERNARD DEAN MURRAY

                                                  b e r e f r a c t , W est Y a r k jh i r c
of

aa the IS"* day o f A pril, 1939

 st         Hillsborough Football S tad iu m , Sheffield

 1.         Unlawfully killed JOHN ALFRED ANDERSON
             C o n tra ry to C o m m o n Lz*>

 2.          Unlawfully killed JAMES GARY ASPINALL
             Contrary to Comman L&w

  3.         Wiirully neglected to perform a public duty
              C o n tra ry to C o m m o n L s w



                                                                                                           K
  Y O U ARE T H E R E T O RE H E R E B Y S U M > i° N E D t o j p p ^ r      ^
  cUy of ( W - t     1993 before th e MAGISTRATES* C O U R T sitting at W ESTG A
     LEEDS to aSxwer the said informations,                                VQJT?.




       J w t t ee af             for the C o u n ty aforesaid



                                            v           •          U 3 •]
                                            *                      0033
                      3a      f?>cn      u in c x u c r t h   s   - £ f>joco                                      9011323^ 7130lTja. P .




                                 I S THE COUNTY Or W rS i YG3Z<S'^




IE INFORMATION of ANN ADLINGTON, Solidtcr, a a ir.g                                            behalf o f the Hillsborough Family
zzcrr. Group, who stales .tfaal


             THE DEFENDANT!


   £          DAVID GQDFKEY D U C K E N rleX P of



              O r, t h s 1 5 th . ArnnH 1 S S 9 a t H i l l s b o r o u g h F o o t b a l l S t a d i u m , S n a ^ d d


              (1)          Unla'wniQy killed JO H N ALFRHD AND.r-B.SON
                           Contrary to Common L aw

               (2)         U daw iiily killed JAMES GARY ASPINALL                                       .
                           Corifkry to ConmoaLa>’

               (3 )        XVH£iIly rrcglcctcd to perform s. public duty
                           Ccmxary to Common. L aw

                (4)         With ia e c i to pervert the course of jusdee did 3 3 ^ w h ic h had. 1
                            tendency to pervert the cour* c f justice la mat he Ued about the
                            drcaacsfcmces mwhich gate C bccamc ope^_ .
                            C cm rzry to Common Law




                 DAT=~n T7T=.1CTS13AY OF JULY 1558




                                                                                0032
                        ADLINGTON -v- MURRAY and DUCKENFIELD




                                                OPINION




1.     We are asked tor a written Opinion on whether it is appropriate for Mr Murray and Mr

Duckentield to continue defending the charges o f manslaughter and misfeasance in public office. It
is understood that the Opinion will be considered by the South Yorkshire Police Authority.



2.     We have no doubts. Mr Murray and Mr Duckenfield must continue to defend the charges. The

alternative, namely pleading guilty to the charges, is in our judgm ent unthinkable.



3.     It is perhaps a sufficient indication o f the merits o f the defences to state the consistent view

c f the D.P.P. over the past ten years. In 1990. having received the Opinion from two leading counsel,

the Director announced that there was not a reasonable prospect o f conviction in respect o f any

potential criminal charges arising out of the Hillsborough tragedy. This view was re-stated by the

Director in 1997, following pressure from HFSG to re-consider the decision not to prosecute. In 1991,

the Inquest juries returned verdicts o f accidental death, (and thus rejected verdicts o f unlawful killing).
In February 1998, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's Scrutiny concluded that there was no material to be put

before the D.P.P. which might cause reconsideration o f the decisions not to prosecute; and further

concluded that there was no basis for re-opening the Inquests. On 18 February 1998, the Home

Secretary, the Attorney-General and the D.P.P. publicly stated that they had considered Lord Justice
Suian-Sm ith's Report very carefully, and that they had no reason to doubt his conclusions.



4.     It is important that the HFSG justification for these private prosecutions has been a claim to
have found ’new ? evidence, such as to undermine the earlier decisions not to prosecute. In 1998, Lord
Justice Start-Smith’s Scrutiny concluded that there was no basis for these claims. There is no
genuinely significant ‘ne w ’ evidence, merely substantially the same evidence from different witnesses.



5.      Against that background, we are confident in our own assessment o f the case. We, too, believe

that there is no reasonable prospect o f conviction. Indeed, it is our judgm ent that there is a strong
argument that there is no prima facie case o f manslaughter anc. misfeasance. We intend to make

submissions to that effect to the stipendiary magistrate at the committal proceedings. For that reason,
      we are satisfied that it is a proper course to contest the committal. Further, a, the same hearing we
      shall argue that private prosecution is oppressive and an abuse of the right of private prosecution. If
      the magistrate agrees with either submission, the effect
                                                                 will be to bring the proceedings to an end.
      without the necessity for a Crown Court hearinc.



      6.         It was a considerable disappointment that the Divisional Court did not quash the D P P 's
  dec,sion not to intervene and withdraw the manslaughter and misfeasance charges, (although our
  challenge to his failure to withdraw the charges of perjuV against Mr Duckenfield was successful).
  It is important that the Court's decision is not misinterpreted. In view of the representations which
  HFSG made to the Police Authority (claiming that we were profligate with public funds by making
  ajudicial review challenge against the Director), we think it right to record that Lord Justice L aw
  expressly commented to Mr Jones Q.C. that the submissions made to the Court on behalf of the
  defendants had been -highly arguable'. The factthatthe Court ultimately rejected our submissions that
  t e D,rectors policy and decision were both unlawful is not an indication that our decision to take the
  proceedings was wrong or unjustified. We are satisfied that, had it not been for the decision of th-
  Coun to allow the Director, on the second day of the hearing, to produce affidavit evidence „iv,V»
 some reason for his decision, we would have succeeded in all our challenges. Our sole purpose ^
 taking those proceedings was to bring these unjustified prosecutions to an end by the most speedy and
 economical means open to us.


 7.         In
                 view ot the tone of the representations HFSG has made to the Police Authoritv we wish
 to g've our unreserved assurances that the advice we have given to these defendants throughout has
 been precisely the same as we would have given to the defendants had they been privately pavin.
 clients or defendants w„h a legal aid certificate. We consider it to be professional!-
                                                                                       Iy improper to do
otherwise.




w im am Clegg Q.C.          (




(Counsel for Mr Duckenfield)
                                                           (Counsel for Mr Murray)

26 April 1999
                      ADLLNGTON -V- D U CK E N FIE LD and MURRAY




      REPRESENTATIONS TO THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS

                          ON BEHALF OF MR. BERNARD MURRAY




1.1       In 1996-7, the HFSG pretext for re-opening the investigation was a claim that ‘new evidence’
existed to undermine the previous findings and decisions. That claim was emphatically rejected by Lord
Justice. Stuart-Smith’s Scrutiny. It was inevitable that any post-Scrutiny attempt to justify a prosecution
would include another claim that further fresh evidence had come to light.

1.2     We are now able to respond to the ‘new evidence’ claim, as well as to the variety of other claims
in the crosecutcr's representations.

1.3     There are also important points to be made about the declared CPS/DPP policy on the provisions
o f the Prosecution of Offences Act 19 Sd.

CPS/DPP Policy - evidence
2 .1    The CPS letters to HFSG on 27 July and 4 August 1998 set out Policy. They refer to evidence,
public interest and the interests o f justice. The latter is one specific aspect of public interest. This is not
the moment for detailed argument about policy, but we indicate our concerns.

2.2      The evidence criterion for intervention is wrong. (We do not accept that the private prosecutor
can make out a case to answer. What follows is addressing the principle-behind the policy.) It cannot be
right to restrict the Director’s scope for intervening on evidence grounds to cases where there is ‘clearly
no case to answer’.

2 3      First it has the effect that the Director will only intervene in cases where the Court would be
bound to stop the proceedings in any event, either by refusing to issue summonses, or by refusing to
commit for trial. To that extent, intervention on evidential grounds would never serve to achieve more
than an acceleration of the inevitable.

2 4       Second in rare cases such as the present, it has a potential for undermining the public’s
perception of the authority of the Director, as well as that of the Attorney-General. For more than eight
years, the Director has publicly asserted that there is no realistic prospect of conviction of any person on
the charges now levelled against the two defendants. This after the most detailed, thorough, responsible
and high-level assessment of the position it is possible to imagine, carried out more than once,^and
coupled with the clear conclusions of the Scrutiny of Lord Justice Stuart-Sm.th, which have m turn b e e n
publicly accepted by the Director, the Attorney-General and the Home Secretary The policy
contemplates L t the Director may conclude that because it is not clearly demonstrated that there is no

                                                                               Mr Murray’s representations - 5/5
case to answer, all that has gone before must count for nothing, and that the publicly appointed body
responsible for criminal prosecutions must stand aside and leave it to a private prosecutor. Tnat such an
outcome is theoretically possible suggests that the underlying policy is flawed. Particularly in the unique
circumstances of this case, where an independent Scrutiny Inquiry under a Lord Justice o f Appeal has
been set up by Ministers o f the Crown to examine whether there is any basis for reviewing the decision
not to prosecute.

2.5      We mention the position o f the Attorney-General at this stage because there is a need to
coordinate the roles o f the principal officers responsible for the criminal process. Were there to be a
committal for trial to the Crown Court, the Attorney’s power to enter a nolle prosequi would be called
upon by the defence. Ex hypothesi , such intervention only arises after it has been found that there is a
case to answer. It cannot be right that the Director is unable to intervene on evidential grounds if there
may be a case to answer, when it is plain that the Attorney can do so in a case where there undoubtedly
is a case to answer. We note section 3(1) o f the 1985 Act. In any case where the Attorney would enter
a nolle prosequi, notwithstanding that there is or might be a case to answer, there is nothing in law or
principle to preclude the Director from intervening to the same effect at an earlier stage, acting either
independently or under the Attorney’s superintendence.

CPS/DPP Policy - public interest
3.1     The public interest factors to be taken into account when considering whether to take over and
discontinue a private prosecution will not be different from or less than those factors which the Cede for
Crown Prosecutors requires to be taken into account when deciding whether to prosecute.

3.2     Without repeating 2.4 above, the public pronouncements from the office of the Director, from
the Law Officers and Ministers of the Crown have created a legitimate expectation in the defendant that
there will be no prosecution. It is unthinkable that this should effectively be overridden by the
commencement of a private prosecution. It would set at nought the assurance contained in § 10.1 o f the
Code. There is no basis for invoking the exceptions in §10.2.

3.3    Material public interest factors against prosecution as identified in §6.5 o f the Code are:
        (d) long delay, and
        (f) significant ill-health o f the prospective defendant.
Both apply here. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith found significant instances of altered recollections in
witnesses upon whom the prosecutor would rely.

3.4     Assessment o f culpability. We do not propose to argue issues o f substantive law at this stage. For
present purposes it is sufficient to refer to the quotation which Lord Taylor chose to cite prominently,
with obvious approval, in his Interim Report, PART II - WHY DID IT HAPPEN? [p.20]:
        “Events of the magnitude of Hillsborough don't usually happen just for one single reason, nor
         is it possible to pin the blame on one single scapegoat... Disasters happen because a whole series
         of mistakes, misjudgments and mischances happen to come together in deadly combination.”
         (The Archbishop ofYork.)
Lord Taylor’s Report, read as a whole, found the disaster was caused by a series of factors: ultimately
a failure of systems as well as of single individuals, involving the Police as a Force, Sheffield
Wednesday as a Club, their consulting engineers, the Health & Safety Executive, the Local Authority and
the Football Association.

3.5       Regrettably, HFSG has become a campaigning pressure group for what is now a relentless pursuit
o f these ex-police officers. Their lives have been and will continue to be seriously afflicted by their
knowledge that they were involved at the epicentre o f the disaster. A fair and dispassionate assessment
o f the position o f the two proposed defendants would see them as having been seriously affected by their
involvement in the tragedy. But there is no prospect o f this private prosecution being carried on and

                                                                           Mr Murray’s representations - 2/5

                                                                                                       0 0 0 0 6
c onduced with any regard to the broader concepts o f fairness and balance of public interest factors which
any defendant in a criminal trial in this country is entitled to expect.



CPS/DPP Policy - the private prosecutor.
4.1      Even if there were to be a defensible evidential basis for continuing the proposed prosecution,
it would be wholly wrong for the public prosecuting authority to abandon responsibility for the conduct
o f what undoubtedly would be a serious, complicated and important 'high-profile’ case. Section
3(2)(b)(i) of the 1985 A ct imposes a duty on the Director to institute and have the conduct o f proceedings
where it appears that:
         “the importance or difficulty o f the case makes it appropriate that proceedings should
         be instituted by him...” .
Although this duty is distinct from the duty to “take over” the conduct o f proceedings, it is not a duty
which the Director can ignore. Parliament did not envisage that important or difficult cases (this would
be both) should be left to private prosecution. The scope for intervention by a private prosecutor in such
cases must clearly be confined to situations where inertia, partiality' or improper action on the part of the
public prosecutor can be demonstrated.

4.2      Although section 6(1) of the Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985 expressly preserved the right of
private prosecution, it is clearly notan unfettered right. The purpose .in preserving private access to the
criminal courts was stated by Lord Wilberforce in Gouriet-v- Union o f Post Office Workers [1978] A.C.
435 at 477:
         “This historical r i a h t ..., though rarely exercised in relation to indictable offences, and
         though Ultimately liable to be controlled by the Attorney-General (by taking over the
         prosecution and, if he thinks fit, entering a nolle prosequi) remains a valuable
         constitutional safeguard against inertia or partiality on the part of authority.
See also: Report o f the Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure (Cmnd 3092 (1981)): it provides a
useful and effective safeguard asainst“ improper action” by the prosecuting authority: cited by Lloyd L.J.
in R -v- Bow Street Stipendiary Magistrate and Another, (1993) 96 Cr.App.R. 405.

4.3     The lengthy history o f public investigations into the circumstances ofthe Hillsborough tragedy,
carried out at all stages under the auspices o f the Home Secretary and the Law Officers, clearly
demonstrates that this is not an appropriate case for private prosecution.



HFSG - 1998 Representations to D.P.P.
5.1     Fundamentally, the HFSG representations amount to claims that, by reason o f fraudulent
interference with and /or concealment of evidence by the South Yorkshire Police and/or the West
Midlands Police, the Taylor Inquiry, the D.P.P., the Police Complaints Authority, the Inquests, and Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith were all in their turn deceived about the culpability of the South Yorkshire Police
Force in relation to the tragedy o f Hillsborough. These claims are presumed to be true, then translatwd
simplistically into a justification for prosecuting the two proposed defendants.

5.2    To overcome the objection that these were the very claims expressly considered and rejected by
the Scrutiny, HFSG contends that it is only post-Scrutiny that material has been released for their
consideration which now enables them to demonstrate the truth of their assertions. It is necessary to
examine this material with close attention to detail, for the claims based upon it are wholly spurious.

 5.3     When viewed in conjunction with the serious allegations which were made to Lord Justice
 Stuart-Smith. the present claims are seen as the continuation of a series of unfounded allegations made
 in support ofthe long-standing conspiracy theory which has become entrenched in the thinking ofthe


                                                                             Mr Murray’s representations - 3/5
HFSG, and which now dominates the presentation of all their arguments. A summary' of certain
allegations together with the findings of the Lord Justice is set out in the following table.




                      ALLEGATION                               FINDINGS OF STUART-SMITH L.J.

  1    Video tapes were stolen by S.Y. police as part    Tnere is no evidence for this suggestion. §22.
       o f a ‘cover-up’, p. 1S, §22.                     One tape would have been blank. Tne other showed
                                                         turnstiles 9 to 16. §21.

  2    Police blamed failure to see overcrowding in      “Quite untenable,” p.26, §61. Note also:
       pens 3 and 4 on fact that camera 5 defective.     [a] pp.24-5, §§51 and 52: Mr Murray had given
       Tnis was deliberately false, p.20, §33.1          evidence to the opposite effect. Ignored by HFSG
                                                         and not drawn to the attention o f Stuart-Smith L.J.
                                                         [b] Mr Houldsworth (upon whom HFSG relied)
                                                         said police would not rely on cameras; they had a
                                                         good view out o f the window: p.25, §55.
                                                         [c] When consulted by Stuart-Smith L.J., counsel
                                                         for the families at the Inquest said it had never been
                                                         the police case that they could not see pens 3 and 4
                                                         were full because CCTV not working: p.26, §58.

  3    Evidence from video tapes o f what was filmed     There was never any disappearance or concealment
       bv camera 5 deliberately supressed and            o f video footage from camera 5: p.27, §63. “Tnere
       cor.cealed (by S.Yorkshire police and’or V» est   is no new video evidence...” p i 04 §7
       Midlands). p*20, §33.2                            Allegation that police hid videotape evidence is
                                                         completely unfounded. There was no suppression
                                                         or disappearance of footage from the vital tapes ...
                                                         which were at all times ... available to be seen by
                                                         legal representatives o f the families: p.30, §77.

   4   Houldswcrth’s evidence was deliberately           Importance o f his evidence exaggerated out o f all
       withheld from Inquest jury, p.20, §33.5           proportion. His existence and evidence were known
                                                         to Taylor Inquiry and to Coroner: p.36, §97,

   5   Inquest verdicts procured by fraud,               Submissions unfounded: p.48, §53.
       suppression o f evidence or insufficiency of      “The suggestion that the evidence now put before
       inquiry; fraudulent concealment o f evidence:     me ... was deliberately suppressed and those
       p.48, §52.6                                       concerned acted in bad faith is ... wholly
                                                         irresponsible”: p.52, §70.
                                                         [fraudulent concealment o f evidence]: “ suggestion
                                                         is false and I regard it as wholly irresponsible”:
                                                         p. 104, §12.



5.4     The prosecutor continues to assert that the South Yorkshire Police and/or West Midlands
carefully withheld important material from the Director and the Coroner, such that the 1990 decision not
to prosecute and the Inquest verdicts were reached on an incomplete assessment of material evidence.
These claims are dealt with in detail in Schedule A. An illusion of incomplete consideration is created
by highlighting the fact that not all statements were considered and not all witnesses were called. Of
course they were not. For obvious reasons, many witnesses were repetitive of others, many were unable
to speak about the focal matters under inquiry. Some sifting process to extract representative sample
witnesses on critical issues was essential, otherwise the Hillsborough Inquiry and the Inquests would
have been unmanageable. Evidence now relied on by the prosecutor as being new and previously

                                                                               Mr Murray's representations - 4/5
                                  v;
                                                                                                                000067
unconsidered is substantially the same evidence as has already been thoroughly considered, but from
different sources. This is analysed in Schedules B and C.




Mr Murray "s representations - accompanying Schedules.
6.1      To assist the Director to give detailed consideration to the points and counter-points arising out
of the HFSG representations, we have prepared responses in the form of three Schedules:
         A - responses to the 40-page representations of Mr Jones Q.C. (24 September 1998);
         B - an analysis of the claims about ‘new evidence’ as it relates to the witness statements referred
to in the HFSG letter to CPS (24 August 1998); (these statements were withheld from us until late
September when they came with the representations);
         C - an analysis of the claims about ‘new evidence’ as it relates to the 22 statements in Annex D
to the representations.
We respond to the claims made about the 38 statements served in support of the summonses in schedule
A. Most of these are general in nature.

6.2     Our submission is that none of the statements relied on establishes anything of material
significance, that is, which has not been known of or available before from other sources. The
prosecutor’s presentation relies on bulk without substance.

6.3      For brevity, we have adopted short-form responses where the same response can be made to
claims about witnesses or points about their evidence, (or deletions or amendments where these
allegations are made). The meaning of the notation we have adopted is as follows:
         NOT NEW - the witness says nothing which has not been established before by other evidence;
         INQUIRY, INQUEST, or SCRUTINY - indicates that the evidence, point or argument was fully
         taken into account by the relevant body, albeit as a result of evidence from other sources;
         AFTERMATH - this indicates that the evidence or argument relates to events after the tragedy
         had occurred, which are not material to the charges against Mr Murray;
         NOT MATERIAL - this indicates that the evidence or argument is not material to the charges
         against Mr Murray.

6.4     Accompanying these Representations.
        [1] The judgments of the Divisional Court in R -v- H M ,Coroner fo r South Yorkshire, ex
        p.Stringer, (see Schedule A, response to §§ 54-55).
        [2] Yorkshire Evening Post report of 17 September 1998, (see Schedule A, response to § 110).




                                                                    Michael Harrison Q.C.

                                                                    Simon Myerson.


Park Court Chambers
40, Park Cross Street
LEEDS, LSI 2QH.

2 October 1998.

                                                                           Mr Murray's representations - 5/5
SCHEDULE A: RESPONSE TO PROSECUTOR’S REPRESENTATIONS: 24 September 1998.


                                       HFSG ARGUMENT                                                                           RESPONSE
     §
     5     [a] CPS Code bome in mind.                                                      (a] Its principles have not been applied,
           [b] Realistic prospect o f conviction on basis o f Taylor findings alone        |l>] If true, this was the position in 1990, so the implication is that counsel then
           (supported by proper basis o f witness statements).                             advising the DPP, and the Director himself, were wrong. They were not.
           [c] Prospect o f conviction enhanced by Adomako.                                                [cj It is not. The fundamental principles o f law are the same. In any
           [d] Private prosecutor entitled to apply less strict test. Approach o f Cl’S    eveni, it would lie contrary to principle and practice to prosecute after 9 years on
           now.                                                                            basis o f a change in interpretation o f the common law.
                                                                                           [d] Wrong. A private prosecutor who does not believe in a realistic prospect o f
yr
                                                                                           conviction ought not to prosecute. The declared CPS policy of not intervening with a
                                                                                           view to discontinuing is a different issue; as to which see §§2.2-2.5 o f the
                                                                                           accompanying representations.

     6-7   [a] Public interest factors and basis for taking over a private prosecution.    (a) See §§ 3.1 - '1.3 of accompanying representations,
           [b] Prosecutor may decide to raise an abuse of process argument.                lb] Ui/arre.

 9-10      [a] Mass o f new evidence made available since Scrutiny, hitherto               {a] There is no ‘new’ evidence of substance. It is the same evidence from dillerent
           conccaled by SYP.                                                               sources. See detailed analysis in Schedules li and C.
           [b] Significance ‘difficult to overstate’; disclose manipulation o f evidence   (1)] An extravagant claim in every respect.
           to the past benefit o f the Defendants and SYP in general; cause all aspects
           o f investigation, statements ptc to be examined differently.

     II    Implies: [a] that the defendants rely upon previous                             Wrong. The issue is whether there is any basis for the DPP to reconsider the 1990
           inquiries/investigations, and [b] that propositions (a)-(e) are relevant to     decision, sufficient to override the S-S conclusion that there was none. Jlie corrupt
           that, (presumably to undermine reliance).                                       conspiracy fixation ofthe private prosecutor was repudiated in SCRIJ1INY. See also
                                                                                           INQUIRY §16, Lord Taylor, and tribute to fairness and thoroughness o f police
                                                                                           investigation from Secretary o f Football Supporters’ Association.

      12   [a] As pointed out in previous submissions, Taylor findings in themselves       (a] In §5 ante, it is claimed the same findings alone disclosed a realistic prospect o f
           amount almost to a prima facie case.                                            conviction.
           [b] The decision was taken by Duckenfield, witli the agreement o f              (h) This identifies the prosecutor’s alleged basis for manslaughter against Mr Murray.
           acquiescence o f Murray.




      CD                                                                                                                                                       SCI IHDUI.fi A - 1/7
      CD
      CD
      CD
      cn
      to
                                                                                                                               •   __________________________________

    13       Witness statements already provided to the defence...provide cogent              This must refer l<> the .18 witness statements Hilton (1) to Lang (38). The statements
             evidential support for manslaughter/misfeasance allegations, combined            do not support the claim to cogent evidence o f manslaughter or misfeasance. There is
             with admissions o f fact by each defendant. The same is repealed as to           nothing ‘new’ in the statements.
             negligence in §16.                                                               The defendants’ statements and evidence have always been available. Fully
                                                                                              considered by INQIJIKY, DI’P (1990), SCRUTINY._______________________________

    14       Elements o f manslaughter.                                                       No admission as to individual criminal liability in respect o f any element.

    15       Taylor found, and inherent in acceptance o f liability by SYP in negligence      Muddle. Admissions by SYP in civil proceedings have no relevance to prosecution
             cases, that police were under duty, in breach, and causation. Frost.             o f individuals. Corporate civil liability is different from individual culpable homicide

               ‘Conspicuous features’ in 35 (sic) statements:                                 (a) Not new. Fact well-known to INQUIRY: §230 “Since pens 3 and 4 were full by
               [a] 1988 - police diverted spectators from tunnel;                             2.50 pm, the tunnel should have been closed off whether gale C was to be opened or
               lb] “The unedited statements o f White and Lang ... prove the same, and        not. The exercise was a simple one and had been carried out in 1988 ... Unfortunately,
               suggest that it had been the practice o f senior officers to ensure that the   the 1988 closure seems to have been unknown to the senior officers on duty at the
               tunnel was closed when the pens were full...                                   time. It did not figure in the debriefing notes. It therefore had no influence on the
               [c] could easily be seen from steps near control box;                          planning for 1989,’’
               [d] this evidence ‘suppressed’ until 1998.                                     |b] A most serious distortion o f what the statements said. Insp. WHITE: (p. 100-101)
                                                                                              “Although on rare occasions in the past 1 have used the gates nearest the concourse to
                                                                                              control How away from the tunnel around to the south pen. I did this only for a few
                                                                                               moments as a psychological support to turn the fans round to the south pen. I would
                                                                                               not use them for any length o f time as when they are in the closed position they would
                                                                                              be an obstruction in an emergency evacuation situation as they wqjild have to be
                                            t                                                 opened against the crowd and also because this is the only ingress/ egress for fans in
                                                                                              the central pens to get to the snack bar and toilet.” SCRUTINY, p.208.
                                                                                               P.C.LANG: (p. 165) [1988] “From approximately 2.30pm (1430) the area outside the
                                                                                              pens contained a large number of people and at the stairs there was an occasional
                                                                                               ‘rush’ but sufficient stewards were on duty to funnel the fans into a fairly orderly
                                                                                              queue. Sometime between 2.45 (1445) and 2.50 (1450) I received an order to closs
                                                                                               the gates at the top o f the tunnel leading to the central pen and remain at these gates
                                                                                               to prevent entry by any further fans into the central pen. 1 closed the right hand gate
                                                                                               and remained at this post directing fans to the wing entrance.... 1 do not know who
                                                                                               gave the order to close these gates or why the order was given."
                                                                                               [c] Not new. View from control box was established by INQUIRY: §23 I. This is
                                                                                               accepted by 11l;SG in §19.
                                                                                               [d] The facts were not suppressed.
i
         o                                                                                                                                                         SCHEDULE A -2/7
         o
         o
         CD
         *<?
         o
                                                             (




      18     fa] Evidence o f how fans entered the tunnel and the central pens after Gate    fa) None o f this is ‘new evidence’.
             C opened.
                                                                                             |l>] I his is not what Guest said. Hie words in our italics have been added. The
            [b] P.C.Guest said that at 2.40 it was not going to be possible to
                                                                                             witness is dead. I lis .statement will not be admissible.
            accommodate the crowd outside the Leppings Lane entrance in those
            pens."

     19     Murray had been on duty in 1988 in the Control llox. 1le culpably failed
                                                                                            1he lust sentence asserts nothing new. Mr Murray’s position in 1988 and 1989 has
            in 1989 to give the proper and obvious advice.
                                                                                            been known throughout. The second sentence is assertion not proof.
    20
                                                                                            Nothing new. All o f this has been well known throughout.
    23      Further witnesses.
y   ... .
                                                                                            Not disclosed.
    24
                                                                                            None o f this can affect the Director’s decision. The advice to SYP has come from
                                                                                            CPS and conforms with authority.
    26        It has been an important part o f the prosecutor’s approach to the
                                                                                             I his is a spurious justification. Nothing that IIFSG has now which it did not have
            Director’s current review, and o f our justification for bringing criminal
                                                                                            pre-Scrutiny adds anything o f material significance to the facts which have been
            proceedings in 1998, that the HFSG has been deprived o f critical
                                                                                            established since the INQUIRY INTERIM REPORT (August 1989). Sec Schedules
            information, statements and documents about the disaster for nine years ”
                                                                                            analysing the statements upon which the private prosecutor relies.
    31      [a] Documents made available by Home Secretary in 1998 permitted
                                                                                            |a) 111is is the SCRUTINY material, all examined by Lord Justice Stnart-Smith.
            HFSG to embark with confidence on prosecutions,
            fb] Information now available undermines Inquest verdicts o f accidental
                                                                                            [bj I lie SCRIJ11NY conclusion after consideration o f the same material was exactly
            death, and calls into question validity o f previous investigations             the opposite.




     o
     o
     o                                                                                                                                                         SCHEDULE A - 3/7
     CD

     K*.
              The decision to prosecute.                                              These paragraphs expose the reality of the prosecutor’s approach, and demonstrate
     32-35
                                                                                      the implausihility ofthe current claims to have further new evidence:
                                                                                      *         the Scrutiny conclusions were rejected and ignored, §3 1; (by implication, so
                                                                                                 were the views o f the 1lome Secretary, the Director and the A-G as to the
                                                                                                 finality o f the Scrutiny Report);
                                                                                      *         the decision to prosecute was taken before considering any o f the Scrutiny
                                                                                                 material which was to be made available, (despite conceding the importance
                                                                                                 of not making any decision without first doing that), §32;
                                                                                      *         Leading Counsel advised that prosecutions were justified on the basis o f the
                                                                                                 INQUIRY findings, §33; (this involves that his advice purported to override
                                                                                                 the 1990 advices o f leading counsel to the DPI’, the decision o f the DPP, and
                                                                                                 the Scrutiny conclusions);
                                                                                      ■         after counsel was instructed to formulate charges on the basis o fth e Taylor
                                                                                                findings, examination o f the Scrutiny material disclosed sustained
                                                                                                 suppression o f the truth beyond the allegations which had led to the
                                                                                                 SCRUTINY, §35.
                                                                                       It is obvious that some pretext o f further, post-SCRUTINY, fresh evidence would
                                                                                       have to he claimed in purported justification of private summonses.

     36-37    Editing o f statements: 24.8.98 documents and Annex D                   This argument is contrived to overcome the two factors which most clearly show the
      39      [a] led to DPP and counsel being misled in 1990;                        prosecutions to be unjustified: the 1990 decisions and the SCRUTINY conclusions.
              [b] Lord Justice Stuart-Smith also misled on subject;                   The spurious nature o f the claims is demonstrated by careful analysis ofthe
              [c] policy o f withholding information on negligence from INQUIRY and   statements now relied on: sec SCHEDULES II and C.
              PCA.

      AO-42   Sharpies and Hatfield                                                   |a) Sharpies’ statement does not seek to exculpate either defendant. Inconceivable
              [a] deliberate plot to place Sharpies’ statement between those of       that experienced leading counsel and the DPP were influenced by juxtaposition, or
              Duckenfield and Murray in Master Witness List to influence reader       that anyone could have thought they might be.
              against prosecutions;                                                   [b] Something sinister seems to be hinted at here, but the author does not seem to
              [b] Hatfield’s undisclosed statement was placed last but one in MWL.    know what. The MWL position seems to contradict the theory advanced in §‘11.

I




I:
j'
1
!             CD                                                                                                                                            SCI IHDULIi A - *1/7
              CD
              CD
              O
              cO
                                                                                          Fanciful speculation that the report of a witness for SYP in contribution proceedings
43-48    Philips Report
                                                                                          has inlliienced the 1990 decisions not to prosecute.
         [a] Report is dated ‘August 1990’ , same month as DPP decided not to
                                                                                          [a] An irrational association o f unrelated events, based upon coincidence of timing.
         prosecute, §43; date o f report is significant. Counsel advised against
                                                                                          [b] Persistent speculation in the face o f contra-indications.
         prosecution on 6 August 1990, but “contribution hearings” pending.
                                                                                          [c] Unsubstantiated speculation. Irrelevant issue.
         [b] Not known to HFSG whether DPP saw report. Not on list of
         documents considered by DPP in 1990. Maybe DPP saw other documents.
         Maybe report incorporated into W/Midlands Report.
         [c] Philips misled.
                                                                                          [a] The statements were edited to cxclude opinion. This could not have influenced
49-53    Selective supply o f information to DPP
                                                                                          DPP because not admissible.
         [a] edited statements;
                                                                                          [b] the illusion of ‘new evidence’ by suggesting the committal will be based largely
         [b] provisional selection for committal: only 7 in MW1., 8 at Inquest, 2 at
                                                                                          on evidence not considered before; there is nothing ‘new’ in the 38 statements; [m
         Inquiry;
         [c] DPP only considered about 12% o f statements generated in Inquiry;           fact ‘I gave evidence to the Inquiry]*,
                                                                                          [c]/[d] an illusion of inadequate consideration based on an (inaccurate) manipulation
         [d] partial (=. biased) selection o f documents submitted to DPP;
                                                                                          of statistics; inconceivable that DPP and counsel did not have an appropriate sample
         [e] SYP have carefully withheld important material from DPP and
                                                                                          of statements in 1990; (see § 5 .4 o f our accompanying representations).
         Coroner, adverse to SYP and the defendants.
                                                                                          [c] prejudicial .speculation.
                                                                                           The whole question of editing o f statements, using sample statements and witnesses,
                                                                                          the decision ofthe DPP in' 1990 was considered thoroughly by the SCRUTINY.

                                                                                           Continuation of a long-running campaign to challenge the Inquest verdicts.
 54-55   Selective supply o f information to Coroner
                                                                                           [a] Judgments in R -v- H.M.Coroner f o r South Yorkshire, exp, Stringer [5 November
                                                                                           1993) arc attached.
                                                                                           [b] The conduct ofthe Inquests was carefully reconsidered by the SCRUIINY.

                                                                                           Mr Murray cannot comment.            ____ _________________ _____________________
 56-91    Control o f material
                                                                                           [a] The conclusion docs not follow from the stated facts.
 92-95    Further significance o f Phillips
                                                                                           [b] It is a relevant part ofthe background that Inquest verdicts did not find unlawful ^
          [a] “In this way, the inquest, ostensibly objective and dispassionate, is now
                                                                                           killing. The defendant is entitled to rely upon that as part of his argument to the DPP.
          shown to have been manipulated by South Yorkshire police for their own
          ends, and by West Midlands police."                                              The extravagant rhctoric in §95 is o f concern.
          [b] “For this reason, the defendants are not entitled to rely upon the-
          inquest verdicts to put an end to this prosecution."




                                                                                                                                                               SC H IiD U U i A   -5/7
                                                                 •                                                  •
96-         Further argument about disclosure to a private prosecutor.             Mr Murray cannot comment.
109

no          Prejudicial Publicity                                                  fa] Factors affecting whether defendants will have a fair trial under a private
            [a] matter forjudge or magistrate;                                     prosecmion are relevant to the Director’s power to intervene and discontinue. The
            [b] “minor" compared to that West, Maxwells, Bulger case, the Krays,   McGovern dramatisation was calculated to prejudice the public’s perception o f the
            Guinness, proposed Lockerbie defendants, Moors murderers, and many     role o f police officers in the tragedy.
            others;                                                                [b] There are clear indications that further public prejudice against the defendants will
            [c] 1989 prejudice against Liverpool supporters never dispelled.       be deliberately created in the period leading up to committal hearings and any
                                                                                   subsequent trial:
                                                                                   ■          The Manic Street Preachers. On 14 September 1998, this very well known
                                                                                             pop group released an album containing a track entitled “S.Y.M.M.”, whose
                                                                                              lyrics refer to ‘South Yorkshire Mass Murderer’, with an undoubted link to
                                                                                             the Hillsborough tragedy by reference to the McGovern dramatisation o f the
                                                                                               1989 events. This group featured prominently in events run by MFSG in
                                                                                              May 1997 to raise funds in support ofthe prosecutions.
                                                                                   ■          A splinter group called Hillsborough Survivors and Relatives and
                                                                                             Supporters fo r Justice Campaign has recently been formed. On 17
                                                                                              September 1998, the Yorkshire Evening Post (circulation in the Leeds and
                                                                                              West Riding areas) reported a message inviting support from people living
                                                                                              in Yorkshire. A spokesman was quoted as saying the Group aimed to take “a
                                                                                              more proactive approach”, and the report added that the group is planning to
                                                                                              demonstrate outside Leeds Magistrates’ Court next montlfat the next stage
                                                                                              of a private prosecution against two former senior police officers by families
                                                                                              who hold them responsible for the tragedy. 'Hie pressure group message
                                                                                             amounts to an invitation to persons in Yorkshire to support the
                                                                                             demonstration now that proceedings are to be in Leeds, and not in Liverpool
                                                                                             as the I1FSG intended when summonses were issued in Sefton.
                                                                                   [c] This ‘tit for tat’ argument is unbecoming.

111-7       Limitations o f Stuart-Smith Report




      o
      o                                                                                                                                               SCIII-DUUiA -6/7
      o
      ra
      Nf
      i>u
                                                               1


  III         Scrutiny conclusions on ‘‘new evidence’’ are not significant, because            Fntirely wrong anil seriously misleading. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith examined
              confined to that tendered as new in 1996 when existence of edited                approximately 100 amended statements. In 74 the amendment was o f no
              statements was unknown; starved o f evidence; one example only (l-Yost)          consequence. In 26, comment and opinion had been excluded. In 5, factual matters
              offered to Scrutiny by a third party; scale o f editing now revealed exceeds     were excluded which arguably should not have been. In 4, factual matters implicit in
              anything shown to Stuart-Smith L.J.                                              comment arguably should not have been excluded. See SCRUTINY Report §§78-88,
              Also §112: conclusions about edited statements seriously wrong.                  pp.78-80. See further detail in SCRUTINY, Appendix 7, pp.205-210; Appendix 8,
                                                                                               pp.211-12.
                                                                                               Note important conclusions at §§104, 105, p.64.

  112         Caution in accepting facts in Report.                                            Nit picking.

< 113         [a] Sandra Stringer.                                                             This § contains unrelated propositions.
              [b] Adomako.                                                                     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith did not misunderstand the law.

  114         “The Stuart-Smith report is itself economical with information.’’                We do not speculate as to what is implied by this comment. If the complaint is that
                                                                                               the 1990 Advice of counsel has not been disclosed, that could have been shortly
                                                                                               stated, but the explanation is obvious.

  IIS         “The knowledge available to the HFSG now, from the 35 (sic) statements,           This proposition cannot stand in the face o f the Scrutiny examination o f statements,
              the Master Witness List, and the edited statements, proves that material         the conclusions, and the analysis o f the so-called further ‘new evidence’ relied on to
              was not available [to the DtM5], and information o f a critical kind had been    justify the prosecutions.
              withheld.’’

  117         [a] Result o f SCRUTINY vyould have been very different; Haws and                [a] There is no basis for this assertion.
              partiality o f previous investigations would have been exposed.                  |b] The prosecutor has been asked to say whether it is intended to call 1louldsworth
              [bj Account given by Houldsworth set out in full, and evidence criticised,       either at committal or at any subsequent trial. Response awaited.
              [c] Report does not mention conversations                                        1c] Factually wrong. The Lord Justice spoke to neither defendant.

 IIS-         Frustration o f Home Secretary’s order fo r disclosure.                           [a] The whole purpose o f the Scrutiny was to investigate allegations o f this sort. It did
 120          [a] 119. Justified b elief o f the Liverpool families: manipulated and cheated    so thoroughly and found no basis for the beliefs which leading counsel describes as
              over years; DPP misled in 1990; course o f justice perverted.                    justified. Nothing revealed since warrants the conclusion that the beliefs are justified.
              [b] 120. Distribution.                                                            [b| The distribution to members o f parliament smacks o f an attempt to bringing
                                                                                                political pressure to hear on the decision.

 121                                                                                           It would be a serious injustice to allow the prosecution to continue.



        era
        CD
                                                                                                                                                                     SCIIHD U LE A      -7/7
        O
        CD
        •<!
                                                     /




SCHEDULE B - RESPONSE TO CLAIMS ABOUT WITNESSES IN LETTER 24.8.98


 Witness [tab]                       Claim - per letter 24.8.98                                                                Response

                 ‘Careful excisions o f factual matters adverse to SY police.’             In context, this is a comment about lack o f contact with Police Control or a senior
[4] Holmes
                 Page 24, last sentence.                                                   officer about action required in the confusion following the events which took
                                                                                           place. AITERMATII. INQUIRY.

 [5] K.Frost     ‘Careful excisions o f factual matters adverse to SY police.’ Page 35,    AFTERMATH. INQUIRY.
                 Penultimate sentence. Comment about nobody organising the injured.

 [6] Wilson      ‘Careful excisions o f factual matters adverse to SY police.’ Page 50,    NOT MATERIAL. INQUIRY.
                 third sentence. Impression about number o f foot officers at Leppings
                 Lane and on train escort.

 [7] Guest       At pages 63 and 68. Obvious at 2.40pm that crowds outside L/Lane           This witness died before the Inquest. 1le was never cross-examined. 1lis
                 could not be accommodated. Would have been obvious to Defendants.         statement would not be admissible at committal or in a trial.
                 SYP case at Inquest that overcrowding not evident before 3.00pm.          ‘Not sufficient room for all to be accommodated’ is ambiguous. The witness
                 Coroner took that view.                                                   never said “in those pens" [implying the central pens] as claimed by leading
                                                                                           counsel in submissions § 18. The Inquiry found that the tragedy occurred because
                                                                                           the Gate C crowd were admitted to the tunnel and thus to the central pens. It was
                                                                                           never found that they could not have been accommodated in the West Stand at all,
                                                                                           which is what Guest’s statement suggests. INQUIRY. -

 [8] Titterton   Removal o f important factual observations ... going to heart of all      The material ‘removed’ at pages 85-89 adds nothing at all to the evidence fully
                 investigations.                                                           considered by INQUIRY.

  [9] White      Deletion o f passages on pp 100-101. White would always monitor build     Evidence has always established that there was a view o f the pens from the
                 up in L/Lane pens by climbing steps to control box (occupied ... by the   Control Box. INQUIRY. INQUEST. SCRUTINY [§51. Extract from Mr Murray
                 two defendants and others) to get a good view. Can be no honest           at Inquest: “We had a good view o f the terraces from the Control Box...". §52.
                 reason for deletion o f this evidence. [See also Claims under             Lord Justice Stuart-Smith expressed surprise that Counsel had not seen lit to draw
                 Woodcock.]                                                                this passage to his attention.]




                                                                                                                                                     SCHEDULE B- 1/2
        O
        O
        O                              .

        O
       •<1
                                                                                                                (




[10] Woodcock     Demonstrates central importance o f deletions from While. While             Woodcock says: “He told me that his serial usually got the job of putting the
                  (p. 112) normally diverted spectators from central pens, but on this        crowd in the different pens at the rear o f the goalmouth, working lioin the outside
                  occasion was told not to. If true proves statement of Hcttison wrong.       to the centre, but for some reason he’d been told to let the fans find their own
                  Issue at heart o f case. SYP claim 1988 diversion from central pens         level, on this occasion, resulting in too many going into the area immediately
                  unknown to senior officers. 1988 events prove foreseeability: Obvious       behind the goal.” (p. 112)
                  relevance to manslaughter. Honest course would have been to ask             What Woodcock says White told him is not proof o f anything against Mr Murray.
                  White about Woodcock’s account. Instead, passages in both were               The prosecutor’s complaint about how these statements were handled is not proof
                  excised and truth suppressed. Seven page statement of White is in           either.
                  MWL. May have been first statement submitted with lines deleted.
                  [Further argument based on Wilson.]

[i 1] Pattison    Important deletions of factual observations adverse to interests of SYP.    P. 123 Penultimate para. AFTERMATH.

[12] Tissington   Important deletions o f factual observations adverse to interests of SYP.   P .I41 “1 remember saying ... lynched through it." P. 144 last para.
                                                                                              AFTERMATI1.

[13] Lang         ‘Neither the important matters at the end o f page 163 in the six page      [A] It is correct that the last 7 lines on page 163 are not repeated in the statement
                  statement’ (sic, there are five pages), nor any o f the statement o f 2nd   at pages 167-171. There arc two points: [a] comment that opening Gate C
                  June 1989, appears in the five page amended report at pages 167 to 171      transferred the problem inside the ground and would need a lot more PC’s to
                  o f the file.’                                                              control it; (this adds nothing to the conclusions o f INQUIRY, INQUEST or
                  MWL shows 5 (possibly 4) page statement sent to DPP.                        SCRU TINY), and [b] comment that one Serial was employed in 1989 against two
                                                                                              in 1988.
                  (See also HFSG Representations §17; reference WHITE & LANG;                 [M] The contents o f the statement 2 June 1989 about 1988 control o f the tunnel
                  argument that evidence suppressed.)                                         and the order to close the gates to the central pens were not deleted from that
                                                                                              statement. Although the 1988 evidence is not contained within the subsequent
                                                                                              statement at pages 167-173, it is substantially repealed in the statement at p. 166
                                                                                              (dated 30 June 1990).

[14] Kennedy      Important deletions of factual observations adverse to interests o f SYP.   P. 176 "Several senior officers...lacking in directing the officers there towards
                                                                                              useful purpose." AFTERMATH.

[15] Dunn         Important deletions o f factual observations adverse to interests of SYP.   P. 189 “1 was on duty at the same Semi-Final...unable to assess the situation
                                                                                              correctly and out swiftly from I..." (sic) Adds nothing to findings o f INQUIRY,
                                                                                              INQUEST or SCRU TINY. Comment about observations from control room add
                                                                                              nothing.

[16] Royle        Important deletions o f factual observations adverse to interests of SYP.   P. 198 - last 4 lines. Adds nothing.


                                                                                                                                                         SCIII-DIJM- Ii- 2/2
      o
      CD
      CD
      CD
      <Z
                                                                                                             I




SCHEDULE C - RESPONSE TO CLAIMS ABOUT SPECIFIC WITNESSES: ANNEX I)


   Witness                    Claim    - [-]   page reference in Annex D                                                     Response

(1) Booth        [1] [a] deletion at [3].                                                   [a] Immaterial.
                 [b] deletion at [7-9]: references to 1988 in statement 1.6.89 not          [b] Observations not new material. The 1988 circumstances were fully
                 incorporated into amended report [10-13].                                  considered at INQUIRY.

(2) Bcresford    [ 14] [a] deletion and 2 amendments [21 ]                                  |a]Not new. Communications issues were fully considered at INQUIRY.
                 [b] amendment and deletion [22 and 31; 23]                                 [hJChanges and deletion o f no substance. Aftermath.

 (3) Bradley     [33] deletion and amendment.                                               Aftermath.

 (4) Hubbard     [40] [a] deletion re Wain.                                                 [a] Immaterial.
                 [b] report not incorporating 1988 experience. Implication of a queuing     (b) Nothing new in this. INQUIRY fully considered 1988 policing: §214-5.
                 system.

 (5) McDonnell   [56] [a] amendment; [b] deletion                                           [a] No change o f substance; [b] aftermath

 (6) Powell      [65] deletion                                                              Not new. Issue fully considered by INQUIRY/SCRUTINY

 (7) Eustis      [76] deletion. Complaint that Stuart-Smith LJ did not comment on           SCRU TINY p.208. As indicated at [76], the Report quoted the passage
                 “how Liverpool fans always congregate very heavily behind the goal         describing the witness’s impressions o f 1988 conditions in the pens where
                 area".                                                                     Liverpool fans had congregated. Stuart-Smith LJ must hflve been fully
                                                                                            aware o f the rest o f the deletion, which adds nothing to the substance o f
                                                                                            what was quoted. This witness was fully considered by the SCRU TINY.

 (8) Crawford    [86] [a] deletion.                                                         fa] The claim is unfounded. Scrutiny Report (p.209) does not quote the
                 None o f statement 31.5.89 (dealing with 1988) was incorporated into       passage cited, but it does refer to it: “But his past experience relating to the
                 amended report.                                                            shutting o f the centre pens is a question o f fact".
                 Complaint that Stuart-Smith LJ fails to refer to deletion o f passage      Clear that Stuart-Smith LJ fully considered the point.
                 [94]:                                                                      INQUIRY: §230 - fully aware that tunnel had been closed o ff in 1988.
                 “At 1450 hours we had an instruction believed verbal, that no more         SCRU TINY: p .2 19 §9: cited this passage from Inquiry Report.
                 fans were to be allowed into the central pens, therefore' the wooden
                 gate at the rear o f the tunnel was closed denying access. This was done
                 by PC 1278 Lang."                                                          [b] Involves no material change.
                 [b] amendment.

  O                                                                                                                                                     S C I I I i D U I . I - C - 1/3
  CD
  CD
  CD
  ‘vl
  CO
                                                     c

(9)    Brookes    [102] [a] amendment: ‘stressed/adamant’ - Duekenfield.          [a] Not material.
                  [b] deletion: officers’ distress.                               [h] Not material.
                  [c] amendment: ‘centre section was now [too] full.              [c] Not new. INQUIRY: §184 - finding that by 2.52 pm "pens 3 and 4
                  [d] amendment: 2.54 to 2.56.                                    were over-full even by this test. Many were uncomfortable. To allow any
                  [e] deletion [107]                                              more into those pens was likely to cause injuries; to allow in a large stream
                  [f] deletion o f ‘observations’.                                was courting disaster"; §230 - “since pens 3 and 4 were full by 2.50pm, the
                                                                                  tunnel should have been closed o ff whether gate C was to be opened or
                                                                                  not”.
                                                                                  No need for SCRUTINY Report to refer to distinction full/too full.
                                                                                  [cl] Not material.
                                                                                  [e] Not new.
                                                                                  [I'| Not evidence. Comments about kick-off and capacity fully considered
                                                                                  by INQUIRY. Comparison with Manchester United match was considered
                                                                                  by SCRUTINY (P.208)._____________________________ ________________

(10)    Burgess     [ 118] [a] amendment,                                         [a] l-stablishes nothing new: was a factual correction o f an estimated time
                  [b deletion.                                                    or a guess. INQUIRY §66 concluded request came between 2.40-2.45.
                                                                                  Point is that it was established that the call came before gates opened.
                                                                                  [b] Not new. Not material.                                     ______________

(11)    Walpole   [131] [a] deletion: did not hear radio message; packed solid.   [a] Comment about radio message adds nothing. ‘Packed solid’ remained
                                                                                  in the statement in an important sentence: [134] lines 4-7. Considered in
                                                                                  SCRUTINY: P.207.
                                                                                  |l>] Opinion. All factors considered: INQUIRY, INQUKST, SCRU IINY.

(12)Groome        [143] [a] deletion: observations 1030-1230.                     [a] Irrelevant.
                  [b] deletion: re Insp.Calvert.                                  |b] Irrelevant.
                  [cj amendment: ‘over the air’ to ‘from the control room’        [c] Change of no substance. Aftermath.
                  [d] 3 deletions [148-149]                                       [d] Aftermath.
                  [e] deletions numbered (I)-(3), (5)-(l0).                       [e] (1) 0 ) , (5) and (7) considered by SCRUTINY, p.206; (6), (8)-(10)
                                                                                  were comments fully considered in INQUIRY and SCRU 1 INY.

(13) Brophy       [157] deletions.                                                Nothing new. All considered INQUIRY. ___________________ __________




                                                                                                                                            SCIII-DIJLF- C - 2 / 3
       CD
       CD
       CD
       CD
                                                  V




(14) Sanderson   [166] [a] amendment ‘going on’ to ‘being conducted’,                  [a) Change of no substance.
                 jb] 2 insertions.                                                     (b) Neither is'.significant.
                 [c] amendment: changes re technical work done,                        (e) The amendment is an expansion of the technical work carried out. It
                 je] amendment: ‘aboutl440‘ to ‘about 1448*.                           makes no change o f substance.
                 [fj insertion.                                                        (e] Change unexplained. Relevance?
                                                                                       [f] Adds nothing.

(15) Croot       [173] deletions.                                                      Comment, nothing new.

(16) Huckstepp   [194] deletion.                                                       Fully considered by INQUIRY (Huckstepp cross-examined); West
                                                                                       Midlands and SCRUTINY (p.207).
                                                                                       Per SCRUTINY, the unamended statement (7.5.89) was seen by
                                                                                       INQUIRY and W.Midlands.

(17) France      [205] amendment.                                                      No change of substance.

(18) Cammock     [219] [a] amendment,                                                  [a] No change o f substance.
                 [b] deletion.                                                         [!>] Irrelevant.

(19) Bennett     [240] [a] 3 deletions,                                                [a] Nothing new.
                 [b] amendment.                                                        [b] No change o f substance.

(20) Ramsden     [257] deletions at [263] and [267-268],                               [263] Was expressly considered by Stuart-Smith LJ, SCRUTINY p.209.
                 Complaint that Scrutiny Report does not comment on                    [267-8] was opinion which added nothing new.

(21) Hanson      [279] deletion.                                                       Comment. Not new.

(22) Athom       [295] deletion.                                                       Not new.




  CD
  CD
  °                                                                     SCI IKDULI: C - 3/3
  CD
  CO
  CD
                                                                                                                  Headquarters
                                                                                                                  50 kid& U H 2
                                                                                                                  London EC4M TEX



                                                            1                                     D irect Line:   0171-273 1225
                                                                                                  Sw ixhbocrd:    0171-273 SGCO
     Messrs W alker Morris                                                                          Fsaim H e:    0171 -329 8366
     Solicitors                                                                                       D X S o:    3CC350 Ludgste EC4

     DX 12051 Leeds 24

                                                                              Your Ref: RBM/MT/MURRAY

l_                                                          j                  1 February 1999




     Dear Sirs

     A D L IN G T O N v D U C K E N FIE LD A_\D M URRAY

     You wrote to the Crown Prosecution Service on IS December 1998, following the receipt of a
     letter from the CPS, also dated 18 December 1998, informing you of the Service’s decision
     not to exercise its power under Section 6(2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 19S5 to take
     over the criminal proceedings against your client with a view to discontinuing them.

     You ask for farther information: first, as to the factual matters on which the CPS relied,
     identifying which parts o f the evidence is “new” since the Crown last considered the case; and
     secondly, as to the way in" which the Service applied the" Code for Crown Prosecutors in
     deciding whether to intervene.

     These questions indicate that you misunderstand the' factors that the CPS considers when
     deciding whether to take over a private prosecution at the request*of a defendant, with a view
     to discontinuance. It may help if I indicate again in broad terms the approach that the Service
     adopts to these decisions.

     As you know, the Code for Crown Prosecutors sets out the general principles applied by the
     Service when (inter alia) deciding whether to continue a prosecution it has taken over; or
     whether to institute proceedings, or to advise the police whether to do so. It is correct that the
     CPS decided in 1997 that the evidence available at that time was not sufficient, in its view, to
     provide a realistic prospect o f the conviction o f either your client or M r Duckenfield for any
     offence.    However, it does not follow that, when considering the evidence and the
     representations submitted by the private prosecutor, and by yourselves on behalf o f your
     client, the CPS should seek merely to identify whether there is now any new evidence
     sufficient to provide a realistic prospect o f a conviction. The decision whether to intervene in




                            Crown Prosecution Service   •   Working in the interests of justice
a private prosecution with a view to terminating it calls for different considerations to be
applied. It is quite possible for a private prosecution to continue, notwithstanding that the
CPS is not satisfied, on the basis o f its own assessment of the strength of the evidence that
the evidence would pass the evidential sufficiency test in the Code (that there should be a
“realistic prospect o f a conviction”).

In broad terms, the reason for this is that Section 6(1) of the Prosecution o f Offences Act
1985, the Act which established the Service’s powers and duties, specifically preserved fee
right o f private individuals and prosecuting authorities or bodies other than the CPS to bring
criminal proceedings. This right is subject (among other limitations) to the limitation in
Section 6(2) that the CPS m ay nevertheless take over the proceedings with a view either to
conducting or to terminating those proceedings.

Private prosecutors are not bound to apply the Code for Crown Prosecutors when deciding
whether to institute proceedings, nor do the courts apply the evidential sufficiency test in the
Code when deciding whether there is a case to answer. The Service therefore recognises that
it is not appropriate to intervene to terminate a private prosecution without good reason. That
general principle has recently been endorsed by the Law Commission in its Consultation
Paper No. 149 “Consents to Prosecution” (see paragraphs 6.3 and 6.4).

The Service’s policy is that it will not take over a private prosecution with a view to
terminating it unless one or more o fthe following applies:

 (i)    there is clearly no case to answer. A private prosecution started in these circumstances
        would be unfounded and ought not to be permitted to continue; or

(ii)    the public interest factors tending against prosecution clearly outweigh those in favour
        (examples might be where the prosecution is malicious, or vexatious; or the offence is
        one for which the defendant should clearly have been cautioned; or where, although
        the offence may be serious, the defendant is terminally ill); or

(iii)   the prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests o f justice.

 In this case, I took the decision not to intervene. After careful consideration, I concluded in
 respect o f the charges o f manslaughter and wilful neglect to perform a public duty (which, for
 the avoidance o f doubt, were each considered against each individual separately) that I could
 not say that there is clearly no case to answer. It was not right, therefore, for the Service to
 take over the proceedings with a view to terminating them.

I should add that, against that background and after specifically considering the appropriate
course to take in these circumstances, I concluded further that it would not be right to
intervene in respect o f the one remaining charge against M r Duckenfield, o f attempting to
pervert the course o f justice, albeit I had formed the view that there was clearly no case to
answer on that charge alone. The charge o f attempting to pervert the course o f justice is a
serious one, particularly when levelldd against someone who was, at the relevant time, a
serving, senior police officer. Nevertheless, in the context o f the case as a whole that charge
is not the gravamen o f the criminality alleged against Mr Duckenfield and I concluded that
m y approach to that charge should be led by my conclusions on the charges o f manslaughter
and wilful neglect to perform a public duty.
I also considered whether, nevertheless, there were o v e r r i d e public i n - r , , , r, ,      ,.
shou d lead to the Service intervening with a view to discontinuance, but I c a i S ’To ^
conclusion that any public interest factors tending against orosecution did not                       i'
outweigh those m favour; nor did I consider that the prosecution is clearly likely ,0 d i S !
the interests oi justice.                                                               *     aarnage

The Crown Prosecution Service is not obliged in law to provide detailed reasons for if,
                    t     ? y .a nalysis 0 f Lhe evidence- However, in the circumstances o f this
p c irc u la r case I consider it appropnate to explain the factors taken into account in more detsM
tnan was contained in the Service’s letter dated 18 December 1998.

I have w ritten in similar terms to those representing Mr Duckenfield and enclose a cony o '
that letter, for your information. I have sent copies o f both letters to Ms Adlington.

Yours faithfully




C vv p N E'w .tLL
Director, Casework




                                                                                                   0 0 0 0 5 !)
22/03 '99 MON 17:39 FAX                                                                                                !;S?dg002




                                                                                              (i) c.w .p. iVeweI1
                                                                                                (2) F ia t Affidavit
                                                                                (3) Sworn on behalf of Responder.:
                                                                                             (4) Swora 22.3.99.

                                                                                                       CO/856/cg
           I ^ I H S J ilG H   C O U R T n ? H .:s -r r -


                : “ V 1S_ 3 HNTC H PTVT^IOV



           b e t w e e n       ,


                                                               REGINA



                                                DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
                                                                                                    Rsspondpp;
                                                              Ex parte
                                                    DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD
                                                                and
                                                      BERNARD DEAN MURRa Y




                                                            AFFIDAVIT




      i f ^ S ^ T ?.P E E R W ILL IA M PAUL N EW ELL, of 50 Ludgaa Hill. London EC4M TEX,
      M A SS OATH and say as follows:


      1.         I am Director o f Casework of the Crown Prosecution Service at the above address and

                 it was I who took the decision in this case on behalf of the CPS and the D PP not to

                 intervene in the private prosecution against Messrs Duckenfield and M urray. I refer

                 to my letters of 1 February 1999 to the solicitors for M r Duckenfield and M r Murray,

                 in which I sought to set out the reasons which led me to that-decision. I am now asked

                 to elaborate on my conclusion that any public interest factors tending against
                                                                                                  '*•■'• •   ■• © 0 0 3
22/03 '33 HON 17:59 FAS




                prosecution did not clearly outweigh those in favour and on my conclusion in relation

                to the spec:nc charge against Mr Duckenneld alone of atempting to pervert the course

                of justice.




         PUBLIC INTEREST FACTORS

         2.    As I now recall, the public Interest factors tending against prosecution which I

               considered were as follows.

               (1)      Previous reviews of the case, in particular those carried out by the DPP when               i^ |

                        considering the question whether criminal proceedings should be taken against

                       Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray and the more recent report of Lord Justice

                       Smart-Smith.

               (2)     The feet that the Applicants had been told on previous occasions that the DPP

                       did not intend to prosecute.

               (3)     The delay which had cccun-ed between the commission of the alleged offences

                       and the commencement o f this prosecution and its likely effect on the

                       Applicants,_although I took the view that delay may be offset by the seriousness

                       of the alleged offences (as is reflected in paragraph 6.5(d) of the Code for

                       Crown Prosecutors) (“the Code”).
                                                                                              x
               (4)     The effect of the delay on the evidence, for example in terms of the potential

                       impairment of the recollections of witnesses.

               (5)     The assertion made on behalf of Mr Murray of ill-health, although I noted that

                       no medical evidence had been put forward in support of this assertion and that,

                       as again reflected in the Code (at paragraph 6.5(e)), ill-health may be offset by



                                                       2
•<   -   22/03 4 " ‘^ O N 1 7 : 5 9 FAX '           1             -                                                      IfiOO-:




                                        the seriousness of the offence.




                     *'             aSair-3t       Actors tending against prosecution, there was in my view one

                             extremely important factor in favour of prosecution, namely the very serious nature of

                             the alleged offences, in particular, the alleged offences of manslaughter.         In my

                             opinion, the allegation that two senior police officers were responsible for the deaths

                             of a number of people as a result of criminal negligence was a very grave allegation.




                    4.      Paragraph 6.2 of the Code reflects the considerable weight attached by the CPS to the .

                            seriousness of the alleged offence when seeking to strike the right balance as to the

                            laciors for and against prosecution. (I refer also to the opening words of paragraph

                            6.4).     Having carefully considered the factors tending against prosecution and this

                            extremely important factor in favour of it, I came to the firm conclusion that the factors

                            tending against prosecution did not.clearly outweigh what I considered-to be the very

                            strong public interest factor in favour of prosecution.




                   THE ADDITIONAL CHARGE AS AGAINST MR DUCKENFIELD ALONE

                   5.      I was folly aware of the seriousness of this additional charge.         I also tentatively

                           concluded that partial intervention (i.e. intervening in order to take over one charge but

                           not intervening in relation to the other charges) was "in law open to the CPS and I

                           proceeded on that assumption. However, the existing policy did not cover the situation

                           which arose in this case, namely where the conclusion was reached that there was

                           clearly a case to answer in relation to some of the charges but not in relation to others.



                                                                      3
•22/03 '99 MON 13:00                                   >-’v '            -        ■         -r                 IflOOc




                 (I can say that with some confidence, since I had overall responsibility for fo
                                                                                               rmu
                                                                                                 latin
                                                                                                     g

                 the policy). I had therefore to consider the question which arose in relation to this

                 additional charge without the benefit of any specific or settled policy. Having carefully

                 considered the question, I concluded that it was in fact inappropriate to intervene only

                to take over (with a view to discontinuing) this additional charge.




          6.    First, partial intervention was not, in my view, either appropriate or desirable. It

                seemed to me that the DPP should either intervene so as to take over the proceedings

                in their entirety or not at all. To have intervened partially would still have left criminal

                proceedings in place in relation to the other charges which included the even more

                serious charge of manslaughter.       Secondly, I took into account the fact that Mr

                Duckenneld would not be left without any remedy in relation to this additional charge.

                On the contrary, he would be entitled to invite the Magistrates’ Court to dismiss it on

                the basis that there was no case to answer. Thirdly, the charge arose, out of essentially

                the same events as the events which gave rise to the other charges and thus those events

                would be scrutinised in any event.              ™




         SWORN at
                                  i CH/U
         this 2Z_ day of March 1999




         Before me,

                                      SoIicitor/gfflHnisgioner-for Oaths




                                                        4
m a s HIGH COURT OF JTJSTTC?

QUEEN'S BENCH PIVT5TON


BETWEEN:


                REGINA

                   -V -



 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
                          Respondent
              Ex parte
   DAVID GODFREY DUCKENHELD
                and
      BERNARD DEAN MURRAY
                                  Anplicants




           AFFIDAVIT




          Treasury Solicitor
        Queen Anne’s Chambers
             28 Broadway
          London SW1H 9JS

        Ref. L98/8265K/SJR/D1

         Counsel’s ref. C.64241
                                                               Case Nos: CO/ 856/99. CO/Q934. .
                                                           r 0 1070/99. CO/1071/99.CO/Q382/99
IN TffT s u p r e m e c o u r t   o f j u d ic a t u r e
DIVISIONAL COURT
                                                                     Roval Courts of Justice
                                                                Strand London. WC2A 2LL

                                                                        Date: 31 March 1999
                                          Before:

                                LORD JUSTICE LAWS
                               M R JUSTICE CRESWELL
                                         and
                                M R JUSTICE LATHAM

                                                R
                                                V


                       THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
                                        ex parte
                                 (1) DUCKENFIELD
                                     (2) MURRAY

                                       R
                                       v
                  (1) SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
                                      and
 P) \NN ADLINGTON (ON BEHALF OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP)
                              (3) DUCKENFIELD
                                 (4) MURRAY
                    (5) HILLSBOROUGH POLICE AUTHORITY
                                    ex parte
                THE CHIEF CONSTABLE OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE


            Mr Michael Harrison QC and Mr Simon Myerson (for Duckenfield & Murray)
          (instructed by Wbkworth Sherwood for Duckenfield and Walker Morris for Murray)
         Mr Alun Jones QC and Mr James Lewis (for the Hillsborough Family Support Group)
              Ms Presiley Baxendale QC and Mark Shaw (for the South Yoricshire Police)
                             (instructed by Garretts for the Respondents)
                       Mr P Havers QC (forthe Director of Public Prosecutions)
                                 (instructed by the Treasury Solicitors)
                    Nigel Baker QC and Ms Louise Varty (forthe Chief Constable)



       .TTTDGMENT: APPROVED BY THE COURT FOR
        TTANDTNG DOWN (subject to editorial corrections)
     Judgment: Approved by the Court for handing down
     (subject to editorial corrections)
                                                                                                          \
                                                                              Ex Parte M urray & Duckenfisla^
                                                                R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police '
                                                                    Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



                          R v THE DIRECTO R OF PUBLIC PRO SECUTIO NS
                                            ex parte
 3                                  DUCK ENFIELD & M URRAY

                           R v SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTH O RITY
 6                                            and
                                        ANN ADLINGTON
                                            ex parte
 Q                     (1) THE CH IEF CONSTABLE OF SOUTH YO RK SHIRE
                                  (2) DUCKENFIELD & M URRAY

12
     LORD JUSTICE LAW S

15                   These are linked applications for judicial review which require the court
     to revisit the terrible disaster which took place at the Hillsborough Football Ground at
     Sheffield on 15 April 1989. In what I will call the first case the applicants Mr
18   Duckenfield and Mr Murray (to whom I w ill refer as “D” and “M”), who are retired
     police officers, seek leave to move for judicial review o f the decision o f the Director
     o f Public Prosecutions (“the DPP”) to refuse to take over and discontinue private
21   prosecutions which have been instituted against them by Ann Adlington (“AA”) o n '
     behalf o f the Hillsborough Family Support Group (“the HFSG”). The decision was
     communicated by letter o f 18 December 1998. On 15 March 1999 Latham J adjourned-
24   the leave application to 22 March 1999 and directed that the parties should then be
     ready to proceed with the substantive application if leave were granted. On 22 March
     this court granted leave and proceeded at once to hear the inter partes application. In
27   the second case the Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire (“the CCSY”) seeks to
     challenge a decision o f the South Yorkshire Police Authority (“the SYPA”) made on 5
     February 1999 to the effect that it lacked the legal power to fund the defences o f D
30   and M to the private prosecutions brought by AA, or to fund their prospective judicial
     review applications against the DPP. On 12 February 1999 Latham J granted leave to
     the CCSY, joined AA as second respondent, abridged time and ordered expedition. On
33   24 March 1999 this court (having reserved judgment in the first case the previous day)
     granted leave to D and M to challenge the same decision and, again, proceeded at once
     to hear the inter partes application. We now deliver our judgments in both cases.
36
                    I will first set out the facts material to the first case, which also form the
     necessary background to the second. I will later describe the further facts which are
39   specifically relevant to the second case.

                  The football match at Hillsborough on Saturday 15 April 1989 was the
42   FA Cup semi-final between Liverpool Football Club and Nottingham Forest Football
     Club. In the events which happened 96 people lost their lives. The Divisional
     Commander in charge o f police operations at the match was D, then holding the rank
45   of Chief Superintendent in the South Yorkshire Police Force. The second applicant,

                                  x                     • i -
     Drzr, : D March 1999 12:26
Judgment: Approved bv the Court for handing down                       Ex Pane M urray & Duckenfield
(subject to editorial corrections)                       R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
                                                             Ex Pane South Yorkshire Police Authority




then Superintendent Murray, held the position o f Sub-Divisional Commander and was
also on duty at the match.

              On 17 April 1989 Taylor LJ, as he then was, was appointed by the
government to conduct a public inquiry into the disaster. He heard the oral testimony
of 174 witnesses between 15 May and 29 June 1989, and presented an interim report
on 4 August 1989. He found that the immediate cause o f the gross overcrow'ding
which had taken place, and thus o f the disaster, had been the failure to cut o ff access
to the central pens behind the goal (which were already overfull) when Gate C was
opened. He found also a number o f contributing factors including the condition o f the
ground, police planning, police operations on the day, and the interaction o f parties
responsible for safety issues. Lord Taylor’s final report was delivered on 18 January
 1990 and included a number o f recommendations relating to crowd control and safety
 at sporting events.

              Meanwhile, immediately after the disaster, the W est Midlands Police
 had been appointed to conduct a review o f the policing operations o f the South
 Yorkshire Police. In March 1990 the. W est Midlands Police reported to the DPP. After
 taking the opinion o f two experienced leading counsel the DPP announced on 30
 August 1990 that in his view there was insufficient evidence to justify any prosecution
 for=a criminal offence, relating to the disaster, against any member o f the South
 Yorkshire Police Force. Then from November 1990 to March 1991 HM Coroner for
 South Yorkshire conducted an inquest into the deaths in the course o f which 2 j
 witnesses gave evidence. On 28 March 1991 the Coroner’s jury retamed verdicts ot
 accidental death.

               Disciplinary proceedings for neglect o f duty were instituted against D
  and M by the Police Complaints Authority (“the PCA”). But D retired from the Force
  on 10 November 1991 on medical grounds, and so the proceedings against him tell
  away. On 13 January 1992 the PCA decided not to proceed with the case agarnst M.
  On 27 August 1992 he too retired on medical grounds. Then on 5 November 199:> the
  Divisional0 Court dismissed an application for judicial review brought by family
  members o f those who had died, refusing orders o f certiorari to quash the inquest
  verdict and to require a fresh inquest to be convened.

                 On 5 December 1996 a documentary programme called “Hillsborough”
  was broadcast on ITV. The programme suggested that fresh evidence about the
  disaster had come to lig h t The allegations made in the broadcast were m vestigae     y
  the Crown Prosecution Service between March and May 1997. At length on j
  1997 the Home Secretary announced in Parliament that an independent scrutiny wo
  be undertaken by Stuart-Smith LJ in order to ascertain t o r alia whether thers| was
  evidence relating to the disaster which had not been available to Lord Taylor, or to th
  DPP or the Attorney General for the purposes o f then- discharge o f their statutory
   responsibilities. Stuart-Smith U ’s report was presented to the House o f Commons on
   18 February 1998. Chapter 1 paras 55-57 state:

                                                   -2-

   Draft 30 March 1999 12:26
                                                                              Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield '
      Judgment: Approved by the Court for handing down
                                                                R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police ‘
      (subject to editorial corrections)
                                                                    Ex Pane South Yorkshire Police Authority




                 “55. From my meetings with the bereaved families and their
                 representatives, I am left in no doubt that there was widespread
3                disappointment at the D P P ’s decision not to prosecute. They find it difficult
                 to understand in the light of Lord Taylor’s trenchant criticisms of the South
                 Yorkshire police and the fact that the force had been paying compensation.
6
                 56. W hat the Director of Public Prosecutions had to bear in mind, however,
                 is the significantly different and greater degree of culpability which is
9                involved in manslaughter, or culpable misfeasance in public office, as
                 against the degree of negligence which gives rise to liability, and
                 compensation payments, under civil law. Any prosecution of an individual
12               police officer would have to establish his individual responsibility. It would
                 not be enough simply to prove the composite failure of the police operation.


15               57. The causes of the disaster were many and complex. So far as these two
                 officers [sc D and M] were concerned, the prosecution would have to prove
                 to the high standard required for a criminal conviction that the failure to
18               give the order to close off the tunnel when Gate C was opened amounted to
                 the serious degree of recklessness necessary to constitute m anslaughter.'5

21     Para 5 o f Chapter 7 (“Summary'”) stated:

                  “... I have come to the clear conclusion that there is no basis upon which
24                there should be a further judicial inquiry or a re-opening of Lord Taylor’s
                  inquiry... I do not consider that there is any material which should be
                  placed before the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Police Complaints
27                Authority which might cause them to re-consider the decisions they have
                  already taken.”

30      On the same day, 18 February 1998, the Home Secretary announced in the House that
        he, the Attorney General and the DPP had very carefully considered Stuart-Smith LJ’s
        report, and said: “W e have no reason to doubt his conclusions” .
33
                       The HFSG was clearly not satisfied with this result. There was first an
        abortive attempt on 26 June 1998 by AA to institute criminal proceedings against D
36      and M in the South Sefton Petty Sessional Division. That was given its quietus on
        technical or jurisdictional grounds into which it is unnecessary to go. Then on 13 July
        1998 Miss Adlington laid informations against them before the Leeds Petty Sessional
39      Division, and summonses were accordingly issued by the Stipendiary Magistrate. The
        charges accuse D and M o f the manslaughter o f two o f those who died at
        Hillsborough, John Anderson and James Aspinall, They also allege against both an
42      offence o f “wilful neglect to perform a public duty” ; and in the case o f D, a further
        offence o f attempting to pervert the course o f justice, said to consist in his having lied
        about the circumstances in which Gate C at the football ground became open.
 45
                                                         -3 -
                   ,,- v , 1 9 0 9
         Drift
          Judgm ent: Approved by the Court for handing down                         Ex Parte M urray & Duckenfield
          (subject to editorial corrections)                          R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
                                                                          Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



                        Both D and M made representations to the DPP that he should exercise
          his power under s,6(2) o f the Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985 (“the POA’ ) to take
    3     over the conduct o f the proceedings initiated against them, and then discontinue the
          proceedings under s,23(3). In order to appreciate the contrary positions being taken
          and the issues in the case, it is convenient to set out the relevant statutory provisions at
    6     this stage.

                             Section 3(2) o f the POA provides so far as relevant:
     9
                    "It shall be the duty of the Director -
                   (a) to take over the conduct of all criminal proceedings, other than specified
    12             proceedings, instituted on behalf of a police force (whether by a member of
                   that force or by any other person);
                   (b) to institute and have the conduct of criminal proceedings in any case
^                  w here it appears to him that -

                             (i) the importance or difficulty of the case makes it appropriate that
    18                       proceedings should be instituted by him; or

                              (ii) it is otherwise appropriate for proceedings to be instituted by
    21                       him;

                    (c) to take over the conduct of all binding over proceedings instituted on
    24             behalf of a police force...

                   (d) to take over the conduct of all proceedings begun by summons issued
    27             under s.3 of the Obscene Publications A ct 1959..."

           S.6 provides so far as relevant:
     iO
                    "(1) Subject to subsection (2) below, nothing in this Part shall preclude any
                    person from instituting any criminal proceedings or conducting any
    33              criminal proceedings to which the Director's duty to take over the conduct
                     of proceedings does not apply.

    36              (2) W here criminal proceedings are instituted in circum stances in which the
                     D irector is not under a duty to take over their conduct, he m ay nevertheless
                     do so at any stage."
    39
            S. 10 provides so far as relevant:

    42               “(1) The Director shall issue a Code of Practice for Crown Prosecutors
                     giving guidance on general principles to be applied by them -

     45                        (a) in determining in any case -


            Draft 30 March 1999 12:26
          Judgment: Approved by the Court for handing down
                                                                                        Ex Parte M urray & Duckem'ield •
          (subject to editorial corrections)
                                                                          R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police.*
                                                                              Ex Pane South Yorkshire Police Authority



                                          (i) whether proceedings for an offence should be instituted or,
                                          where proceedings have been instituted, whether they should
 3                                        be discontinued;...

           S.23 provides so far as relevant:
     r*
 D

                     “(1) W here the Director of Public Prosecutions has the conduct of
                     proceedings for an offence, this section applies in relation to the
 9                   prelim inary stages of those proceedings.

                     (2) In this section, 'preliminary' stage’ in relation to proceedings for an
12                   offence does not include -
                                •••


                                (b) in the case of an indictable offence, any stage o f the proceedings
15                              after -
                                          (i) the accused has been committed for trial...

18                  (3) W here, at any time during the preliminary stages of the proceedings,
                    the Director gives notice under this section to the clerk of the court that he
                    does not want the proceedings to continue, they shall be discontinued with
21                  effect from the giving of that notice...”


24                      Representations had first been made to the DPP on behalf o f D and M in
          early July 1998, after the commencement o f the proceedings in the South Sefton Petty
          Sessional Division which proved abortive. In the course o f correspondence the HFSG
27        again contended that it had discovered new evidence, which, it was said, had not been
          before Lord Taylor, the DPP, the Coroner, or Stuart-Smith LJ. At length, after A A ’s
          informations had been laid in the Leeds Petty Sessional Division, the considered views
30        o f the DPP as to the approach to be taken to a request to take over and discontinue a
          private prosecution were set out in a letter to the HFSG on 27 July 1998. The letter did
          not contain a decision, but it explained the DPP’s policy:
33
                    “The policy where proceedings have been commenced by a private
                    prosecutor builds on that contained in the Code for Crown Prosecutors.
36                  The right to bring a private prosecution is preserved by s.6(l)... subject to
                    the power under s.6(2). The CPS will take over a private prosecution where
                    there is a particular need for it do so on behalf of the public...
39                  In the instant case where we have been asked by the defendants to take over
                    the prosecution in order to discontinue it, we would do so if one (or more) of
                    the following circumstances applies:
42
                                •      There is clearly no case to answer. A private prosecution
                                      commenced in these circumstances would be unfounded, and
45                                    would, therefore be an abuse of the right to bring a prosecution.

                                             •-V              -5 -
          Draft 30 March 1999
/
                                                                                          Ex Parte M urray & Duckenfield
             Judgment: Approved bv the Court for handing down
                                                                            R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
             (subject to editorial corrections)
                                                                                Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority




                                  • T he p u b lic interest fa c to rs tending against p ro secu tio n clearly
                                    outw eigh th o se fa c to rs ten d in g in fa vo u r.
    3                             • The prosecu tion is clearly likely to dam age the interests o f justice.
                                  • The prosecution is clearly likely to dam age the interests o f justice.

    5                   The CPS would then regard itself as having to act in accordance with our
                        policy.

    9                  I f none of the above apply there would be no need for the CPS to become
                        involved and w e would not interfere with the private prosecution.

    12                 Ciearly there is a distinction between the 'realistic prospect of conviction
                       test in the Code [the Code for Crown Prosecutors issued by the DPP under
                       s. 10 o f the 1985 Act] and the 'clearly no case to answ er’ test mentioned
    ^                  above. Accordingly w e recognise that there w ill be some cases which do not
    ®                  meet the CPS Code tests where nevertheless w e will not intervene. It has
                        been considered that to apply the Code tests to private prosecutions would
    18                 unfairly limit the right of individuals to bring their own cases.

                         Before this decision can properly be made the CPS must be assured that all
    2   i               relevant material has been considered...

                         Until there has been a. detailed review of the many papers in the case the
    24                  Crown’s position cannot be determined...


    27                     There follow ed very substantial representations from D and M and from
               the HFSG. At length the DPP communicated his decision not to intervene, as I have
               said by letter o f 18 December 1998. The letter merely stated:

    ^                    ‘-"We have considered the evidence, the representations made by the parties
                          and all the relevant circumstances of the case. W e have concluded that we
        33               should not intervene to take over any of the charges.

                The respective solicitors for D and M asked for reasons to be given. Then; follow ed a
        36      letter o f 1 February 1999 (the “reasons lettei” ) from the CPS’ Casework Director to
                M ’s solicitor from which it is necessary to cite at some length.

                           “As you know, the Code for Crown Prosecutors sets out the general
        39
                           principles applied by the Service when (inter alia) deciding whether to
                           continue a prosecution it has taken over; or whether to institute
                           proceedings, or whether to advise the police to do so. It is correct that e
        42
                           CPS decided in 1997 that the evidence available at that time was not
                           sufficient, in its view , to provide a realistic prospect of the conviction of
                           either your client or M r Duckenfield for any offence. H owever, it does not
        45

                 Draft 30 March 1999 12:26
     Judgment: Approved by the Court for handing down                         Ex Parte M urray & Duckenfield
     (subiect to editorial corrections)                         R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
                                                                    Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



               follow that, when considering the evidence and the representations
               submitted by the private prosecutor, and by yourselves on behalf of your
3              client, the CPS should seek merely to identify whether there is now any new
               evidence sufficient to provide a realistic prospect of a conviction. The
               decision whether to intervene in a private prosecution with a view to
 6             terminating it calls for different considerations to be applied. It is quite
               possible for a private prosecution to continue, notwithstanding that the CPS
               is not satisfied, on the basis of its own assessment of the strength of the
 9             evidence, that the evidence would pass the evidential sufficiency test in the
               Code (that there should be a 'realistic prospect of a conviction’).

12             In broad terms, the reason for this is that s.6(l)... specifically preserved the
               right of private individuals and prosecuting authorities and bodies other
               than the CPS to bring criminal proceedings. This right is subject (among
15             other limitations) to the limitation in s.6(2) that the CPS may nevertheless
               take over the proceedings with a view either to conducting or to
               terminating those proceedings.
18
               Private prosecutors are not bound to apply the Code for Crown Prosecutors
               when deciding whether to institute proceedings, nor do the courts apply the
21             evidential sufficiency test in the Code when deciding whether there is a case
               to answer. The Service therefore recognises that it is not appropriate to
               intervene to terminate a private prosecution without good reason. That
24             general principle has recently been endorsed by the Law Commission in its
               Consultation Paper No. 149 'Consents to Prosecution’ (see paragraphs 6.3
               and 6.4).
27
               [The letter then proceeds to set out the DPP’s policy in the same terms as those
               in which it had earlier been described by the three “bullet-points” in the letter
30             o f 27 July 1998, save that it gives instances o f the “public interest factors” test
               as follows:

33             “ examples might be where the prosecution is malicious, or vexatious; or the
               offence is one for which the defendant should clearly have been cautioned;
               or where, although the offence may be serious, the defendant is terminally
36             ill.” Then the letter continues as follows]

               In this case, I took the decision not to intervene... I concluded in respect of
39             the charges of manslaughter and wilful neglect to perform a public duty
               (which, for the avoidance of doubt, were each considered against each
               individual separately) that I could not say that there is clearly no case to
42             answer. It was not right, therefore, for the Service to take over the
               proceedings with a view to terminating them.



                                                        -7 -
      Draft 30 March 1999 12:26
                                                                                     Ex Pane M urray & Duckenfield
          Judgment: Approved bv the Court for h anding down
                                                                       R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
          (subject to editorial corrections)
                                                                           Ex Pane South Yorkshire Police Authority




                    I should add that, against that background and after specifically
                    considering the appropriate course to take in these circum stances, I
3                  concluded further that it -would not bcuright to intervene in respect of the
                    one rem aining charge against M r Duckenfield, of attempting to pervert the
                    course of justice, albeit I had formed the view that there was clearly no case
6                  to answer on that charge alone. The charge of attempting to pervert the
                     course o f justice is a serious one, particularly when levelled against
                     som eone who was, at the relevant time, a serving, senior police officer.
 9                  N evertheless, in the context of the case as a whole that charge is not the
                     gravam en of the criminality alleged against M r Duckenfield and I
                     concluded that my approach to that charge should be led by my conclusions
12                  on the charges of manslaughter and wilful neglect to perform a public duty.
                     I also considered whether, nevertheless, there were overriding public
                     interest factors that should lead to the Service intervening with a view to
B                   discontinuance, but I came to the conclusion that any public interest factors
                     tending against prosecution did not clearly outweigh those in favour; nor
                      did I consider that the prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests
18                  of justice...”


                          The private prosecution o f D and M presently stands adjourned in the
21
            magistrates’ court. Committal proceedings were due to commence on 19 April 1999.
            B u fw e understand that date has been vacated. There is a directions hearing fixe or
            hearing later in April. The matter was earlier before the magistrates court on 2
            December 1998, an occasion to which I should refer because Mr Jones QC
            contends that the applications in the first case have n o t be® ^                  ^
            53 and the Supreme Court Act 1981 require (Mr Havers QC for the DPP ldcewise so
27
            contends but only in relation to the assault which is Erected toi theRegality o f
            DPP’s policy; he says, as is plainly the fact, that D and M had notice     ^ p    y y
            the letter o f 27 July 1998). On 21 December it is said by AA that Mr Harrison QC or
•b
            "        m indicated his clients’ intention to seek leave to bring an application for
             judicial review against the DPP's decision, whatever the reasons for it (the reasons
 33         had not, o f course, by then been supplied). Mr Jones contends that the
            judicial review could and should have been lodged then or very shortly
             There is an issue as to the context in which Ivlr Ham son said what he said to toe
             magistrate It is clear from an affidavit sworn by M 's solicitor Mr Manning that Mr
    36
             S n       took the view (as, i f I may say so., one would expect) t o he would have to
             consider the DPP’s written reasons before finally advising as to a judicial r .   .
              at 21 December 1998 a reasons letter was expected before Christmas, and M rH am
    39
              so informed the magistrate. In the event the reasons were not ^ v e r e d ^ l
              February 1999. These applications were lodged m the Crown Office on an
    42        1999.

                                   In my judgment there is nothing in the delay point. I t would have: been

     45       irresponsible to seek ju S cial review leave before the DPP’s reasons
              .And the letter o f 27 July 1998 could not have been a proper trigger to seek
                                                                                Ex Parte M urray & Duckenfield
         Judqment: Approved bv the Court for handing down
                                                                  R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
         (subject to editorial corrections!                           Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority




         contained no decision. It is true that a challenge only to the legality of the policy need
         not strictly have awaited the DPP’s reasons for applying it as he decided to do, but
3        since D and M, very obviously, were at least as interested in the application o f the
         policy as in its legality, overall it was perfectly proper and reasonable to wait tor the
         reasons letter before lodging any application for leave.
6
                                                            ***



9         The F irst Case: the D ecision o f the DPP

                       I may now turn to the substantive arguments in the first case. The lead
12        skeleton argument is that prepared on behalf of M, which is adopted by D who adds
          further submissions to challenge the distinct decision o f the DPP not to take over and
          discontinue the charge against him o f attempting to pervert the course o f justice. To
15        that I w ill come in due course.

          S.3(2)(b) o f th e A c t o f 1985
18
                         The applicants’ first submission is that the DPP’s decision fails to pay
           any regard to his duty under s.3(2)(b), which I have set out. It is put thus at #2.6 o f the
21         skeleton argument:

                      “The applicant’s point is that the policy and decision process in this case
24                    have not recognised that the s.3(2)(b) duty is relevant to the exercise of
                      discretion whether to intervene under s.6(2) and apply s.23(3)’\

27          In the course o f his oral submissions Mr Hamson expanded this argument. He
            submitted that in deciding whether to take over and discontinue a private prosecution
            where the case is one o f “ importance or difficulty”, the DPP should bear in mind that
30         it is ordinarily his duty to institute and conduct such proceedings. Accordingly, as I
            understand it, the suggestion is that the DPP should in some way entertain a
            heightened concern where such a private prosecution is launched, and his policy in
33         relation to the potential discontinuance o f such cases under s.23(3) should reflect this,
            presumably (for otherwise I cannot see how the argument can assist Mr Hamson) by
            leaning more favourably towards discontinuance than in other classes o f case.
 36
                            In my judgment this is a bad argument. S.3(2)(b) speaks only of the
            institution o f proceedings by the DPP; contrast s.3(2)(a), (c), and (d), which require
 39        him to take over proceedings. Plainly the DPP would not institute proceedings with a
            view to discontinuance. Moreover, as Mr Havers submitted, had it been the
            legislature’s intention to require the DPP to treat “important or difficult” cases in a
 42        different way from others for the purposes o f ss.6(2) and 23(3), it could have readily
            so provided and it is to be supposed would have done so. In my judgment the right of
            private prosecution preserved by s.6(1) is in no way qualified by s.3(2)(b), which has
    45     nothing to do with the discretion to take over such a prosecution under s.6(2) with a
            view to discontinuance under s.23(3). I consider that this conclusion is lent support by
                                    V                  - 9-
             Draft 30 March 1999 12:26
                                                                                        Ex Parte M urray & Duckenfield
          inHr|mi»nt: Approved by The Court for handing down              R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Poiice
          (subject to editorial corrections)                                  Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority




          die decision o f the Divisional Court in R v Bow Street Stipendiary ex p. South Coast
          L td [1993] 2 WLR 621, in which Lloyd LJ, as he then was, said at 6

                     “It will be noticed that section 3(2)(a)... provide[sJ for the D irector to take
                     over !he conduct of certain kinds of p ro ceed in g , B y contrast section
                     3 D ( b ) provides for the Director to institute certain other kinds of
                     p ro ceed in g w here it appears to him to be appropriate, having regard to the
                     im portance and the difficulty of the case. The difference in language is not
                     in my view, accidental. It becomes of crucial importance when one tu ns
                      section 6 which deals with private prosecutions... The effect of section ( )
                      is to preclude a person from bringing a private prosecution in cases
                      , cf . +:nn 3 f2Va,> (c) and (d) but not in the residuary category of C2S s
                      by section ( )( ), ' j             f      section 3 (2)(b) cases are concerned,
                      covered by section 3(2)(b). So tar as section v A J                 enrahasis)
                      there is nothing to preclude a private prosecution. (Lloyd LJ s emphas )



              The D P P ’s p o licy fa ils to have regard to the fu n dam en tal p u rp o se f o r which p r i m e
    18        prosecution is preserved by statute

                                  Mr Harrison’s second submission was that die right
              prosecution essentially operates as a co n stitu tio i]is                             bUc prosecutor;
    21
              some suggestion o f “inertia, partiality or impr p                  Dres. nt the DPP should lean
              and fte implication is that where                                           on statements o f dieir
    24        L     o    X      s T        "   T m o n T p o s t 'O ffice W orkers [1978] AC 435. Lord

               Wilberforce said at 477B-C:
    27
                         "This historical right which goes right back to the earliest: d^
^                        system , though rarely exercised in r e ,a t,o '                                                 (by
® 30                    though ultim ately liable to           e c°"            fit enterin<, a nolle prosequi)
                                                                  ^            aga'inst inertia or partiality on

     33                 the part of authority.

                Lord Diplock said this at 498B:
     36
                          “In English public law every citizen still
                          duty (though of im perfect obligation), to invo              procedure. It is
                          jurisdiction for the enforcement of the cnrmna I n b y t n s proce
         39
                          I right which nowadays seldom needs to be e x e ^ d b y .             ^
                           m ember of the public, for since the form                            g             ^    an() t0
         42                charged with the duty in pubhc l a w ^ P ™ '“                            offk e of Director

                                                                                           to » r         t t r            s


                        30 March 1999 1 2 26
                                                                               Ex Pane M urray &. Duckenfisld
      judgm ent: Approved by the Court for handing down
                                                                 R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police.'
      (subject to editorial corrections)
                                                                     Ex Pane South Yorkshire Police Authority




               biased failure or refusal of those authorities to prosecute offenders against
               the criminal law.”
3
      Reliance is also placed on a passage at para 7.50 in the report o f the Royal
      Commission on Cnmmal Procedure 1981, which refers to the retention o f the right of
6     private prosecution “as an effective safeguard against improper inaction by the
      prosecuting authority”, and to a recent recommendation o f the Law Commission,
      contained in para 5.26 o f its final report on “Consents to Prosecution (October 1998),
9     to the effect that private prosecutions might be made subject to a statutory provision
      requiring the consent o f the CPS.

12                    In my judgment this argument is also misconceived. The obiter dicta in
       Gouriet are not reflected in the 1985 statute, which was o f course enacted some seven
       years after G ouriet wras decided. More particularly, it is simply quixotic to suggest that
15    the DPP should allow a private prosecution to go ahead if there has been “inertia,
       partiality or improper action” by the public prosecutor - namely him self - but not
       otherwise. Is he to be judge and juiy on the question whether he has let the public
18     down? Their Lordships’ dicta in Gouriet do not with respect provide anything
       anproachins a compulsory template o f a lawful policy to be adopted by the DPP for
       the execution o f his duty under ss.6(2) and 23(3).
21
        The Code fo r Crown P rosecutors

24                      The argument here, at least as originally put forward in M’s skeleton
        argument, was that because o f his view (referred to in the reasons letter) that private
        prosecutors are not bound to apply the Code when deciding whether to institute
27      proceedings, the DPP has erroneously proceeded on the basis that the principles in the
         Code are irrelevant to his discretion under ss.6(2) and 23(3). But the DPP has nowhere
         stated that he regards the Code as systematically or generally irrelevant to his power to
30       discontinue. Indeed, as I shall show, there are some aspects o f the Code which are
         reflected in his approach to the question, how his policy should be applied in this case.
         In truth, however, it could not be right for the DPP to apply across die board the same
33      tests, in particular the “reasonable prospect o f conviction” test referred to in the
         correspondence, in considering whether to take over and discontinue a private
         prosecution as the Code enjoins Crown Prosecutors to follow in deciding whether to
36      institute or proceed with a prosecution themselves; the consequence would be that the
         DPP would stop a private prosecution merely on the ground that the case is not one
         which he would himself proceed with. But that, in my judgment, would amount to an
39      emasculation o f s.6(1) and itself be an unlawful policy, and in fairness Mr Hamson
         (#7 o f M ’s skeleton) made it clear that he did not submit so much. The very premise of
          s.6(1) must be that some cases will go to trial which the DPP him self chooses not to
 42     prosecute.

                      As it seems to me the only points remaining in relation to the Code
 45     concern the application o f the DPP’s policy to the facts o f this case, and I will deal
         with that shortly.
                                                          .11.
         Draft 30 March 1999 12:26
                                                                                             Ex Pane M urray & Duckenfield
     ’ Judgment: A p p roved by The Court for handing dow n                  r ^         Constabje g f SouTh Yorkshire Police
      (subject to editorial corrections]                                           ^   pane South Yorkshire Police Authority




       The “clearly n o case to a n sw er” test

                            The argument here (#7 o f the skeleton) is that such a test ^is
          impermissibly risdd It is said that the policy excludes “any assessm ent of evidential
          deficiencies and so amounts to an unlaw ftl fetter o f the DPP's discretion; and that it
          “also leads to a distorted evaluation of the public interest factors In my
          the test involves no unlawful fetter o f discretion. It is plain from the formulation there
          f c e a X no c i e to answer” (my emphasis) that the DPP only intends to stop pnvate
          prosecutions on this ^ ou nd where no reasonable
          there was sufficient evidence for the case to go forward. That seems to m e to De a
          S c t i y p C e r approach. Such a prosecution could offer no le^BmaW b e n e f it *
          ^ n e U d w o u l i potential* at least, be an abuse o f the process o f die o ^ The
          test rishtlv identifies a class o f case which should always be stopped, i f the case no
          w S e d “ r * n the decision whether to stop it will, o f course, depend on the
          "        tests which, in my judgment, amply - t e m p l a t e - ^ 1 t "    y
          which all material factors w ill be considered and whose application accordin, y
18         negates any unlawful fetter o f discretion.

                              As regards any “ distorted evaluation” o f the public interest test, it is
21         clear that t h f t e e aspects o f the policy are in d ivid^ lly s e ^ d m ^ T t o
           r-ST3-ctive application in this case is a another matter, to which as I have sai
           come. But the applicants have a separate argument about the public interest      .
24
            The “p u b lic interest fa c to r s ” test

                               Here it is submitted (#8 o f the skeleton) that the public interest
27
            necessarily involves consideration o f the likelihood o f “ ™ c t m                                                «£


 30


                                                                            s a t a               s s *                “
 33         factors in favour o f the private prosecution outweigh those against.

                                   T <?ee no reason why quite aside from the evidential test o f no case to
             answer the DPP should not, within his policy as pre^tiy^foim ulated, t o e m ^
 36
             ? e                                                                           Should compel the DPP to

 39          reverse the effect o f the public interest        ‘
             his judament they clearly point m the other direction. The^test* presentty to
             seems « me designed to allow proper
 42          prosecution. The private prosecutor is very       y               imijlies that he is entitled
             die public interest lies than does the DPP, and s.6( l), I think, n g h e r f l * t rfvate

             » i „ ™                                                                          s      s      s      i       *        >
     45
              S S X           'S      S    2   Z     Z        *   w - .                             ■ —           «*>“ "
                                                                    - 12-

              Draft 30 March 1P?9 '.".26
      Judgm ent: Approved by the Court for handing down                           Ex Parte M urray & DuckenfiSId
      (subject to editorial corrections)                            R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
                                                                        Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



      right o f private prosecution; but it is enough to hold, as I would, that the present public
      interest policy is perfectly consistent with the objects o f the statute and thus well
 3    within the proper discretion o f the DPP.

                      Mr Harrison directed similar criticisms to the third limb o f the policy,
 r*
 o    but in light o f what I have said about the public interest test they possess no separate
      force.

 9                                                        ***



                      For all these reasons, the DPP’s policy overall is in m y judgment a
12    lawful one. The real question in the case is whether it has been lawfully applied. It is
      clear that (a) the DPP maintains his view that the “reasonable prospect o f conviction”
      test in the Code would not be met in this case, but that (b) the “no evidence” test is not
15    met either (save as regards the charge against D o f attempting to pervert the course o f
      justice, with which I deal separately below). In those circumstances, the application of
      the public interest test was crucial. In this context it is convenient to deal first with Mr
18    Harrison’s submission that the reasons letter shows that the DPP has given improper
      and perhaps decisive weight to the “no evidence” test. He relies on the sentence which
      follows the conclusion that that test is not satisfied: “It was not right, therefore, for
21    the Service to take over the proceedings with a view to terminating them”, and
      submits that it suggests the author o f the letter considered that that was the end o f the
      matter. However after dealing with the particular issue concerning the charge against
24    D o f attempting to pervert the course o f justice, the letter continues: “I also
      considered whether, nevertheless, there were overriding public interest factors
      that should lead to the Service intervening© with a view to discontinuance” . I think
27    the letter could have been better expressed, so as to make it clear that the public
      interest test is by no means secondary to the “no evidence” test. However I am quite
       satisfied that there was no intention to downgrade or sideline the balance o f public
30     interest factors. It is not really credible to suppose that author o f the letter
      misunderstood or failed to apply the very policy which he had just clearly set out.

33    The D P P ’s ju d g m e n t o f th e p u b lic interest

                     Mr Harrison submitted that in light o f everything that had gone before,
36    and not least Stuart-Smith LJ’s Scrutiny, there were no public interest factors
      favouring continuation o f the prosecutions o f D and M. He said that there is nothing in
      the reasons letter to show that the DPP accepted the suggestion, urged forcefully and
39    at length by the HFSG in the course o f their representations, that further evidence had
      come to light since the Scrutiny. With this latter proposition I agree. But the reasons
      letter clearly implies an acceptance that some factors existed which favoured the
42    prosecutions. It stated: “I came to the conclusion that any public interest factors
      tending against prosecution did not clearly outweigh those in favour” . What were
      those in favour? If in truth there were no factors which a reasonable decision-maker
45    could regard as going in favour o f the prosecutions, then the DPP’s decision would be

                                                           • 13 -
      Draft 30 March 1999 12.26
         Judgment: A pproved by the Court for handing down                          Ex Parte M urray & Duckenfield
         (subject to editorial corrections)                           R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
                                                                          Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



         ■vulnerable to a challenge on W ednesbury1 grounds (as indeed Mr Harrison claims it is)
         since there would be nothing in public interest terms to weigh in the scales against
    3    discontinuance. When the case was opened there was no affidavit from the DPP
         dealing with the point, nor did Mr Havers’ skeleton argument articulate any such
         factors. So it was that, effectively at the court’s invitation so that the matter could be
     6   clarified, Mr N ew ell swore an affidavit for the DPP on 22 March 1999. He is the CPS’
         Director o f Casework and the author o f the reasons letter. Paras 2 - 4 are as follows:

     9            “2. A s I now recall, the public interest factors tending against prosecution
                  which I considered w ere as follows:

    12                      (1) Previous reviews of the case, in particular those carried out by
                            the DPP when considering the question w hether criminal
                            proceedings should be taken against M r Duckenfield and M r
                            M urray and the more recent report of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.
#
                            (2) The fact that the Applicants had been told on previous occasions
    18                      that the DPP did not intend to prosecute.

                            (3) The delay which had occurred between the commission of the
    21                      alleged offences and the commencement of this prosecution and its
                            likely effect on the Applicants, although I took the view that delay
                            may be offset by the seriousness of the alleged offences (as is reflected
    24                      in paragraph 6.5(d) of the Code...).

                            (4) The effect of the delay on the evidence, for exam ple in terms of
    27                      the potential impairment of the recollections of witnesses.

                                (5) The assertion made on behalf of M r M urray of ill-health,
                                although I noted that no medical evidence had been put forward in
                                support of this assertion and that, as again reflected in the Code (at
                                paragraph 6.5 (e)), ill-health may be offset by the seriousness of the
    33                          offence.

                   3. As against these factors tending against prosecution, there was in my
    36             view one extremely important factor in favour of prosecution, namely the
                   very serious nature of the alleged offences, in particular, the alleged
                   offences of manslaughter. In my opinion, the allegation that two senior
    39             police officers w ere responsible for the deaths of a number of people as a
                   result of criminal negligence was a very grave allegation.

    42             4. Paragraph 6.2 of the Code reflects the considerable w eight attached by
                   the CPS to the seriousness of the alleged offence when seeking to strike the
                   right balance as to the factors for and against prosecution. (I refer also to

          1 [1948] 1 KB 223.
          Draft 30 March 1999   12:26
          Judgment: Approved bv the Court, for handing down
                                                                                   Ex Pane M urray & Duckerifield'
          (subject to editorial corrections)                         R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police.'
                                                                         Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



                    the opening words of paragraph 6.4.) Having carefully considered the
                    factors tending against prosecution and this extremely important factor in
     3              favour of it, I came to ihe firm conclusion that the factors tending against
                    prosecution did not clearly outweigh what I considered to be the very-
                    strong public interest in favour of prosecution.”
     6

                         One o f Mr H am son’s complaints, advanced before this affidavit was
     9    sworn, was that the policy should have taken account o f para 10.1 o f the Code which
          includes this:

12                  “Norm ally, if the Crown Prosecution Service tells a suspect or defendant
                    that there will not be a prosecution... that is the end of the matter... But
                    occasionally there are special reasons wrhy the Crown Prosecution Service
15                  will re-start the prosecution, particularly if the case is serious.”

           This is one o f the points relating to the Code which, as it seems to me, bear on the
18        application o f the policy rather than the policy itself; and para 2(2) o f Mr N ew ell’s
          affidavit shows that regard was had to assurances or statements made to D and M that
          for his part the DPP would not prosecute. Clearly it was right to do so, within the
21        public interest balance. But I think there is a qualitative difference between the
          situation wrhere the DPP him self goes back upon a previous assurance not to prosecute
          and one where the DPP does not change his mind but a private prosecutor chooses to
24        instigate proceedings.

                         In reply, having by then seen Mr N ew ell’s affidavit, Mr Hamson made
27       further submissions. While accepting that there could be a case in which a single
         factor favouring prosecution might not be outweighed by a multiplicity o f factors
         going the other way, he submitted that if the raft o f public interest considerations
30       favouring discontinuance in this case was held not to be enough to outweigh the sinsle
         factor o f the allegations gravity, it was difficult or impossible to imagine what set o f
         considerations might do so; and the court should conclude that DPP had fettered his
33       discretion by treating the seriousness o f the allegations as overriding everything else,
         so that he had not in truth carried out a proper balancing exercise at all.

36                     I would reject this argument. There is no reason to suppose that the
         factors against prosecution were not properly weighed and considered, and certainly
         no basis for the supposition that once faced with a private prosecution for something
39       as serious as manslaughter the DPP would inevitably decide to allow it to proceed.

                       Mr Hamson submitted next that Mr N ew ell’s affidavit showed that the
42       DPP had transposed from the Code the “seriousness o f the charge” factor as a
         consideration favouring the prosecution without also taking account o f his own view
         that the Code test o f realistic prospect o f conviction” was not m et I agree that the
45       DPP_s view o f the prospects o f conviction is a proper matter for him to consider.
         v*ithin the public interest test contained in the policy, when deciding whether to
                                       K                      -15-
         Drifi 30 March 1999 12:26
         Judgment: Approved by the Court for handing down                             Ex Parte M urray & Duckenfield
         (subject to editorial corrections)                             R v Chief Constable of Soirth Yorkshire Police
                                                                            Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



         discontinue; but, as it seems to me, para 2 ( 1) o f Mr N ew ell’s affidavit shows that in
         this case he has done so.
     3
                        Then Mr Harrison suggested that para 3 o f the affidavit demonstrated
         that the DPP’s view o f the gravity o f the allegation was informed simply by the fact
     6   that there was a manslaughter charge. He had not properly considered the real degree
         o f culpability inherent in the facts alleged; and the gravity o f the offence o f
         manslaughter can vary very widely. There is nothing in this. Mr N ew ell made it
     9   perfectly clear that he had regard to the species o f manslaughter in question
         (“criminal negligence”) and it cannot sensibly be doubted that he was w ell aware and
         took account o f the circumstances in which the alleged offences are said to have been
    12   committed.

                       Lastly on this part o f the case Mr Ham son submitted that the refusal to
         discontinue was simply perverse, given the “enormous w eight” o f the public interest
#        considerations going the other way.

    18                 The DPP might, in my judgment, lawfully have decided to discontinue.
         The tragic events at Hillsborough have been the subject o f repeated, detailed, thorough
         enquiries. Nearly ten years have passed. But the judgment was for the DPP to make. If
    21   we acceded to Mr Harrison’s submission, we would I think usurp the role o f the
         primary decision-maker.

    24                  In my judgment the decision not to discontinue is no more unlawful than
         is the policy which the DPP applied.

    27

         The fir s t applicant: attem p tin g to p ervert th e course o fju s tic e

#                       Mr Harrison discretely submits that the decision to let the charge of
         attempting to pervert the course o f justice go ahead was unlawful, because it runs flat
    33   counter to the “no case to answer” test in his own policy. It w ill be recalled that the
         reasons letter said:

    36             “I concluded further that it would not be right to intervene in respect of the
                   one remaining charge against M r Duckenfield, of attem pting to pervert the
                   course of justice, albeit I had formed the view that there was clearly no case
    39             to answer on that charge alone... in the context of the case as a whole that
                   charge is not the gravamen of the criminality alleged against M r
                   Duckenfield and I concluded that my approach to that charge should be led
    42             by my conclusions on the charges of manslaughter and wilful neglect to
                   perform a public duty.”

          Paras 5 and 6 o f Mr N ew ell’s affidavit state as follows:

                                                            • 16 •
          Draft 30 March 1999 12:26
     Judgment: Approved by the Court for handing down                          Ex Pane M urray & Duckenfielt'
     (subject to editorial corrections)                          R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
                                                                     Ex Pane South Yorkshire Police Authority



               “5. I was fully aware of the seriousness of the additional charge. I also
               tentatively concluded that partial intervention... was in law open to the CPS
 3             and I proceeded on that assumption. However, the existing policy did not
               cover the situation which arose in this case, namely where the conclusion
               was reached that there was clearly a case to answer in relation to some of
 6             the charges but not in relation to others. (I can say that with some
               confidence, since I had overall responsibility for formulating the policy.) ...
               I concluded that it was in fact inappropriate to intervene only to take over
 9             (with a view to discontinuing) this additional charge.

               6. First, partial intervention was not, in my view, either appropriate or
12             desirable. It seemed to me that the DPP should either intervene so as to
               take over the proceedings in their entirety or not at all. To have intervened
               partially would still have left the criminal proceedings in place in relation to
15             the other charges which included the even more serious charge of
               manslaughter. Secondly, I took into account the fact that M r Duckenfield
               would not be left without any remedy in relation to this additional charge.
18             On the contrary, he would be entitled to invite the M agistrates’ Court to
               dismiss it on the basis that there was no case to answer. Thirdly, the charge
               arose out of essentially the same events as the events which gave rise to the
21             other charges and thus those events would be scrutinised in any event.”


24                   I o f course accept that Mr N ewell did not subjectively believe - or intend
      - that the policy covered this situation. But the policy has to be read objectively; there
     can be no doubt that it gave, rise to a legitimate expectation on the part o f D and M
27   that it would be applied according to its terms. The first question, then, is as to the true
     meaning o f the policy on a fair reading o f the letter o f 27 July 1998 and the reasons
     letter. It is true that the letters use the singular: “the prosecution” and “a private
30   prosecution” . But it is elementary that in criminal cases each count constitutes a
     separate indictment; it is as i f there are separate trials relating to each. And this is no
     mere technicality; for it means, o f course, that where there is more than one charge
33   any question whether there is “no case to answer” is, as regards each individual
     charge, w holly discrete. I do not consider that the policy can fairly be read as
     indicating that the DPP would necessarily either take over or discontinue a private
36   prosecution in its entirety. In my view the articulation o f the “no case to answer” test
     would be taken by any informed reader, facing a multiple private prosecution, to imply
     that the DPP would consider whether in his view there was clearly no case to answer
39   on each charge.

                    The DPP concluded that there was clearly no such case in relation to this
42   charge against D, and yet decided to allow it to proceed. It follows, in m y judgment,
     that there is a breach o f D ’s legitimate expectation that the policy would be applied.
     The pragmatic factors spoken to by Mr New ell in para 6 can make no difference. Nor,
45   o f course, can the vigorous assertion by the HFSG that there is in fact a case to
     answer. What matters for present purposes is the DPP’s conclusion on that issue
                                  V                     -1 7 -
     Draft 30 March 1999 12:26
     Judgm ent: Approved bv the Court for handing down                         Ex Parte M urray & Duckenfield
     (subject to editorial corrections)                          R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
                                                                     Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority




                    For these reasons I would quash the DPP’s decision only so far as it
 3   relates to this charge against D. I make it clear that I say nothing as to what might
     follow as regards any further decision concerning that charge to be made by the DPP.

 6                   Otherwise, for the reasons I have given I would dismiss the application
     in the first case.

 g                                                       ***


     T he S e c o n d Case: th e D ecision o f th e S Y P A
12
                    First I should describe the further facts which are specifically relevant to
     the second case. These must be read into the narrative o f events which I have already
     given in relation to the first case; it seems to me clearer and more convenient to isolate
     here the particular facts which bear on the challenge to the decision o f the SYPA.

18                  The history shows that at earlier stages the SYPA had been prepared to
      provide financial support for D and M (and other officers) to be legally represented in
      matters arising from the Hillsborough disaster. On 7 December 1990 they resolved to
21   fund the representation o f six police officers, including D and M, at the inquest. They
      had earlier resolved not to do so; the decision o f 7 December was taken after
      considering “the most recent legal advice available” . Then o n 1 August 1997 the
24   SYPA resolved to set aside £500,000 for financial assistance for police officers in
      connection with Stuart-Smith LJ’s Scrutiny. In both instances they had considered a
      report from the Chief Constable (or a joint report o f the Chief Constable and the Clerk
27   and Treasurer). The latter decision was said to be taken “in accordance with the
      principles set out in Home Office Circular No 77/87 Financial Assistance to Police
      Officers in Legal Proceedings”, to which I will have to refer.

                     On 27 February 1998, following publication o f the Scrutiny, and
      considering that “there w ere indications that private prosecutions could be brought
33   against 3 officers” , the SYPA resolved in. principle to authorise consideration being
      given to applications by officers for financial assistance. On 5 March 1998 D ’s
      application for such assistance was approved by the SYPA, and M ’s was approved on
36   29 June 1998. It will be recalled that three days earlier, on 26 June, A A had first
      sought to institute criminal proceedings against D and M in the South Sefton Petty
      Sessional Division. On 20 November 1998 M applied for further financial assistance
39   in relation to the judicial review which was then seen to be in prospect should the DPP
      decide to allow the private prosecutions to continue; and the HFSG had made it clear
      that were the DPP to take over the prosecutions and discontinue, they would seek a
42   judicial review. On 21 December 1998 counsel for D and M indicated to the
      Stipendiary Magistrate their intention to seek a judicial review o f the DPP’s decision; I
      have already referred to this in dealing with Mr Jones’ misconceived argument that the
45   first case should be dismissed on grounds o f delay. The following day, 22 December
       1998, in a letter o f over six pages AA made written representations on leading
                                                         - 18-
      Draft 30 March 1999 12:26
      Judgm ent: Approved by the Court for handino down                        Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield,
      (subject to editorial corrections)                         R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
                                                                     Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



      counsel’s advice to urge the SYPA that the decision to fund the defences o f D and M
      was “unlawful, irrational, ultra vires and procedurally improper on various
 3    grounds” . On 23 December 1998 D applied for further financial assistance in relation
      to the prospective judicial review proceedings. On 5 January 1999 AA wrote a farther
      lengthy letter to the SYPA repeating and expanding her assertions that the funding
 6    decisions were unlawful.

                   Then on 5 February 1999 the SYPA passed the resolutions under
 9   challenge, “that, on balance, the Authority has no legal power to provide financial
     assistance” to D and M in respect either o f the private prosecution or a judicial review
     o f the DPP s decision. On 10 February 1999 the CCSY’s application for judicial
12   review in these proceedings was lodged, and on the same day solicitors for the SYPA
     wrote to the Crown Office to consent to the grant o f leave and seek expedition. They
     stated:
15              “SYPA passed these resolutions with great reluctance on the basis of advice
                received from ourselves and Counsel...”

18                                                        ***


                    The legality or otherwise o f the decisions under challenge ultimately -
21   turns on the construction and application o f s.6(l) o f the Police Act 1996 and s. 111(1)
     o f the Local Government Act 1972. I shall have to look at other statutory provisions,
     but it is convenient to set these out at once. The cross-heading to s.6 reads “ General
24   functions of police authorities”, and ss.(l) provides:

               “Every police authority established under section 3 shall secure the
27             maintenance of an efficient and effective police force for its area.”

     S .111(1) o f the Act o f 1972 in its present form provides:
30
               “W ithout prejudice to any powers exercisable apart from this section but
               subject to the following provisions o f this Act, a local authority shall have
33             power to do any thing (whether or not involving expenditure, borrowing or
               lending of money or the acquisition or disposal of any property or rights)
               which is calculated to facilitate, or is conducive or incidental to, the
36             discharge of their functions.”


39                  S. 111( 1) applies to police authorities (but in light o f m y conclusions it is
     unnecessary to go into the legislative history relating to that). Now, it might be
     thought - indeed this is the applicants’ case - that by s.6( l), securing “the
42   maintenance of an efficient and effective police force” is plainly made the function
     o f a police authority, and that accordingly it is no less plain that s. 111( 1) empowers
     the police authority to do such things as fund the legal representation o f police officers
45   in proceedings if the authority reasonably concludes that to do so is conducive to that
     function s discharge. That has been the settled view o f the Association o f Chief Police
                                                          -19-
     Draft 30 March 1999 12:26
       Judgm ent: Approved bv the Court for handing down                         Ex Parte M urray & Duckenfield
       (subject to editorial corrections!                         R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
                                                                      Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



        Officers, the Police Superintendents Association, and (until 1998) the Home Office.
       The decision to provide such finance, in common with any decision taken under
  3    s. 111(1), would o f course be subject to w ell known public law constraints enshrined in
       the W ednesbury and P a d fie lS principles. There is before the court an affidavit o f Mr
       Daines, Assistant Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire, in which he describes what he
  5      regards as the “absolutely vital” requirement “that officers should know that if they
        act in good faith in performing their duties their Police Authority will support
        them in the event that they face litigation” . If as a matter o f vires s. 111(1) allows a
  9    police authority to incur expenditure in furtherance o f the general function seemingly
        conferred by s.6( 1), then in m y judgment the use o f s. 111( 1) to finance police officers’
       legal expenses in litigation, including private prosecutions brought against them and
12     the bringing o f judicial review proceedings, cannot in principle be ruled unlawful on
        W ednesbury or P adfield grounds. The circumstances in which such funding might be
       provided in any particular case is another matter. The policy has in the past been to the
 15    effect that the authority must be satisfied that the officer has acted in good faith in the
)      discharge o f his duty; and I can see that, at least where a private prosecution is
       involved, there may be issues for the authority to consider which would involve their
 18    taking a view o f the merits in advance o f any trial. But in these proceedings we are not
        concerned with any question whether, when, or to what extent the SYPA might
       provide financial assistance to D or M. We are only to decide whether the power
21     exists to do so at all.

                     In fact the argument o f the CCSY was put two ways by Mr Baker QC. It
24     was first said that s.6(1) o f itself, without the aid o f s.. 111(1), enabled the funding
       decision. Alternatively, it was enabled by s. 111(1) read with s.6(1).

27                  Upon this issue Miss Baxendale QC for the SYPA submits that the
       apparently obvious relation between s.6( 1) and s. 111( 1) is in fact no relation at all.
       The essence o f her argument may be expressed veiy shortly, as follows.
.3 0
                     (a)                      S.6(1) confers no pow ers o f any kind. All the powers posses
       police authorities are conferred elsewhere in the Police Act and by the local
33     government legislation. S.6(1) does no more than to provide the purpose for which the
       authority’s powers are to be exercised; it states the A ct’s “policy and objects”, in the
       language o f the P adfield case, as they apply to police authorities. I f this is right, it
36     would contradict Mr Baker’s first argument, that s.6(1) alone is enough to empower
       the SYPA to fund D and M.

 39                   (b) S. 111(1) cannot be read as: enabling the authority to do anything
        which is not ancillary to a power which is elsewhere conferred upon it. If this is right,
        then taken with (a) it contradicts Mr Baker’s second argument which relies on
42     s .lll(l).




       : [1968] AC 997.
                                                           -20-
       Draft 30 March 1999 12:26
     Judgment: Approved by the Court for Handing down                         Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfieid
     (subject to editorial corrections}                         R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police ’
                                                                    Ex Pane South Yorkshire Police Authority



                    There is no doubt that express powers are conferred on police authorities
     by a raft o f statutoiy provisions. Miss Baxendale says that such provisions support
     proposition (a) which I have set out, by application o f the canon o f statutory
     construction expressed by the Latin maxim expressio unius est exclusio alterius. Thus,
     she submits, where Parliament has seen fit to confer a range o f specific powers on
     police authorities, the intention must have been thereby to set the limits on what such
     an authority may do and it cannot be supposed that s.6( l) provides an undefined and
     open-ended power to do anything else which the authority may choose, merely on the
 9   ground that in some way it may be said to support the general aim o f “the
     maintenance of an efficient and effective police force”. The high water-mark o f this
     submission is found in s.88(4) o f the Act o f 1996 which confers an express power to
12   fund police officers’ costs in certain circumstances which do not include the defence
     o f private (or any) criminal prosecutions or participation in proceedings for judicial
     review.
15
                    I shall have to look in a little more detail at s.88(4). I have concluded,
     however, that the correctness or otherwise o f proposition (a) is not in the end at the
18   centre o f the case. The reason is that in the particular statutory context proposition (b)
     is in my judgment wrong; so that the SYPA is enabled by s. 111(1) (subject to
     W ednesbury and Padfield).to finance D and M in the criminal and judicial review
21   proceedings even i f s.6( 1) confers no powers as such.

                    The scheme o f the Act o f 1996 involves the distribution o f -
24   responsibilities between three bodies: the Chief Constable, the Secretary o f State, and
     the police authority. The Chief Constable’s role is principally given by s. 10:

27             ‘*(1) A police force maintained under section 2 shall be under the direction
               and control of the chief constable appointed under s . l l . ”

30             (2) In discharging his functions, every chief constable shall have regard to
               the local policing plan issued by the police authority for his area under
               section 8. ”
33
     ( S .l l provides for the appointment and removal o f the Chief Constable, by the police
     authority with the approval o f the Secretaiy o f State.) I should notice also ss 22(1) and
36   44(4):
              “22(1) Every chief constable shall, as soon as possible after the end of each
              financial year, submit to the police authority a general report on the
39            policing during that year of the area for which his force is maintained.”

              “44(4) Every chief constable shall, as soon as possible after the end of each
42            financial year, submit to the Secretary of State the like report as is required
              by section 22(1) to be submitted to the police authority.”

45   The role o f the Secretary o f State is principally given by ss.36 and 37( 1):

                                                        -21 -
     DraS 30 March 1999 12:26
Judgm ent: Approved bv the Court for handing down                        Ex Parte M urray & Duckenfield
(subject to editorial corrections)                         R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
                                                               Ex Pane South Yorkshire Police Authority




         “36(1) The Secretary of State shall exercise his powers under the provisions
         of this A ct referred to in subsection (2) in such manner and to such extent
         as appears to him to be best calculated to promote the efficiency and
         effectiveness o f the police.”

          37(1) The Secretary of State may by order determine objectives for the
         policing o f the areas o f all police authorities established under section 3.”

As reaards the Secretaiy o f State’s position I should notice also these provisions o f the
Act o f 1996:
        “38(1) W here an objective has been determined under section 37, the
        Secretary of State may direct police authorities to establish levels of
        perform ance (performance targets) to be aimed at in seeking to achieve the
          objective.

          39(1) The Secretary of State may issue codes of practice relating to the
          discharge by police authorities established under section 3 o f any of their
          functions.”

 The role o f the police authority is given first by the subsections o f s.6 which follow
 subsection ( 1):

          “6(2) In discharging its functions, every police authority established under
          section 3 shall have regard to -

          (a) any objectives determined by the Secretary o f State under section 37,

          (b) any objectives determined by the authority under section 7,

          (c) anv performance targets established by the authority, whether in
          compliance with a direction under section 38 or otherwise, and

           (d) any local policing plan issued by the authority under section 8.

           (3) In discharging any function to which a code of practice issued under
           section 39 relates, a police authority established under section 3 shall have
           regard to the code.

           (4) A police authority shall comply with any direction given to it by the
           Secretary of State under section 38 or 40.”

  These provisions, o f course, confer duties rather than powers. In relation to the police
  authority I should next notice ss.7 - 9:



                                                    -22-
  Draft 30 March 1999 12:55
Judgment: Approved bv the Court for handing down                          Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield ,
(sub iect to editorial correctional                         R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police’
                                                                Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority




        “7(1) E very police authority established under section 3 shall, before the
        beginning of each financial year, determine objectives for the policing of the
        authority's area during that year.

         (2 ) Objectives determined under this section may relate to matters to which
         objectives determined under section 37 also relate, or to other matters, but
         in any event shall be so framed as to be consistent with the objectives
         determined under that section.

         (3) Before determining objectives under this section, a police authority shall

         (a) consult the chief constable for the area, and

         (b) consider any views obtained by the authority in accordance with
         arrangem ents made under section 96.

         8(1) Every police authority established under section 3 shall, before the
         beginning of each financial year, issue a plan setting out the proposed
         arrangem ents for the policing of the authority’s area during the year (the
         local policing plan).

         (2) The local policing plan shall include a statement of the authority's
         priorities for the year, of the financial resources expected to be available
         and of the proposed allocation of those resources, and shall give particulars
         of -

          (a) any objectives determined by the Secretary of State under section 37,

          (b) any objectives determined by the authority under section 7, and

          (c) any performance targets established by the authority, whether in
          compliance with a direction under section 38 or otherwise.

          (3) A draft of the local policing plan shall be prepared by the chief
          constable for the area and submitted by him to the police authority for it to
          consider.

          (4) Before issuing a local policing plan which differs from the draft
          submitted by the chief constable under subsection (3), a police authority
          shall consult the chief constable.

          (5) A police authority shall arrange for every local policing plan issued by it
          under this section to be published in such manner as appears to it to be
          appropriate, and shall send a copy of the plan to the Secretary of State.


                                                   -2 3 -
 Dm* 30 March 1999 12:55
          Judgment: Approved bv the Court for handing dow n                        Ex Parte M urray & Ducken#r
          (subject to editorial corrections)                         R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
                                                                         Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Auth>




                    9(1) As soon as possible after the end of each financial year every police
                    authority established under section 3 shall issue a report relating to the
                    policing of the authority's area for the year.

                    (2) A report issued by a police authority under this section for any year
                    shall include an assessment of the extent to which the local policing plan for
                    that year issued under section 8 has been carried out.

                    (3) A police authority shall arrange for every report issued by it under this
                    section to be published in such manner as appears to it to be appropriate,
                    and shall send a copy of the report to the Secretary of State.”
    12
          S. 14 is important:

    15              “ (1) Each police authority established under section 3 shall keep a fund to
4)                  be known as the police fund.

    18              (2) Subject to any regulations under the Police Pensions A ct 1976, all
                     receipts of the police authority shall be paid into the police fund and all
                     expenditure of the authority shall be paid out of that fund.
    21
                    (3) Accounts shall be kept by each police authority o f payments made into
                    or out of the police fund.”
    24
           Then s.43(l):

     27              “A police authority shall, whenever so required by the Secretary of State,
                     submit to the Secretary of State a report on such matters connected with
                     the discharge of the authority’s functions, or otherwise with the policing of
      0              its area, as may be specified in the requirement.”
#
           S.92:
     33             “ ( i) The council of a county, district, county borough or London borough
                     may make grants to any police authority established under section 3 whose
                     police area falls wholly or partly within the county, district, county borough
     36             or                                                                     borough.

                     (3)              Grants under this section may be "made unconditionally or, with the
     39             agreem ent o f the chief officer of police for the police area concerned,
                     subject to conditions.”

     42     S.96:

                     “(1) Arrangem ents shall be made for each police area for obtaining
     45
                                                              -24.
            DraA 30 March 1999 12:55
      Judgment: Approved bv the Court for handing down                         Ex Pane Murray & Duckenfield,-
      (subject to editorial corrections)                         R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police'
                                                                     Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



                      (a) the views of people in that area about matters concerning the
                      policing of the area, and
 3
                      (b) their co-operation with the police in preventing crime in that area.

 r*
 D               (2) Except as provided by subsections (3) to (6), arrangements for each
                 police area shall be made by the police authority after consulting the chief
                 constable as to the arrangements that would be appropriate.”
 9

                       Looking at the whole picture displayed by these provisions, it is clear
12    that the Chief Constable is in charge o f day-to-day policing (s. 10( 1)); the police
      authority has a role in relation to policy, or strategy (ss.7, 8 and other provisions); but
      this is subject to the overall direction o f the Secretary o f State (ss.37, 38, 39 and other
15    provisions, taken with s.6((2) - (4)). The police authority holds the purse (s. 14). Those
      provisions specifically concerned with the police authority’s role confer duties rather
      than powers, though in some cases there is clearly a discretion as to how the duty is to
18    be performed (as for example under s.37). Other powers (including those contained in
      s. 111( 1)) are conferred on the police authority by the local government legislation, to
      the extent that measures there contained were applied to police authorities by
21    s.l4 6 A (l) o f the Act o f 1972. The powers so conferred are listed in a helpful note
      provided by Miss Baxendale. I do not propose to set them out. They include (apart
      from s. 111( 1)) such matters as the disposition and treatment o f staff and the -
24    acquisition and disposal o f land.

                      The critical point which in my judgment emerges from a consideration
27    o f the interlocking roles o f Chief Constable, Secretary o f State and police authority is
      that it cannot have been within the contemplation o f Parliament in enacting the
       scheme, and in embracing within it s . l l l ( l ) , that the police authority should only be
30    empowered to incur expenditure in support o f those duties, and ancillary powers,
      which are specifically conferred upon it. The police authority holds the find s from
      which expenses for its local police force will be supplied’, s. 14. It is inherent in the
33    system (as Mr Baker submitted in reply) that the Chief Constable will apply to the
      authority for authorisation to incur expenditure; it may be for the use o f resources such
      as helicopters, or the installation o f video surveillance systems in city streets, or a host
36    o f other things. N o doubt the Chief Constable presents a general budget. We were not
      referred to any provision in statute which shows or suggests that the police authority’s
      power to accede to such requests rests in anything other than the combination o f s.6(l)
39    and s. 111(1). Given this, it seems to me plain that, in the particular context before us
      in this case, the legitimate scope o f the ancillary power provided by s. 111(1) cannot be
      restricted so as to support only those powers and duties which are expressly conferred
42    on the police authority. Those powers and duties are themselves ancillary; though they
      are very important, they take second place to the Chief Constable’s tactical role, and
      second place also to the Secretary o f State’s strategic role. S. 111( 1) must in context
45    (whatever it does in other cases) allow the police authority to support what its express
      powers and duties also support; and this is no less than its general function conferred
                                                         -25 -
      Drafl 30 March 1999 12:55
     Judgm ent: Approved bv the Court for handing down                        Ex Parte M urray & Duckenfield
     (subject to editorial corrections)                         R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
                                                                    Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority




     by s.6(1). If that is right, the authority may in principle decide to fund officers’ legal
     representation in proceedings no less than they may fond any other activity which the
3    Chief Constable might propose as being conducive to “the m aintenance of an
     efficient and effective police force for its area”.

 6                   This result is supported, if only ex silentio, by the decision o f this court
     in R v D erbyshire Police A uthority ex p. W ilson (8 August 1989, unreported save in
      The Times). The court had to consider a decision o f the police authority not to
 9   contribute to the legal expenses o f two police officers in relation to an auditor’s
      enquiry. The court assumed that s.4 o f the Police Act 1964 (the predecessor o f s.6(l))
     provided the power to grant financial assistance. However the point o f principle was
12   not argued. The applicants also point to other materials. In 1962 the report o f the
      Royal Commission on the Police was published. It indicated the then current practice
      in relation to the provision o f financial support to police officers in civil proceedings,
15   which included a requirement that “a constable must have acted in good faith in the
      intended execution of his duty” (para 196(a)). Para 197 stated:

18            “In England and W ales a distinction is made between a private prosecution,
              in which the decision as to the support of the constable will be taken on the
              sam e basis as in the case of a civil action, and a public prosecution brought
21            by the police or the Director of Public Prosecutions.”

     Home Office Circular 77/1987, published on 4 December 1987, stated:
24
               “... acting in pursuance of its general statutory duty to maintain an
               adequate and efficient police force for its area, the police authority has
27             discretion to meet expenditure incurred by officers in all kinds of legal
               proceedings w here the officers have acted in good faith in pursuance of
               their duties, or the interests of the force as a whole are involved...
iO             [Then under the heading “Private Prosecutions”]
*              A police officer should be able to carry out his duties in the confidence that,
                if he acts in good faith and exercises his judgment reasonably, his police
33             authority will support him. If, in a case where a m ember o f the public
                brings a prosecution against an officer, the authority is satisfied that the
                officer has acted in this way, the authority should provide or fund legal
36             advice and/or representation.”

        On 17 February 1998 Home Office Circular 4/1998 was published. Unlike its
39    predecessor it sits on the fence as regards the power o f a police authority to fond
       defences to private prosecutions. It has no persuasive effect one w ay or the other upon
       the issues in these proceedings. The earlier Circular, though obviously not a source of
42    law, may possibly possess some force as regards the purposes to be fulfilled by
       s.6( l ) ’s predecessor in s.4 (l) o f the Police Act 1964: see per Scarman L J as he then
       was in B ristol D C v C lark [1975] 3 AER 976, referred to in W ilson. But there are
45    great dangers in treating government pronouncements, however helpful* as an aid to
       statutory construction. I would prefer to base my conclusion, that s. 111(1) in principle
                                                         -26-
       Draft 30 March 1999 12:55
     Judgm ent: Approved by the Court for handing down                          Ex Parte M urray & Duckenfield •
     (subject to editorial corrections)                           R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police ’
                                                                      Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



      empowers the SYPA to support D and M ’s defence (and their participation in the
     judicial review against the DPP), upon those considerations touching the correct
 3   construction o f the material statutory provisions which I have already set out.

                     If my Lords agree with this conclusion, it is enough to dispose o f the
 6   case in the applicants’ favour. However we heard much argument on the question
      whether s.6( 1) conferred on the police authority any power, in any circumstances, to
      take action not otherwise expressly authorised. This engages Miss Baxendale’s
 9   proposition (a) as I have described it, and her reliance on the expressio unius est
      exclusio alterius doctrine. It only has relevance if I am wrong to hold, as I have done,
      that s. 111(1) in principle enables the SYPA to fund D and M even i f s.6( l ) does not
12   itself empower the authority to do anything. In this context I will deal only (and that
      shortly) with s. 88(4) o f the Act o f 1996, which as I have said is the high water-mark o f
      this part o f Miss Baxendale’s argument.
15
                    S.88 contains a comprehensive scheme as to liability on the part o f the
      police for torts. By ss .(l) the chief officer o f police for a police area is liable in
18   respect o f torts committed by constables under his direction and control in the
      performance or purported performance o f their functions. Without this provision there
      would be no such liability because police officers are not servants but office-holders.
21   Ss.(2) provides in part:

                 “There shall be paid out of the police fund -
24
                             (a) any damages or costs awarded against the chief officer of police
                             in any proceedings brought against him by virtue of this section and
27                          any costs incurred by him in any such proceedings so far as not
                             recovered by him in the proceedings...”

30   Ss. (4) provides:-
                 “A police authority may, in such cases and to such extent as appear to it to
                 be appropriate, pay out of the police fund -
33
                            (a)                   any damages or costs awarded against a person to whom
                            subsection applies in proceedings for a tort committed by that
36                          person,

                            (b) any costs incurred and not recovered by such a person in such
39                          proceedings, and

                            (c) any sum required in connection with the settlement              o f a claim
42                          that has or might have given rise to such proceedings.”

     In my judgment this provision offers no support for Miss Baxendale’s reliance on the
45   exclusio d te riu s rule. S.88 is self-standing. It has no implications for the general reach
     o f the police authority’s functions. And once s.88(4) was to allow the police authority
                                                         - 27 -
     Dr.*.? :. ~ March 1?’>S i2:33
     Judgment: Approved by the Court for handing down                           Ex Pane M urray & Duckenfield
     (subject to editorial corrections)                           R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
                                                                      Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority




     to cover damages awarded against an officer in a tort action, it is no surprise that it
     covers costs as well. If it did not, there might well be an argument - based on the
 3   exclusio alterius rule - that costs were deliberately excluded.



 5                  In ail these circumstances I do not think it necessary to go into the
     legislative history o f s.6( l), or to canvass the arguments which were addressed to us as
     to the construction or effect o f its predecessor, s.4 (l) o f the Police Act 1964. In the
 9   end there are two possibilities: s.6( l) empowers the police authority to do things, or it
     does not. I have so far proceeded on the assumption asserted by Miss Baxendale that it
     does not; but given that assumption, nevertheless for reasons I have sought to explain
12   the SYPA possesses in principle the legal power to fund D kid M.

                  In fact I think the better view is that s.6( l ) enables the police authority to
15   do things which reasonably support the function which s.6( 1) confers. Such a power is
     by no means open-ended. It would not allow the authority to invade the provinces o f
     the Chief Constable or the Secretary o f State; and this is an important and
18   considerable constraint.

                     In the course o f argument some time was spent, in fairness at the
21   encouragement o f the court, in seeing whether the specific provisions in the Act o f
     1996 or the local government legislation, conferring specific powers on the police
     authority, left gaps which only s.6(1) could fill. Points were made about lower ranks
24   rishts o f representation in legal proceedings, which are covered as appropriate by the
     Police Federation; and about the representation o f higher ranks in various forms o f
     legal proceedings. But the answer to the question we must decide, whether the power
27   to fund D and M in principle lies in the hands o f the SYPA, cannot in my judgment
     depend on a trawl through all the things a police authority is expressly empowered to
     do. The provisions which expressly confer and impose powers and duties on police
     authorities do not constitute an independent code. The police authority’s functions are,
4°   to use a questionable modernism, symbiotic with those o f the Chief Constable and the
     Secretary o f State. So judged, and for the reasons I have given, they allow the use o f
33   s. 111( 1) to fund officers in the defence o f private prosecutions and injudicial review
      proceedings.

36                         I would allow this application. It will be appropriate to hear counsel as
      to relief, and costs.

39    M R JU STIC E CRESSW ELL

      I agree.
42
      M R JU STIC E LA T H A M

       I also agree.

                                                        -28-
       Draft 30 March 1999 12:55
C W P Newell
Director, Casework.


                                                                                              Headquarters
                                                                                              50 Ludgcte H iE
                                                                                              London EC4M 7EX



                                                  1                            Direct Line:   0171-273 1226
                                                                              Suji'chbccrd:   0171-273 80G0
                                                                                 Facsimile:   0171-329 8366
   Messrs Winckworth Sherwood                                                      DX So:     300850 Ludgcte EC4

   Solicitors
   Dx: 2312 Victoria


                                                                       Our Ref: YBF/334I/89
                                                  J
                                                                       Your Ref: 24332/1/SBE/jet


                                                                               12 April 1999


                                N O TIC E OF DISCONTINUANCE


   D ear Sirs


   RE:      D A M D GODFREY D UCKENFIELD
            LEED S M AGISTRATES COURT -A D JO U R N ED H EA RIN G

  I have today written to the Clerk to the Justices at Leeds Magistrates’ Court, informing him,
  first, that I have taken over and secondly, that I am discontinuing under Section 23 of the
  Prosecution o f Offences Act, 1985, the following charge against your client: that on the 15th
  day o f April, 1989, at Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield, with intent to pervert the
  course o f justice, he did an act which had a tendency to pervert the course o f justice in that he
  lied about the circumstances-in which gate C:arth e FooibairStadium became open;, contrary to
  Common Law.

  The effect o f this notice is that your client no longer needs to attend court in respect of this
  charge and any bail conditions imposed in relation to it cease to apply.

  The decision to discontinue this charge has been taken because there is not enough evidence to
  provide a realistic prospect o f conviction.

  This notice does not apply to any other charges against you client. Your client must still attend
  court in respect o f these charges and any bail conditions imposed in relation to them continue to
  apply.

  Your client has the right to require the discontinued proceedings to be revived. If you u'ish to
  exercise this right, you must give written notice to the Clerk to the Justices at the above
  magistrates' court as soon as possible (and in any event within 35 days).

  Should your client wish to apply for any costs incurred in respect o f our taking over o f this
charge, you may make a written request to the Clerk to the Justices. It is not necessary to apply
for the proceedings to be continued in order to apply for your costs.

CA U TIO N : this notice only applies to the charge specified in it, and does not have any effect in
relation to any others that may be pending, or other proceedings against your client.

Yours faithfully




C W P NEWELL
 13-M AY-1999         1 6 :2 5   FRCP1   UINCKU1CRTH SHERUOOD      TO   501132079001                   P. 08

                                                                                              67A Rending
                                 Polics         endenls                                             Pangb
                                                                                             Berkshire RG'.
                                       Association                                            Tel: 0118 984
                                           of                                                 Fax: 0118 984.
                                                                                F.-msil: Polics.Supcrs@BTIn:erne
                                                         unci V / s I s s        Wch>itc: hap://www.PojiceS'jper''




Ref: PW /ESP


5 March 1999


    Simon Eastwood
' ‘nckworth Sherwood
Solicitors
35 Great Peter Street
Westminster
London
SW1P 3LR




 Dear Simon,

 REQUEST FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
 D A V ID DUCKENFIELD A N D BERNARD MURRAY

J ^ v r ite in reply to your letter of 18th February 1999 and in confirmation of our recent telephone
 conversation.

 The request which you made on behalf of David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray has now been
 considered bv the National. Executive Committee of the Association. The Committee recognises that
 it is a m ost unsatisfactory position in which the retired officers now find themselves in respect of
 fu n d in g their legal representation in the pending judicial review. The judicial review has
 implications in the service far beyond the Hillsborough case but of course it has major implications
 for the two retired officers. It is for this reason that the Committee believe it to be appropriate that
 thev be represented at the hearing.

 The Committee also believes that David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray should not put themselves
 financially at risk in order to co-join the action. For this reason the Association 15 prepared tc
 'underwrite' the legal representation of David Duck<3 nfio!d and Bernard Murray up to a maximum
 of £ 2 0 , 0 0 0 .

 Should the issue be returned to the South Yorkshire Police Authority follow ing the judicial review-
 then y o u mav consider it appropriate to draw its members attention to the fact that such finance
 assistance has not previously teen provided by the Association to its retired members. Although
 tliev are no longer members of t f e Association the National Executive Committee believes that the.e
    13-M flY -lSSS   16= 25   FROM   UJINCKUJORTH SHERUJOQD   TO   S01132079001     P .08




1S a strong moral obligation to provide them with the support they deserve and without doubt
require.

Yours^sincerelv




   - *Williams
o up^rmtend ent
N ational Assistant Secretary
7 April 1999


Walker Morris                                                                         Direct line   0113 3996136
Solicitors
Kings Court                                                                           Our ref       D H /K H
12 King Street
Leeds
L eed s°                                                                              Yourref
LSI 2HL




Dear Sirs

R - v - South Yorkshire Police A uthority Ex Parte Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police

We refer to our letter of 1 April.

The outcome of the consolidated applications for judicial review will be reported to the Authority
this Friday, 9 April 1999. The Authority will then decide how to proceed w ith your client's
application
 lr          for financial assistance.

In the circumstances, in addition to the matters requested in our letter of 1 April, would you kindly
clarify the matters on which financial assistance is being sought from the Authority. Would you
also let us know w hat other sources of funding have been or might be made available to your ^
clients. For example, w ould you clarify the scope of assistance that has been given by The Police
Superintendents Association.

We also feel that the Authority should have the benefit of a legal opinion of the merits on the^
charges against your client. In the circumstances, we w ould invite you to let us have an opinion
froirdeading Counsel instructed on behalf of your client. We w ould expect that opinion to detail
the prospects of succeeding at committal, trial, on an application to strikeout or otherwise.

The Authority will meet the costs of that opinion which we w ould expect to be limited to £1,000
 plus VAT.

 We look forward to hearing from you.


 Yours faithfully




 ; : \ ^ j r r e K ', sou th v o r k ih ir t? p o iic * \!e - 0 0 C 6 o .d o c \K H
Bv fax and post
R B M anning Esq
Walker Morris                                                         Direct line   0113 3996182
Solicitors
Kings Court                                                           Our ref       LKA/KH
12 King Street
                                                                      Your ref
Leeds
LSI 2HL




Dear Richard

Request for financial assistance

I refer to our recent exchange of correspondence and telephone conversations. I hope very soon to
be able to let vou have a substantive response to the issues we have raised.

In the meantime, I would like to mention four points:

1      Toint opinion of Counsel for Messrs Duckenfield and Murray

       Thank you for letting me have this document.

       However, it is not w hat I had hoped you would provide. It contains no analysis of the
       charges against your client, the evidence in support (and against) those charges or the
       merits of the charges and defences. Indeed, I would query whether it w ould actually
       qualify as an opinion on the merits of the charges against your client and Mr Duckeruield.
       It does little more than m ake one or two comments on the proceedings and repeat matters
       which are not in dispute.

       I also feel that a fee of £1,000 plus VAT for each of the teams of Counsel is not reasonable
       for w hat was provided, even if it were to qualify as an opinion.

       Therefore, I w ould invite you, and Simon Eastwood, and your respective Counsel to
       reconsider your response to our request of 7 April. I should hope you will let me h a \e
       something more for w hat the Authority is prepared to pay.

 2     Funding from the Police Superintendents Association

       I look forward to receiving details of the assistance provided by the PSA to your client.
R B M anning Esq                                                                                                                              30 April 1999




3               Costs

                  Thank you for your letter of 29 April w ith details in respect of some of your costs. I note
                  that the details do not include am ounts in respect of the South Sefton proceedings, nor is
                  there an estimate of the future costs.

4               Scope of applications

                   I have seen a copy of your client's letter of 22 April to the Authority. A copy is enclosed in
                   case you have not seen it. Would you please confirm that the letter sets out the scope of
                   your client's application and that the application may be summarised as follows:

                   4.1 For re-instatement of the assistance set out in the letter of 29 June 1998 from the Clerk
                       and Treasurer to the Authority;

                   4.2 For assistance to seek review of the decision of Chief Clerk, South Sefton Magistrates
                       Court, not to meet your client's costs out of central funds w'ere the Clerk so to decide;
                       and

                   4.3 For assistance to meet your client's costs of the application for judicial review against
                       the DPP, and the costs aw arded against him.

In the light of paragraph 4.3 above, w ould you also let me have details of the costs of the judicial
review against the DPP.together w ith the costs sought by the DPP pursuant to the order for costs
made against your client (if available).

I look forward to hearing from you on these matters.

Kind regards


Yours sincerely                                                                                                                      ......               -




 David Harlock

 c.c.           S Eastwood                                             -                   W inckworth Sherwood




    l d * r i 3 ‘* w \ v o l | \ j j \ d u u v £ j r r v t t \ s o u t h \ o r k s h t r * p o h c e \< e » 0 0 0 7 5 .d o c \ K H
South Y orkshire J t Sec                                     20 Ppr ’99       7 :4 2    P . 02




                  m


                                                             Dorset


                                                              16th April, jl999


W.J. W ilkinson
C lerk & T reasu rer
South Y orkshire Joint Secretariat
P.O. Box 37
R egent S treet
B am sley
S70 2PQ



D ear M r W ilkinson,                                                     i

H IL L S B O R O U G H D ISA S T E R - FIN A N C IA L ASSISTANCE FO R L E G A L COSTS

In February, 1998 I m ade application to the Police Authority foij financial assistance
with legal costs in respect o f the above and this was approved and com m unicated to
me in a letter dated 5th M arch. (C opy attached plus a letter of thanks to the
authority)                                                       j

D uring the eariy p art o f this year representations were m ade to     the   Police Authority
that they may not have the pow er to provide financial assistance junder H om e Office
C ircular 4/98 and legal advice suggested the position was unclear. O n the 5th
February, 1999 the Police A uthority, with some reluctance! decided to seek
clarification and tem porarily suspended paym ent o f legal costs pending the outcom e
o f a Judicial Review. O n 31st M arch the High C ourt ruled th a t the Police Authority
do have the power to provide financial assistance to police officers facing legal
proceedings.

 I th erefo re request th at th e financial assistance provided previously be reinstated, with
 confirm ation of continuing assistance with regard to private prosecution. In addition,
 as requested previously by my solicitors, I am seeking reim bursem ent o f my costs in
 m aintaining the judicial review against the D irector o f Public Prosecutions which was
 partially successful, insofar as the decision by the D irector in relation to the
 perverting the course o f justice charge was quashed. Further, if necessary, financial
 assistance for the judicial review in regard to South Sefton Chief Clerks refusal to tax
 the costs o f those previous proceedings.

 In addition,     an o rd e r for costs was m ade in the judicial review against the DPP
 because the      main decision was not overturned and I have been (ordered to pay two
 thirds o f the   D P P ’s costs in that regard. O n the basis o f C ounsel’* advice, considering
 the previous     decisions o f the D irector, the inquest verdict, the result o f Lord Justice

                               V-
Scuth Y orkshire J t Sec                               20 Ppr '99                P. 03




Stuart-Smith’s Scrutiny and the comments o f the judge, I understand that it was
appropriate for this challenge to be made.

Indeed this was borne out by the fact that as a result of the Highj Court decision the
DPP has discontinued the charge of attempting to pervert the course of justice on the
basis that there was no case to answer. This was the only c h arg e! alleging mala fides
against me. The remaining charges concern matters amounting to gross negligence
which will be vigorously defended. The High Court observe*! that^ the overall
challenge was highly arguable and had it been successful in all probability the whole
private prosecution with its obvious implications both personally and cost wise would
have been avoided.

I was employed as a police officer for 28 years rising to he rank of Chief
Superintendent until my retirement on medical grounds on the 10th November, 1991.
I had an unblemished disciplinary record and was commended fcr good police work
on three occasions. I only left the police service after the Police Surgeon had certified
I was medically unfit to perform the duties of a police officer an:d this was accepted
by the Chief Constable who approved of my medical retirement. My ill health was as
a result of the effects of the disaster.




 At the time of leaving the Police Service it was indicated I may face disciplinary
 proceedings for alleged irregularities arising from my conduct at the football stadium
 but these allegations would have been vigorously contested. I shall also contest the
 present criminal allegations with the same determination.




                           v;
South Y orkshire J t Sec                                20 Ppr ’99       7 '-M    p. 04




I ask th at the financial provision m ade' previously be reinstated an d the further
assistance be given as requested and would be grateful if y o u jw ould consider this
m atter at y o u r earliest opportunity. T he next hearing the the criminal case is on the
26th April when the m agistrates will review the progress of the prosecution.
                                                                     i


Y ours sincerely




 D D uckenfield
South Y orkshire J t Sec                                   23 fipr ’99     10 =17      P. 02




                                                                  Pontefract
                                                                  West Yorkshire




    W .T Wilkinson
    Clerk to the South Yorkshire Police Authority
    PO Box 37
    Regent Street
                                                                            COPY FOB YD®
    Barnsley
                                                                             INFORMATION
    South Yorkshire
    S70 2PQ

     22 April 1999

     Dear Mr Wilkinson

     I write as one o f the two former South Yorkshire Police Ofucqrs facing a private
     prosecution over the 1989 Hillsborough disaster.

     At all times I have carried out my duties as a Police Officer to the iest o f my ability.
     I served the Police for 27 years and I have an unblemished record. Like every Police
     Officer I believe that I am entitled to expect the support o f my C lief Constable and
     the Police Authority.

     When it became known that HFSG were going to initiate these private prosecutions,
     I was promised financial support. On 28 June 1 wrote to the Chie(f Constable asking
     that the Police Authority be approached .with a. view to then reimbursing any legal,
     expenses that I may incur in defending myself. By letter of 29 June 1998 the
     Authority referring to my request confirmed that it would meet such reasonable
     expenses as I may incur in defending the proceedings instituted. I have relied upon
     that support. It is a matter or record that:

     a.      with reluctance the Police Authority sought to revoke the decision to grant
             funding;

             that the decision was solely based upon the legal advice tha* the position as -to
             the power to grant funding was unclear at iaw;

      c.     that consequent upon a Judicial Review, the law has been clarified and it has
             been confirmed that the Police Authority does have the power to fund the
             defence for private prosecutions for Police Officers in Judicial Review;

             that HFSG were told that as the prosecution they should not be seeking to
             interfere in the way in which the Defendants costs were being met


                             1
South Y orkshire J t Sec                                  23 Ppr ’99      10:18       P. 03




    Shortly before the 1988 FA Cup semi-final I was promoted and appointed
    Superintendent of Hammerton Road Sub-division. I performed duty at the s^mi-iinal
    in charge of the Police Control Room and the event was seen as a successful event.
    When the 1989 semi-final between identical teams was arranged^ similar plans and
    preparations were made. Everyone is aware of the terrible events of that day and
    despite my best efforts on the day I am sorry that I personally co ild not do mor*- to
    minimise the deaths and the injuries that occurred.

     I cooperated fully with the public enquiry that followed, the inquest and the criminal
     enquiry. I answered all questions put to me. I accepted responsibility for the officers
     under my command. I accepted the criticism in the Taylor report, the decision of
     accidental death of the Coroner s Jury at the inquest and the decisions in 1990 and
     subsequently of the Director of Public Prosecutions that there was to be no prosecution
     against any person.

     I had upon my promotion to the rank of Superintendent followed the recommendation
     of taking out and paying for a Legal Expenses Insurance Policy. Ti^is is recommended
     because Superintendents are not eligible to any assistance through the Police
     Federation. A claim, under this policy, was made to meet my private legal costs for
     representation at the Coroner’s inquest. The inquest lasted much longer than anyone
     had anticipated so that the total legal expenses cover became exhausted. Application
     was made to the South Yorkshire Police Authority who agreed to indemnify me in
     relation to the remainder of my legal costs.

      A charge was laid against me by the Police Complaints Authority. I was absolutely
      confident that I could successfully defend this. I would refute any suggestion that
      these charges would have been proved and led to my dismissal! In January 1992
      whilst serving as a Superintendent I was informed that the charge against me had been
      withdrawn. Although I was relieved that there were to be no disciplinary proceedings
      I felt that I was also being denied the opportunity of being able to clear my name.
      This was particularly important to me as a Supervisory Officer who placed great
      importance on maintaining the respect of the Officers under my Command. I refute
      any suggestion that I took early retirement simply so as to avoid having to meet the
      disciplinary charges. I was denied the opportunity of clearing m> name because the
      charge was withdrawn.




                            v.
South Y orkshire J t Sec                                  23 fipr ’99     10:19      P. 04




     I have nothing but sadness and sympathy for the families and friends of people who
     lost their lives on that day particularly as so many were young people loved by those
     around them and I can understand their anguish and determination! I can understand
     their disappointment when the further scrutiny of evidence completed reaffirmed
     previous decisions. It was following the Stuart-Smith scrutiny and the Home
     Secretary’s acceptance that no further enquiry was called for nor any prosecution
     justified that these private prosecutions were commenced. Notwithstanding the decision
     of the Director of Public Prosecutions not to take over and discontinue the charges
      against me, it is still the position of the Crown Prosecution Service and Director of
      Public Prosecutions that there is no realistic prospect of a conviction. This confirms
      advices by two eminent QC’s in 1990 and the various other reviews and comes after
      they have reviewed every bit of information and “new evidence” which is suggested
      by HFSG.

     From the outset the prosecution has been led by Mr Alun Jones QC a leading and high
     profile Queen’s-Counsel. He has-been assisted by Junior Counsel. Mr Jones has
     appeared at every hearing and indeed he was the person that prepared the submissions
     to which bundles of documents were annexed which led to the grant of summonses.
     The Solicitor acting for HFSG is called Ann Adlington. She is a full time paid
     employee of Liverpool City Council. That Council has approved her secondment for
     the duration of the case to HFSG to conduct the proceedings with her wage being met
     by Liverpool City Council. HFSG held a pop concert at Anfield Stadium, Liverpool
     which is said to have raised half a million pounds to fund the Drosecution. They
     continue to invite subscriptions and donations and have announced that they are
     embarking on a further fund raising campaign.

     HFSG have suggested that in reliance upon the agreement of the South Yorkshire
     Police Authority to grant me financial support, I have been profligate with the amount
     of legal costs incurred. That is wholly untrue.

      I do not believe that it is unreasonable to hope to be defended against these serious
      charges with a similar level of legal expertise as the prosecution. Following my
      application in June 1998 for financial support from the Soutfj Yorkshire Police
      Authority and the approval of that support. I contacted the Solicitor who represented
                           •V
South Y orkshire J t Sec                                   23 fipr ’99    10:20       P . 05




    me at the inquest. He was aware of my own personal feelings, the previous issues and
    the background to the events. Ke has done everything to bring matters to a swift
    conclusion, but it now appears that a trial is to go ahead. My Solicitor has dealt with
    many of the issues himself, but equally it became obvious that Counsel were going to
    have to be retained. This was also done in consultation with and the approval of the
    South Yorkshire Police Authority. In pursuance of the attempt to bring the matter to
    a swift conclusion and as advised by Leading Counsel, application was made to the
     Director of Public Prosecutions for him to exercise his power under Section 6 (2) of
     the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 to take over the private prosecution and then to
     discontinue the prosecution under Section 23 (3) of the Prosecution o f Offences Act
      1985. My Solicitors and Counsel effectively managed to hold the Magistrates’ Court
     proceedings in abeyance pending the decision of the Director of P jblic Prosecutions.
     It came as a great disappointment to me and to my legal advisors that the Director of
     Public Prosecutions decided not to intervene and to allow the case to continue. It was
     the strong view of Leading Counsel that this decision of the DPP was unreasonable and
      perverse and he recommended that there should be an application for Judicial Review.
      That decision was not crystallised until reasons had been obtained from the Crown
      Prosecution Service as to the basis of their decision. In simple, every effort was made
      to avoid any unnecessary costs. The result of the Judicial Review w'as that a charge
      against former Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield of perverting the course of
     justice was quashed. Tne remaining charges, however, were left untouched by the
      Court albeit that they said that it was appropriate for the challenge to have been made
      and the case was highly arguable. Expressed another way, if he decision of the
      Director o f Public Prosecutions had been to intervene and to have quashed the
      proceedings, the Court would not have interfered with that decision

     I therefore seek as part of the financial assistance, an indemnity for payment of my
     costs in relation to the application to seek Judicial Review of the decision of the
     Director of Public Prosecutions and including that part of the Order for Costs made
     against me in favour of the Director of Public Prosecutions because the main decision
     was not overturned. No Order for Costs was made in favour of HFSG.

     At the very outset of the attempt by HFSGto prosecute me. Summonses were issued
     in the South Sefton Magistrates’ Court. Ultimately those summonses were withdrawn
     because they had in the view of my Solicitors been the subject Jof an ill conceived
     attempt to bring me hefnre a Magistrates’ Court in Liverpool which did not have
     jurisdiction. An Order for Costs was made for payment of my lkwyer’s fees out of
     Central Funds. The Clerk to the Justices at South Sefton has refused to tax the bill of
     costs submitted. I seek financial assistance in relation to an application for Judicial
     Review o f the decision of the Clerk to the Justices at South Sefton. This application
     is absolutely fundamental because if, as I hope, I am acquitted of the charges against
     me an Order could be made for payment of all or part of my defence costs out of
     Central Funds, from which I could then reimburse the Police Authority. If the South
      Sefton decision is left unchallenged it would almost certainly preclude an ability to
      have a bill of costs taxed for payment out of Central Fundsj in relation to the
      proceedings presently in the Leeds Magistrates’ Court.

      In summary therefore, 1 request:

      1.      That financial assistance provided previously be reinstated and with
Sauth Y o rk shire J t Sec                                       23 fipr *S9       10:20      P. 06




                confirmation o f continuing assistance without interruption from the date of
                initial authorisation in relation to all works in defending the prosecutions, those
                w orks to include the applications for Judicial Review and my part o f the
                liability for costs made in favour o f the Director o f Public Prosecutions in the
                Judicial Review proceedings.                                    I
                                                                               i
    2.          If so advised by Leading Counsel to make an application for Judicial Review
                in relation to a refusal of the Clerk to the Justices o f South Sefton to tax the
                bill o f costs for payment out o f Central Funds.

     Although o f course this request for financial assistance is made by me personally, I
     feel that Mr Duckenfield and myself have been singled out as easily identifiable
     representatives o f South Yorkshire Police, effectively making it the South Yorkshire
     Police that is on trial. The HFSG are using my presence in a C o p t o f Law to raise
     issues such as conspiracy and suppression of evidence against the South Yorkshire
     Police and they also include the West Midlands Police in this. There is a major public
     relations onslaught continuously mounted through me at the Police. jThus for example,
     in covering the proceedings in the High Court the reporter who interviewed Assistant
     Chief Constable Dames started his report with “the fight for justice goes on". I believe
     that there is a campaign to discredit the Police through me and] to apportion guilt
     before any trial or even any evidence has been heard, ignoring all other factors which
      com bined to culminate in this awful tragedy. By their efforts to remove financial
      support for me from the South Yorkshire Police Authority, riFSG continue tneir tactics
      to try to weaken my defence and in any event failing a conviction being recorded, to
      ruin me financially and to have completely destroyed my health.




     On that terrible day I was doing my duty as an Officer of the South Yorkshire Police
     in good faith and to the best of my ability. I am innocent o f the charges levelled
     against me. I would hope and expect to continue to be supported by the South
     Yorkshire Police Authority and in particular by the provision o f funding to meet my
     defence costs incurred hitherto and on a continuing basis.




      ivjLi n   u   iv i iu i& y      1

      Encs - Copy letter 28 June 1998 to Chief Constable
             Copy letter 29 June 1998 from Police Authority
                                                                       W A L K E R
                                                                       M O R R I S
                                                                                  Solicitors



                 Kings Courc, 12 King Street, Leeds, LSI 2 H L . Telephone 0113 23 325 00.
            Facsimile 0113 2459412. D o cu m en t Exchange 12051 Leeds 24. Email inrb(?walkemiorris.co.uk
                                        'X’eb: h:t3://ww\v.\va!kermorris.co.u.<



Garretts                                                                                                   Our ref                           RBM/BQW/MURRAY
Solicitors
DX 26444                                                                                                   Your ref                        DH/KH
LEEDS PARK SQUARE
                                                                                                             7 Mav 1999




Dear Sirs

R EQ U EST F O R FIN A N C IA L ASSISTANCE

We refer to your letter o f 30 April. We deal with the matters in the same order.

1.      We are a little surprised at the criticism that you make o f the joint Opinion
        of two very eminent Leading Counsel. Perhaps it is that you were not aware
        o f the enormous effort that was put into the preparation o f submissions to the
        Director o f Public Prosecutions. For your assistance therefore we are
        enclosing herewith a copy of the submission made by us which provides an
        almost line by line answer to the allegations made by the prosecution. What
        has been done in preparing this Opinion is as follows.

         1.               A review o f the submissions made to the DPP against the stated
                          allegations.

        2.               Consideration o f "new” evidence.

         3.              Consideration o f further correspondence and documentation from
                         HFSG since the submission to the DPP.

         4.                Consideration of the further documents which are sought by way of
                           witness summons.

            5.           Reference to all other papers that we have in our possession.

            As we understand it the reason for the request for an Opinion and the
            preparedness of the Authority to pay for this Opinion it is so that members
            can satisfy themselves as to the prospects o f success o f the defence.
            Although we do not believe that this is necessarily the criteria upon which
            they should make their decision hence forth, we do not understand the
            thinking. An Opinion, and indeed we venture to suggest any document does
            not have more substance because o f its length. You are aware that



                                              $
                      ■rtn er s ' uu»tc< is o f i f t :o ■.n>pri '.ton . a   u o a t r . i d d r r n . R e f i l l e d b y 7 '/V i.au - W : e .y : n l i ' f < o»du< t   i m r U t w u t oi»i>
                                                                       Garretts
                                                                    7 May 1999
                                                                        Page 2


immediately after the Taylor enquiry two eminent QC’s both advised the
D irector of Public Prosecutions that there was no reasonable prospect o f a
conviction against our Client.        That decision was in effect reviewed
consequent upon the Coroner’s inquest. It was very definitely reviewed again
by the DPP then consequent upon the scrutiny o f Lord Justice Stewart Smith
 and only in this last few months has the Director yet again looked at the
 matter and confirmed that his view is that there is no reasonable prospect o f
 a conviction. The two QC’s who give you this Opinion have confirmed their
 views that they too see no reasonable prospect of a conviction. They have
 additionally confirmed, for the benefit of members, that in their opinion there
 is no substance to the allegation that the defence have been profligate and
 that w ork carried out and the advices given would have been no different
 whether this case was funded on a private basis o f if there had been Legal
Aid.

If there is a particular point which you think has not been covered then we
will try to deal with this but we hope that now with the benefit o f the copy
o f the submission to the DPP and the explanation that you will understand
why the Opinion needed only to be short but equally why the fee is entirely
justified and we await the necessary payment.

 Funding from the Police Superintendents Association.

 This Association have indicated that they indemnify Client if necessary by
 making a payment in an amount of £20,000.00 as a contribution towards the
 cost of both Mr Murray and Mr Duckenfield in relation to the application for
 Judicial Review in relation to funding. We use the word “contribution”
 advisedly since when we checked with you at the hearing as to the marking
 on Miss Baxendale’s brief, we noted that there was effectively consistency
 in that Mr Harrison was marked at £12,500.00 plus VAT with Junior Counsel
 at one half. We give you this information although we do not believe as a
 matter o f l a w that those-instructing you are entitled to it or that they should
 use this information as a reason to themselves refuse to meet the costs
 incurred.

 Costs

 W e have spoken to Leading Counsel and Junior Counsel. They have
 estimated that between now and the beginning o f the committal hearing they
 are going to be involved in 120 hours and preparation each. W hilst we have
 not yet been asked to agree a brief fee we would anticipate £15,000.00 plus
 VAT for Leading Counsel with one half of that for Junior Counsel. We
 would estimate a daily refresher of £1,000.00 for Leading Counsel and Junior
 Counsel at one half. Thus if the case at committal takes two weeks, you are
 looking at Counsel’s fees for Leading Counsel and Junior Counsel in total at
                                                                        Garretts
                                                                     7 May 1999
                                                                         Page 3


between £55,000.00 to £85,000.00 plus VAT.

What time is going to have to be set aside for our team in this office is more
difficult to gauge. There is clearly a lot o f work to do with the documents
which have been served upon us but on which we have not been able to
substantially work due to the uncertainty about funding. We now know that
there are substantial amounts of photographs and plans already ordered to be
produced by the Stipendiary Magistrate. There is also the summons against
the Assistant C hief Constable which seeks a vast amount o f further
documentation, some o f which we already know is going to be made
available. A lot o f time is going to have to be spent with Client. As a rough
estimate and having regard to the amount of time that Counsel says will have
to be spent by him on considering documents that will have been prepared
by us, we believe that we shall have 200 hours of preparation time before the
committal starts and with two weeks o f committal we are looking at a total
 figure o f £40,000.00 to £50,000.00 plus VAT and disbursements. It may
 help you to know what we have in mind for immediate pre-committal days
 and tim e during the committal itself for it in many ways m irrors what
 happened in London during the Judicial Review. This office will become the
 nerve centre. All papers now immediately needed in Court will be held here.
 B oth sets o f Solicitors and Counsel will meet for Court. We will use the
 room for work over the lunch break and for work at the conclusion o f the
 day in Court.

We all hope of course that the committal proceedings will see the conclusion
o f the case. We appreciate that if the case is committed then the issue of
costs o f trial will have to be addressed. You will immediately understand
that we cannot give you any sort of- estimate just now. We appreciate that
the members will be looking at the reserve which has been set aside for these
and it is clear that if unhappily the case is committed for trial then the
reserve is not going to be sufficient. However, we are helped by knowing
something of the history of the provision of this reserve. We understand that
at the tim e o f the Stewart Smith enquiry, the only likely persons against
w hom a prosecution was indicated were Mr Duckenfield and PC Bichard.
We also understand that the only possible allegation against Mr Bichard was
 one of perjury in relation to the TV c a m e ra . '-This discreet issue would in our
 view have probably needed a reserve o f no more than £20,000.00 to
 £25,000.00 for trial. In essence therefore the whole of the reserve was for
 the defence o f M r Duckenfield. Thus to the extent that the two former
 officers have to be separately represented and even with the respective
 Solicitors and Counsel doing their very best to avoid duplication (which we
 certainly have achieved) one really ought to look at the adequacy o f the
 reserve as if the same amount had been allocated for each o f the two
  defendants.            Furthermore as you appreciate these costs nave been
  s u b s ta n tia lly added to by virtue o f the Judicial Review proceedings.
                                                                             Garretts
                                                                          7 May 1999
                                                                              Page 4


4-.    Scope o f applications

       We confirm points 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3 save that we would ask that in addition
       to 4.3 there be authorised assistance to meet our Client’s costs for the
       application for Judicial Review o f the funding application subject to
       reimbursement upon payment o f the order for costs made against Ann
       Adlington.

        Our letter of 6 May has provided you with details o f all o f the costs incurred
        up to 31 March. It is extremely difficult in relation to the Judicial Review
        proceedings to actually separate out those costs which relate to the Judicial
        Review against the DPP and those costs which relate to the funding as for
        some o f the time the action in our office were concurrent.

We confirm that the DPP has not given any indication o f the level o f his costs
pursuant to the order made against our Client and Mr Duckenfield.
                       A D LIN G TO N -V- D U CK EN FIELD and M URRAY




       REPRESENTATIONS TO THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS

                           ON BEHALF OF MR. BERNARD MURRAY




1.1      In 1996-7, the H rS G pretext for re-opening the investigation was a claim that ‘new evidence’
existed to undermine the previous findings and decisions. That claim was emphatically rejected by Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith’s Scrutiny. It was inevitable that any post-Scrutiny attempt to justify a prosecution
would include another claim that further fresh evidence had come to light.

i .2    We are now able to respond to the ‘new evidence’ claim, as well as to the variety ot other claims
in the prosecutor's representations.

I j     Tr.ere are also important points to be made aoout the declared CPb/"D?P policy on the prov isions
o f the Prosecution o f Offences Act 19S5.

CPS/DPP Policy - evidence
2.1    The CPS letters to HFSG on 27 July and 4 August 199S set out Policy. They refer to evidence,
public interest and the interests o f justice. The latter is one specific aspect o f public interest. Tnis is not
the moment for detailed argument about policy, but we indicate our concerns.

2.2      The evidence criterion for intervention is wrong. (We do not accept that the private prosecutor
can make out a case to .answer.. What follows is.addressing the principle behind the policy.) It cannot be
right to restrict the Director’s scope for intervening on evidence grounds to cases where there is ‘clearly
no case to answer’.

2.3   First, it has the effect that the Director will only intervene in cases where the Court would be
bound to stop the proceedings in any event, either.by refusing to issue summonses, or by refusing to
commit for trial. To that extent, intervention on evidential grounds would never serve to achieve more
than an acceleration o f the inevitable.

2.4      Second in rare cases such as the present, it has a potential for undermining the public’s
perception of the authority of the Director, as well as that of the Attorney-General. For more than eight
years, the Director has publicly asserted that there is no realistic prospect o f conviction o f any person on
the charges now levelled against the two defendants. This after the most detailed, thorough, responsible
and high-level assessment o f the position it is possible to imagine, carried out more than o n c e and
coupled with the clear conclusions o f the Scrutiny o f Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, which have m turn been
publicly accepted by the Director, the Attorney-General and the Home Secretaryv T i e policy
contemplates that the Director may conclude that because it is net clearly demonstrated that there is no


                                                                                Mr Murray's representations - 1/5
case to answer, all that has gone before must count for nothing, and that the publicly appointed body
responsible f o r criminal prosecutions must stand aside and leave it to a private prosecutor. That such an
outcome is theoretically possible suggests that the underlying policy is flawed. Particularly in the unique
circumstances o f this case, where an independtnt Scrutiny Inquiry under a Lord Justice o f Appeal has
been set up by Ministers o f the Crown to examine whether there is any basis for reviewing the decision
net to prosecute.

2.5     We mention the position o f the Attorney-General at this stage because there is a need to
coordinate the roles o f the principal officers responsible for the criminal process. Were there to be a
committal for trial to the Crown Court, the Attorney’s power to enter a nolle prosequi would be called
upon by the defence. Ex hypothssi, such intervention only arises after it has been found that there is a
case to answer. It cannot be right that the Director is unable to intervene on evidential grounds if there
may be a case to answer, when it is plain that the Attorney can do so in a case where there undoubtedly
is a case to answer. We note section 3(1) o f the 1985 Act. In any case where the Attorney would enter
a nolle prosequi, notwithstanding that there is or might be a case to answer, there is nothing in law or
principle to preclude the Director from intervening to the same effect at an earlier stage, acting either
independently or under the Attorney’s superintendence.

CPS/DPP Policy - public interest
3.1    The public interest factors to be taken into account when considering whether to take over and
discontinue a private prosecution will not be different from or less than those factors which the Code for
Crown Prosecutors requires to be taken into account when deciding whether to prosecute.

 3.2     Without repeating 2.4 above, the public pronouncements from the office o f the Director, from
 the Law Officers and Ministers o f the Crown have created a legitimate expectation in the defendant that
 there will be no prosecution. It is unthinkable that this should effectively be overridden by the
 commencement or a private prosecution. It would set at nougni the assuiance ^cmain^-d in §10.1 of the
 Code. There is no basis for invoking the exceptions in §10.2.

 3.3     Material ou'olic interest factors against prosecution as identified in §6.5 o f the Code are:
         (d) long delay, and
         ( 0 significant ill-health o f the prospective defendant.
 Both applv here. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith found significant instances Oi 6-ii.eied rewoKections in
 witnesses upon whom the prosecutor would rely.

 3.4     Assessment o f culpability. We do not propose to argue issues o f substantive law at this stage. For
 present purposes it is sufficient to refer to the quotation which Lord Taylor chose to cite prominently,
 with obvious approval, in his Interim Report, PART II - WHY DID IT HAPPEN? [p.20].
          “Events o f the magnitude o f Hillsborough don’t usually happen just for one single reason, nor
          is it possible to pin the blame on one single scapegoat... Disasters happen because a whole series
          o f mistakes, misjudgments and mischances happen to come together in deadly combination.”
          (The Archbishop o f York.)
 Lord Taylor’s Report, read as a whole, found the disaster was caused by a series o f factors: ultimately
 a failure o f system s'as well as o f single individuals, involving the Police as a Force, Sheffield
 Wednesday as a Club, their consulting engineers, the Health & Safety Executive, the Local Authority and
 the Football Association.

 3.5       Regrettably, HFSG has become a campaigning pressure group for what is now a relentless pursu it
 o f these ex-police officers. Their lives have been and will continue to be seriously afflicted by their
 knowledge that they were involved at the epicentre of the disaster. A fair and dispassionate assessment
 o f the position o f the two proposed defendants would see them as having been seriously affected by
 involvement in the tragedy. But there is no prospect o f this private prosecution being carried on and

                                                                                   Mr Murray’s representations - 2/5
    conducted with any resard to the broader concepts o f fairness and balance of public interest factors which
    any defendant in a criminal trial in this country is entitled to expect.



    CPS/DPP Policy the private prosecutor.
                      -


    4.1       Even if there were to be a defensible evidential basis for continuing the proposed prosecution,
    it would be wholly wrong for the public prosecuting authority to abandon responsibility for the conduct
    o f what undoubtedly would be a serious, complicated and important high-profile case. Section
    3 (-)(b)(i) o f the 1935 Act imposes a duty on the Director to institute and have the conduct o f proceedings
    where it appears that:
              “the importance or difficulty o f the case makes it appropriate that proceedings should
              be instituted by him...” .
    Although this duty is distinct from the duty to “take over” the conduct o f proceedings, it is not a duty
    which the Director can ignore. Parliament did not envisage that important or difficult cases (this would
    be both) should be left to private prosecution. Tne scope for intervention by a private prosecutor in such
    cases must clearlv be confined to situations where inertia, partiality or improper action on the part o f the
    public prosecutor can be demonstrated.
r
    4.2      Although section 6(1) of the Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985 expressly preserved the right of
    private prosecution, it is clearly not an unfettered right. The purpose in preserving private access to the
    criminal courts was stated by Lord Wilberforce in Gouriet -v- Union o f Post Office Workers [1978] A.C.
    435 at 477:
             “This historical r ig h t ..., though rarely exercised in relation to indictable offences, and
             though 'ultimately liable to be controlled by the Attorney-General (by taking over the
             prosecution and, if he thinks fit, entering a nolle prosequi) remains a valuable
             constitutional safeguard against inertia or partiality on tne part or authority.
    See also: Report o f the Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure (Cmnd 8092 (1981)): it provides a
    useful and effective safeguard against "improper action oy tne prosecuting authority, cited by Lloyd L.J.
    in R -v- Bow Street Stipendiary Magistrate and Another, (1993) 96 Cr.App.R. 405.

    4.3     The lengthy historv o f public investigations into the circumstances o f the Hillsborough tragedy,
    carried out at all stages under the auspices o f the Home Secretary and the Lav* Otticers, cleany
    demonstrates that this is not an appropriate case for private prosecution.



    HFSG 1998 Representations to D.P.P.
            -

    5.1     Fundamentally, the HFSG representations amount to claims that, by reason o f fraudulent
    interference with and*/or concealment o f evidence by the South Yorkshire Police and/or the West
    Midlands Police, the Taylor Inquiry, the D.P.P., the Police Complaints Authority, the Inquests, and Lord
    Justice Stuart-Smith were all in their turn deceived about the culpability o f the South Yorkshire Police
    Force in relation to the tragedy o f Hillsborough. These claims are presumed to be true, then translated
    simplistically into a justification for prosecuting the two proposed defendants.

    5.2    To overcome the objection that these were the very claims expressly considered and rejected by
    the Scrutiny HFSG contends that it is only post-Scrutiny that material has been released for their
    consideration which now enables them to demonstrate the truth o f their assertions. It is necessary to
    examine this material with close attention to detail, for the claims based upon it are wholly spurious.

     5.3     When viewed in conjunction with the serious allegations which were made to Lord Justice
     Stuart-Smith. the present claims are seen as the continuation o f a series o f unfounded allegations made
     in support o f the long-standing conspiracy theory which has become entrenched in the thinking ot me


                                                                                 Mr Murray's representations - 3/5

                                      >5
                                                                                                           000066
HFSG, and which now dominates the presentation o f all their arguments. A summary' of certain
allegations together with the findings o f the Lord Justice is set out in the following table.




                         ALLEGATION                               FINDINGS OF STUART-SMITH L.J.

          Video rapes were stolen by S.Y. police as part   There is no evidence for this suggestion. §22.
   1
                                                           One tape would have been blank. The other showed
          o f a ‘cover-up’, p.18, §22.
                                                           turnstiles 9 to 16. §21.

  2       Police blamed failure to see overcrowding in     “Quite untenable,” p.26, §61. Note also:
          pens 3 and 4 on fact that camera 5 defective.    [a] pp.24-5, § §51 and 52: Mr Murray had given
          This was deliberately false, p.20, §33.1         evidence to the opposite effect. Ignored by HFSG
                                                           and not drawn to the attention o f Stuart-Smith L.J.
                                                           [b] Mr Houldsworth (upon whom HFSG relied)
                                                           said police would not rely on cameras; they had a
                                                           good view out o f the window: p.25, §55.
                                                           [c] When consulted by Stuart-Smith L.J., counsel
                                                            for the families at the Inquest said it had never been
                                                           the police case that they could not see pens 3 and 4
                                                            were full because CCTV not working: p.26, §58.

   3      Evidence from video tapes o f what was filmed    There was never any disappearance or concealment
          bv camera 5 deliberately supressed and           o f video footage from camera 5: p.27, §63. “There
          concealed (by S. Yorkshire police and'or West    is no new video evidence...” p i 04 §7
          Midlands), p.20, §33.2                           Allegation that police hid videotape evidence is
                                                           completely unfounded. There was no suppression
                                                           or disappearance o f footage from the vital tapes ...
                                                           which were at all tim es... available to be seen by
                                                           legal representatives of the families: p.30, §77.

   A       Houldsworth’s evidence was deliberately          Importance of his evidence exaggerated out o f ail
           withheld from Inquest jury, p.20, §33.5          proportion. His existence and evidence were known
                                                            to Taylor Inquiry and to Coroner: p.36, §97.

      5    Inquest verdicts procured by fraud,              Submissions unfounded: p.48, §53.
           suppression o f evidence or insufficiency of     “The suggestion that the evidence now put before
           inquiry; fraudulent concealment o f evidence:    me ... was deliberately suppressed and those
           p.48, §52.6                                      concerned acted in bad faith i s ... wholly
                                                            irresponsible”: p.52, §70.
                                                            [fraudulent concealment o f evidence]; “ suggestion
                                                            is false and I regard it as wholly irresponsible”:
                                                            p. 104, §12.



 5.4     The prosecutor continues to assert that the South Yorkshire Police and/or West Midlands
 carefully withheld important material from the Director and the Coroner, such that the 1990 decision not
 to prosecute and the Inquest verdicts were reached on an incomplete assessment o f material evidence.
 These claims are dealt with in detail in Schedule A. An illusion o f incomplete consideration is created
 by highlighting the fact that not all statements were considered and not all witnesses were called. Ot
 course they were not. For obvious reasons, many witnesses were repetitive o f others, many were unab e
 to speak about the focal matters under inquiry. Some sifting process to extract representative sample
 witnesses on critical issues was essential, otherwise the Hillsborough Inquiry and the Inquests wouW
 have been unmanageable. Evidence now relied on by the prosecutor as being new and previously

                                                                                  Mr Murray's representations - 4/5
unconsidered is substantially the same evidence as has already been thoroughly considered, but from
different sources. This is analysed in Schedules B and C.




Mr Murray's representations - accompanying Schedules.
6.1      To assist the Director to give detailed consideration to the points and counter-points arising out
of the KFSG representations, we have prepared responses in the form o f three Schedules:
         A - responses to the 40-page representations o f Mr Jones Q.C. (24 September 1998);
         B - an analysis o f the claims about ‘new evidence’ as it relates to the witness statements referred
to in the HFSG letter to CPS (24 August 1998); (these statements were withheld from us until late
September when they came with the representations);
         C - an analysis o f the claims about ‘new evidence’ as it relates to the 22 statements in Annex D
to the representations.
We respond to the claims made about the 38 s tatements served in support o f the summonses in schedule
A. Most o f these are general in nature.

6.2     Our submission is that none o f the statements relied on establishes anything o f material
significance, that is, which has not been known o f or available before from oiher sources. The
prosecutor’s presentation relies on bulk without substance.

6.3     For brevity, we have adopted short-form responses where the same response can be made to
claims about witnesses or points about their evidence, (or deletions or amendments where these
allegations are made). The meaning o f the notation we have adopted is as follows:
         NOT N E W - the witness says nothing which has not been established before by other evidence;
         INQUIRY, INQUEST, or SCRUTINY - indicates that the evidence, point or argument was fully
         taken into account by the relevant body, albeit as a result o f evidence from other sources;
         AFTERMATH - this indicates that the evidence or argument relates to events after the traged.V
         had occurred, which are not material to the charges against Mr Murray;
         NOT MATERIAL - this indicates that the evidence or argument is not material to the charges
         against Mr Murray.

6.4      Accompanying these Representations.
         [1] The judem ents o f the Divisional Court-in R -v- H.M .Coromr fo r South Yorkshire, ex
         p .Stringer, (see Schedule A, response to §§ 54-55).
         [2] Yorkshire Evening Post report o f 17 September 1998, (see Schedule A, response to § 110).




                                                                      Michael Harrison Q.C.

                                                                      Simon Myerson.



 Park Court Chambers
 40, Park Cross Street
 LEEDS, LSI 2QH.

 2 October 1998.

                                                                             Mr Murray's representations - 5/5
                                                              t


    SCHEDULE A: RESPONSE TO PROSECUTOR’S REPRESENTATIONS: 24 September 1998.


                                       HFSG ARGUMENT                                                                             RESPONSE
      §
      5     (a) CPS Code borne in mind.                                                     [a] Its principles have not been applied.
            (h] Realistic prospcct of conviction on basis of Taylor findings alone          [b] If true, this was the position in 1990, so the implication is that counsel then
            (supported by proper basis o f witness statements).                             advising the DPP, and the Director himself, were wrong. They were not.
            [c] Prospect o f conviction enhanced by Adomako.                                               [c] It is not. The fundamental principles o f law are the same. In any
            [d] Private prosecutor entitled to apply less strict test. Approach o f CPS     event, it would be contrary to principle and practice to prosecute after 9 years on
            now.                                                                            basis o f a change in interpretation o f the common law.
                                                                                            [d] Wrong. A private prosecutor who does not believe in a realistic prospect of
<
                                                                                            conviction ought not to prosecutc. The declared CPS policy o f not intervening with a
                                                                                            view to discontinuing is a different issue; as to which see §§2.2-2.5 o f the
                                                                                            accompanying representations.

     6-7    [a] Public interest factors and basis for taking over a private prosecution.    [a] See § § 3 . 1 - 4.3 of accompanying representations.
            [b] Prosecutor may decide to raise an abuse o f process argument.               [b] Bizarre.

     9-10   [a] Mass o f new evidence made available since Scrutiny, hitherto               [a] There is no ‘new’ evidence o f substance. It is the same evidence from different
            concealed by SYP.                                                               sources. See detailed analysis in Schedules B and C.
            [b] Significance ‘difficult to Overstate’; disclose manipulation o f evidence   jb] An extravagant claim in every respect.
            to the past benefit o f the Defendants and SYP in generaj;;cause all aspects
            o f investigation, statements e|c to be examined differently.

      11    Implies: (a] that the defendants rely upon previous                             Wrong. The issue is whether there is any basis for the DPP to reconsider the 1990
            inquiries/investigations, and [b] that propositions (a)-(e) are relevant to     decision, sufficient to override the S-S conclusion that there was none. '1 he corrupt
            that, (presumably to undermine reliance).                                       conspiracy fixation of the private prosecutor was repudiated in SCRUTINY. See also
                                                                                            INQUIRY §16, Lord Taylor, and tribute to fairness and thoroughness o f police
                                                                                            investigation from Secretary o f Football Supporters’ Association.

      12    [a] As pointed out in previous submissions, Taylor findings in themselves       fa] In §5 ante, it is claimed the same findings alone disclosed a realistic prospect o f
            amount almost to a prima facie case.                                            conviction.
            (b) The decision was taken by Duckenfield, with the agreement o f               jh] This identifies the prosecutor’s alleged basis for manslaughter against Mr Murray.
            acquiescence o f Murray.




       CD                                                                                                                                                       S C I I I ’D U I J i A - 1/7

       CD
       CD
       CD
       CD
       CO
                                                              (                                                           I




13          Witness statements already provided to the defence...provide cogent               This must refer to the 38 witness statements Hilton (1) to Lang (38), The statements
            evidential support for manslaughter/misfeasance allegations, combined             do not support the claim to cogent evidence of manslaughter or misfeasance. There is
            with admissions o f fact by each defendant. The same is repeated as to            nothing ‘new’ in the statements.
            negligence in §16.                                                                The defendants' statements and evidence have always been available. Fully
                                                                                              considered by INQUIRY, DI’P (1990), SCRUTINY.

14          Elements o f manslaughter.                                                        No admission as to individual criminal liability in respect o f any element.

15          Taylor found, and inherent in acceptance of liability by SYP in negligence        Muddle, Admissions by SYP in civil proceedings have no relevance to prosecution
            cases, that police were under duty, in breach, and causation. Frost.              o f individuals. Corporate civil liability is different from individual culpable homicide

17          'Conspicuous features’ in 35 (sic) statements:                                    [a| Not new. l-’act well-known to INQUIRY; §230 “Since pens 3 and 4 were full by
            [a] 1988 - police diverted spectators from tunnel;                                2.50 pin, (lie tunnel should have been closed off whether gate C was to be opened or
            [bj “The unedited statements o f White and Lang ... prove the same, and           not. The exercise was a simple one and had been carried out in 1988 ... Unfortunately,
            suggest that it had been the practice o f senior ojfwers to ensure that the       the 1988 closure seems to have been unknown to the senior officers on duty at the
            tunnel was closed when the pens were full...                                      time. It did not figure in the debriefing notes. It therefore had no influence on the
            [c] could easily be seen from steps near control box;                             planning for 1989,”
            [d] this evidence ‘suppressed’ until 1998.                                        |b] A most .serious distortion o f what the statements said. lnsp. WIIITU: (p .100-101)
                                                                                              “Although on rare occasions in the past I have used the gates nearest the concourse to
                                                                                              control How away from the tunnel around to the south pen. 1 did this only for a few
                                                                                              moments as a psychological support to turn the fans round to the south pen. 1 would
                                                                                              not use them for any length o f time as when they are in the closed position they would
                                                                                              be an obstruction in an emergency evacuation situation as they wqpld have lo be
                                                                                              opened against the crowd and also because this is the only ingress/ egress for fans in
                                                                                              the central pens to get to the snack bar and toilet." SCRUTINY, p.208.
                                                                                              P.C.LANG: (p. 165) [1988] “From approximately 2.30pm (1430) the area outside the
                                                                                              pens contained a large number o f people and at the stairs there was an occasional
                                                                                              ‘rush’ but sufficient stewards were on duty to funnel the fans into a fairly orderly
                                                                                              queue. Sometime between 2.45 (1445) and 2.50 (1450) I received an order to close
                                                                                              the gates at ilio top o f the tunnel leading to the central pen and remain at these gates
                                                                                              to prevent entry by any further fans into the central pen. 1 closed the right hand gate
                                                                                              and remained at this post directing fans to the wing entrance.... 1 do hot know who
                                                                                              gave the order to close these gates or why the order was given."
                                                                                              [c] Not new. View from control box was established by INQUIRY: §231. This is
                                                                                              accepted by 11FSG in §19.
                                                                                              [d] The facts were not suppressed.


     V- J                                                                                 SCI 1HDULF. A - 2/7
     CD
     CD
     CD

     CD
                                                          (




18        [a] Evidence o f how fans entered the tunnel and the central pens after Gate   [a] None of this is ‘new evidence’.
          C opened.                                                                      [I>] This is not what Guest said. The words in our italics have been added. The
          [b] “P.C.Guest said that at 2.40 it was not going to be possible to            witness is dead. 1lis statement will not he admissible.
          accommodate the crowd outside the Leppings Lane entrance in ihoxe
          pens.”

19        Murray had been on duty in 1988 in the Control llox. I le culpably failed      The fust sentence asserts nothing new. Mr Murray’s position in 1988 and 1989 has
          in 1989 to give the proper and obvious advice.                                 been known throughout. 'Hie second sentence is assertion not proof.

20                                                                                       Nothing new. All of this has been well known throughout.

23        Further witnesses.                                                             Not disclosed.

24                                                                                       None o f this can affect the Director’s decision. The advice to SYP has come from
                                                                                         CPS and conforms with authority.

26        “ It has been an important part o f the prosecutor’s approach to the            This is a spurious justification. Nothing that I1FSG has now which it did not have
          Director’s current review, and o f onr justification for bringing criminal     pre-Scmtiny adds anything o f material significance to the facts which have been
          proceedings in 1998, that the HFSG has been deprived of critical               established since the INQUIRY INTERIM REPORT (August 1980), See Schedules
          information, statements and documents about the disaster for nine years,"      analysing the statements upon which the private prosecutor relies.

31        [a] Documents made available by Home Secretary in 1998 permitted               (a) This is the SCRU TINY material, all examined by Lord Justice Stuart-Sinitli.
          HFSG to embark with confidence on prosecutions.
          [b] Information now available undermines Inquest verdicts of accidental        [1>] The SCRUTINY conclusion after consideration o f the same mnterial was exactly
          death, and calls into question validity o f previous investigations.           ihe opposite.




     cn
     CD
                                                                                                                                                            S C I 1 H D U L E A - 3/ 7
     CO
     CD
                                                                                 These paragraphs expose the reality o f the prosecutor’s approach, and demonstrate
32-35    The decision to prosecutc.
                                                                                 the implausibility o f the current claims to have further new evidence:
                                                                                 ■        the Scrutiny conclusions were rejected and ignored, § 3 1; (by implication, so
                                                                                          were the views o f the Home Secretary, the Director and the A-G as to the
                                                                                             finality o f the Scrutiny Report);
                                                                                 m          the decision to prosecute was taken before considering any o f the Scrutiny
                                                                                             material which was to be made available, (despite conceding the importance
                                                                                             of not making any decision without first doing that), §32;
                                                                                 *          Leading Counsel advised that prosecutions were justified on the basis o f the
                                                                                             INQUIRY findings, §33; (this involves that his advice purported to override
                                                                                             the 1990 advices o f leading counsel to the DPP, the decision o f the DPP, and
                                                                                             the Scrutiny conclusions);
                                                                                 ■          after counsel was instructed to formulate charges on the basis o f the Taylor
                                                                                             findings, examination o f the Scrutiny material disclosed sustained
                                                                                              suppression o f the truth beyond the allegations which had led to the
                                                                                           SCRUTINY, §35.
                                                                                 It is obvious that some pretext of further, post-SCRUTlNY, fresh evidence would
                                                                                 have to be claimcd in purported justification of private summonses. _______________

                                                                                  This argument is contrived to overcome the two factors which most clearly show the
 36-37    Editing o f statements: 24.8.98 documents and Annex D
                                                                                  prosecutions to be unjustified: the 1990 decisions and the SCRUTINY conclusions.
  39      [a] led to DPP and counsel being misled in 1990;
                                                                                   The spurious nature of the claims is demonstrated by careful analysis of the
          lb] Lord Justice Stuart-Smith also misled on subjcct;
          [c] policy of withholding information on negligence from INQUIRY and    statements now relied on: see SCHEDULES B and C.

          PCA.
                                                                                     [a] Sharpies’ statement does not seek to exculpate either defendant, Inconceivable
 40-42    Sharpies and Hatfield
                                                                                     that experienced leading counsel and the DPP were influenced by juxtaposition, or
          [a] deliberate plot to place Sharpies' statement between those of
          Duckenfield and Murray in Master Witness List to influence reader          that anyone could have thought they might be.
                                                                                     (b] Something sinister seems to be hinted at here, but the author does not seem to
          against prosecutions;
                                                                                     know what. The MWL position seems to contradict the theory advanced in § 4 1.
          (b] Hatfield’s undisclosed statement was placed last but one in MWL.




                                                                                                                                                         SCHEDULE A -4/7
                                                            (




43-48      Philips Report                                                                   Fanciful speculation that the report o f a witness for SYP in contribution proceedings
           [a] Report is dated ‘August 1990', same month as DPP decided not to              has influenced the 1990 decisions not to prosecutc.
           prosecutc, §43; date o f report is significant. Counsel advised against          (a | An irrational association o f unrelated events, based upon coincidence o f timing,
           prosecution on 6 August 1990, but "contribution hearings" pending.               [b] Persistent speculation in the face o f contra-indications.
           [b] Not known to I1FSG whether DPP saw report. Not on list of                    |c) Unsubstantiated speculation. Irrelevant issue.
           documents considered by DPP in 1990. Maybe DPP saw other documents.
           Maybe report incorporated into W/Midlands Report.
           [c] Philips misled.

49-53      Selective supply o f information to DPP                   .                      [a] The statements were edited to excludc opinion. This could not have influenced
           {a] edited statements;                                                           DPP because not admissible.
           [b] provisional selection for committal: only 7 in MWL, 8 at Inquest, 2 at       {h] the illusion o f ‘new evidence’ by suggesting the committal will be based largely
           Inquiry;                                                  i                      on evidence not considered before; there is nothing ‘new’ in the 38 statements; [in
           [c] DPP only considered about 12% o f statements generated in Inquiry;           fact 4 gave evidence to the Inquiry];
           [d] partial (=.biased) selection o f documents submitted to DPP;                 [c]/jd] an illusion of inadequate consideration based on an (inaccurate) manipulation
           [e] SYP have carefully withheld important material from DPP and                  o f statistics; mccmccivable that DPP and counsel did not have an appropriate sample
           Coroner, adverse to SYP and the defendants.                                      o f statements in 1990; (sec § 5.4 o f our accompanying representations).
                                                                                            [e] prejudicial speculation.
                                                                                            Hie whole question of editing o f statements, using sample statements and witnesses,
                                                                                            the decision o f the DPP in 1990 was considered thoroughly by the SCRUTINY.

54-55      Selective supply o f information to Coroner                                      Continuation o f a long-running campaign to challenge the Inquest verdicts.
                                                                                            [a] Judgments in It - v - 11. M. Coroner f o r South Yorkshire, ex p. Stringer [5 November
                                                                                            1993] are attached.
                                                                                            [b] The conduct of the Inquests was carefully reconsidered by the SCRUTINY.

56 - 9 1   Control o f material                                                             Mr Murray cannot comment.

92-95      Further sign ificance o f Phillips                                               fa] The conclusion does hot follow from the stated facts.
           [a] “ In this way, the inquest, ostensibly objective and dispassionate, is now   (b] It is a relevant part o f the background that Inquest verdicts did not find unlawful
           shown to have been manipulated by South Yorkshire police for their own           killing. The defendant is entitled to rely upon that as part of his argument to the DPP.
           ends, and by West Midlands police.”                                              The extravagant ihetoric in §95 is o f concern.
           [b] “ For this reason, the defendants are not entitled to rely upon the-
           inquest verdicts to put an end to this prosecution."




      o                                                                                                                                                           SCIII-DU LI'A -5 /7
      CD
      CD
      CD
      96-          Further argument about disclosure to a private prosecutor.             Mr Murray cannot comment.
      109

      11 0         Prejudicial Publicity                                                  [a] Factors affecting whether defendants will have a fair trial under a private
                   [a] matter forjudge or magistrate;                                     prosecution are relevant to the Director's power to intervene and discontinue. The
                   [b] “minor" compared to that West, Maxwells, Bulger case, the Krays,   McGovcrn dramatisation was calculated to prejudice the public's perception o f the
                   Guinness, proposed Lockerbie defendants, Moors murderers, and many     role o f police officers in the tragedy.
                   others;                                                                [b] There are clear indications that further public prejudice against the defendants will
                   [c] 1989 prejudice against Liverpool supporters never dispelled.       be deliberately created in the period leading up to committal hearings and any
                                                                                          subsequent trial:
                                                                                          *         The Manic Street Preachers. On 14 September 1998, this very well known
                                                                                                      pop group released an album containing a track entitled “S.Y.M.M.", whose
                                                                                                      lyrics refer to ‘South Yorkshire Mass Murderer’, with an undoubted link to
                                                                                                      the I lillsborough tragedy by reference to the McGovern dramatisation o f the
                                                                                                       1989 events. This group featured prominently in events run by 1IFSG in
                                                                                                      May 1997 to raise funds in support o f the prosecutions.
                                                                                           h        A splinter group called Hillsborough Survivors and Relatives and
                                                                                                      Supporters fo r Justice Campaign has recently been formed. On 17
                                                                                                      September 1998, the Yorkshire Evening Post (circulation in the Leeds and
                                                                                                       West Riding areas) reported a message inviting support from people living
                                                                                                       in Yorkshire. A spokesman was quoted as saying the Group aimed to take “a
                                                                                                      more proactive approach”, and the report added that the group is planning to
                                                                                                      demonstrate outside Leeds Magistrates’ Court next month’ at the next stage
                                                                                                      of a private prosecution against two former senior police officers by families
                                                                                                      who hold them responsible for the tragedy. The pressure group message
                                                                                                      amounts to an invitation to persons in Yorkshire to support the
                                                                                                      demonstration now that proceedings are to be in Leeds, and not in Liverpool
                                                                                                      as the IIFSG intended when summonses were issued in Sefton.
                                                                                           [c] T h is ‘lit for tat’ argument is unbecoming.

       1 1 1-7      Limitations o f Stuart-Smith Report
I
i ,



I'
’            Cb                                                                                                                                                SCHEDULE A -6/7
             O
             o
             ra
             *vj
                                                              r
             Scrutiny conclusions on "new evidence" arc not significant, because              Entirely wrong and seriously misleading. Lord Justice Stuait-Smith examined
      111
             confined to that tendered as new in 1996 when existence of edited                approximately 100 amended statements. In 74 the amendment was of no
             statements was unknown; starved o f evidence; one example only (Frost)           consequence. In 26, comment and opinion had been excluded. In 5, factual matters
             offered to Scrutiny by a third party; scale o f editing now revealed exceeds     were excluded which arguably should not have been, hi 4, factual matters implicit in
                                                                                              comment arguably should not have been excluded. Sec SCRU IINY Report §§78-88,
             anything shown to Stuart-Smith L.J.
             Also §112: conclusions about edited statements seriously wrong.                  pp.78-80. See further detail in SCRUTINY, Appendix 7, pp.205-210; Appendix 8,
                                                                                              pp.211*12.
                                                                                              Note important conclusions nt §§104, 105, p.64._______                              _____

      112     Caution in accepting facts in Report.                                           Nit picking.                          ____________________ _______________________

              [a] Sandra Stringer.                                                            This § contains unrelated propositions.
    ? 113
              [b] Adomako.                                                                    I.ord Justice Stnart-Smith did not misunderstand the law._________________________ _

              "The Stuart-Smitli report is itself economical with information."               We do not speculate as to what is implied by this comment. If the complaint is that
      114
                                                                                              die 1990 Advice o f counsel has not been disclosed, that could have been shortly
                                                                                              stated, but the explanation is obvious.  _____________________ _______________ _

              "The knowledge available to the IIFSG now, from the 35 (sic) statements,        This proposition cannot stand in the face o f the Scrutiny examination o f statements,
      115
              the Master Witness List, and the edited statements, proves that material        the conclusions, and the analysis of the so-called further ‘new evidence’ relied on to
              was not available [to the DPP], and information o f a critical kind had been    justify the prosecutions.
              withheld."

      117     [a] Result o f SCRUTINY would have been very different; flaws and               [a] There is no basis for this assertion.
              partiality o f previous investigations would have been exposed.                 |b] The prosecutor has been asked to say whether it is intended to call I louldsworth
              [b] Account given by Houldsworth set out in full, and evidence criticised,      either at committal or at any subsequent trial. Response awaited.
              fc] Report docs not mention conversations                                       [c] Factually wrong. The Lord Justice spoke to neither defendant.       ______________

              Frustration o f Home Secretary's order fo r disclosure.                          [a] I'lie whole purpose of the Scrutiny was to investigate allegations of this sort. It did
     IIS-
     120      [a] 119. Justified belief o f the Liverpool families: manipulated and cheated    so thoroughly and found no basis for the beliefs which leading counsel describes as
              over years; DPP misled in 1990; course o f justice perverted.                   justified. Nothing revealed since warrants the conclusion that the beliefs are justified.
              [b] 120. Distribution.                                                           [b] The distribution to members o f parliament smacks o f an attempt to bringing
                                                                                               political pressure to bear oil the decision.

     121                                                             •                        It would he a serious injustice to allow the prosecution to continue.        __________


i
i
I           CD
            CD                                                                                                                                                       SCIIHDULI: A -7 /7
            CD
            O
            “v3
SC H E D U L E H - R E SPO N SE TO C LA IM S AHOUT W ITN ESSES IN L E T T E R 2<l.8.98


                                      Claim - p e r letter 24.8.98                                                              Response
 W itness [tab]
                  ‘Careful excisions o f factual matters adverse to SY police.’              In context, this is a comment about lack of contact with Police Control or a senior
 [4] Holmes
                  Page 24, last sentence.                                                    officer about action required in the confusion following tlie events which took
                                                                                             place. AFTERMATH. INQUIRY.

                  ‘Careful excisipns o f factual matters adverse to SY police.’ Page 35,     AFTERMATH. INQUIRY.
 [5] K.Frost
                  Penultimate sentence. Comment about nobody organising the injured.

 (6] Wilson       ‘Careful excisions o f factual matters adverse to SY police.’ Page 50.     NOT MATERIAL. INQUIRY.
                  third sentence. Impression about number of foot officers at Leppings
                  Lane and on train escort.

 [7] Guest        At pages 63 and 68. Obvious at 2.40pm that crosvds outside L/l.ane         This witness died before the Inquest, lie was never cross-examined. Ilis
                  could not be accommodated. Would have been obvious to Defendants,          statement would not be admissible at committal or in a trial.
                  SYP case at Inquest that overcrowding not evident before 3.00pm.           ‘Not sufficient room for all to be accommodated’ is ambiguous. The witness
                  Coroner took that view.                                                    never said "in those pens" [implying the central pens] as claimed by leading
                                                                                             counsel in submissions §18. The Inquiry found that the tragedy occurred because
                                              i   :
                                                                                             the Gate C crowd were admitted to the tunnel and thus to the central pens. It was
                                                                                             never found that they could not have been accommodated in the West Stand at all,
                                                                                             which is what Guest’s statement suggests. INQUIRY. .

                   Removal o f important factual observations... going (o heart ol all       The material ‘removed’ at pages 85-89 adds nothing at all to the evidence fully
  [8] Titterton
                   investigations.                                                           considered by INQUIRY.

                   Deletion o f passages on pp!00-101. White would always monitor build      Evidence has alsvays established that there was a view o f the pens from the
  [9] White
                   up in L/Lanc pens by climbing steps to control box (occupied ... by (he   Control Box. INQUIRY. INQUEST. SCRUTINY (§51. Extract from Mr Murray
                   two defendants and others) to get a good view. Can be no honest           at Inquest: “We had a good view o f the terraces from the Control Box...”. §52.
                   reason for deletion o f this evidence. [Sec also Claims under             Lord Justice Stuart-Smith expressed surprise that Counsel had not seen fit to draw
                   Woodcock.]                                                                this passage to his attention.]




                                                                                                                                                       s c h e d u l e d - 1 /2
        era
        o
        CD
        CD
        -V *
                                                                                                                          (




     [10] Woodcock     | Demonstrates central importance o f deletions from White. White               Woodcock says: "lie told inc that his serial usually got the job of putting the
                         (p.l 12) normally diverted spectators from central pens, hut on this          crowd in the different pens at the rear of the goalmouth, working from the outside
                         occasion was told not to. If true proves statement of Dcttison wrong.         to the centre, but for some reason he’d been told to let the fans find their own
                         Issue at heart o f case. SYP claim 1988 diversion from central pens           level, on this occasion, resulting in too many going into the area immediately
                         unknown to senior officers. 1988 events prove foreseeability; Obvious         behind the goal." (p. 112)
                         relevance to manslaughter. Honest course would have been to ask               What Woodcock says White told him is not proof of anything against Mr Murray.
                         White about Woodcock’s account. Instead, passages in both were                The prosecutor’s complaint about how these statements were handled is not proof
                         cxciscd and truth suppressed, Seven page statement of White is in             cither.
                         MWL. May have been first statement submitted with lines deleted.
                         [Further argument based on Wilson.]
<T<? [11] Pattison      Important deletions o f factual observations adverse to interests o f SYP.     P. 123 Penultimate para. AFTERMATH.
     [12] Tissington    Important deletions o f factual observation? adverse to interests o f SYP.     P. 141 "I remember saying ... lynched through it." P. 144 last para.
                                                                                                       AFTERMATH.
     [13] Lang          ‘Neither the important matters at the end o f page 163 in the six page         [A| It is correct that the last 7 lines on page 163 arc not repeated in the statement
                        statement’ (sic, there are five pages), nor any of the statement of 2nd        at pages 167-171. There are two points: [a] comment that opening Gate C
                        June 1989, appears in the five page amended report at pages 167 to 171         transferred the problem inside the ground and would need a lot more PC’s to
                        o f the file.’                                                                 control it; (this adds nothing to the conclusions o f INQUIRY, INQUEST or
                        MWL shows 5 (possibly 4) page statement sent to DPP.                           SCRU TINY), and [b] comment that one Serial was employed in 1989 against two
                                                                                                       in 1988.
                        (See also HFSG Representations §17; reference W111112 & LANG;                  [11] The contents o f the statement 2 June 1989 about 1988 control o f the tunnel
                        argument that evidence suppressed.)                                            and the order to close the gates to the central pens were not deleted from that
                                                                                                       statement. Although the 1988 evidence is not contained within the subsequent
                                                                                                       statement at pages 167-173, it is substantially repeated in the statement at p. 166
                                                                                                       (dated 30 June 1990).
     [14] Kennedy       Important deletions o f factual observations adverse to interests of SYP.      P. 176 "Several senior officers...lacking in directing the officers there towards
                                                                                                       useful purpose." AFTERMATH.
     [ 1 5 ] Dunn       Important deletions o f factual observations adverse to interests o f SYP.     P. 189 “1 was on duty at the same Semi-Final...unable to assess the situation
                                                                                                       correctly and out swiftly from 1...” (sic) Adds nothing to findings o f INQUIRY,
                                                                                                       INQUEST or SCRUTINY. Comment about observations from control room add
                                                                                                       nothing.
    [16] Royle          Important deletions of factual observations adverse   10   interests of SYP.   P. 198 - last 4 lines. Adds nothing.


           Q                                                                                                                                                      S C H E D U L E 11- 2/ 2
           CD
           CD
           O
           •^1
. SCHEDULE C - RESPONSE TO CLAIMS ABOUT SPECIFIC WITNESSES: ANNEX I)

                                                                                                                                                  Response
           Witness                                Claim    - [-]   page reference in Annex D
                                                                                                                  a] Immaterial.
     (1) Booth                       [!] [a] deletion at [3].
                                                                                                                 [b] Observations not new material. The 1988 circumstances were fully
                                     [b] deletion at [7-9]: references to 1988 in statement 1.6.89 not
                                                                                                                 considered at INQUIRY.
                                     incorporated into amended report [10-13],
                                                                                                                 [a]Not new. Communications issues were fully considered at INQUIRY.
     (2) Bcresford                   [14] [a] deletion and 2 amendments [21]
                                                                                                                 [b]Changcs and deletion o f no substance. Aftermath.
                                     [b] amendment and deletion [22 and 31; 23 j
<<
     C.            ■■■•■..........
                                                                                                                 Aftermath.
      (3) Bradley                    [33] deletion and amendment.
                                                                                                                 [a] Immaterial.
      (4) Hubbard                    [40] [a] deletion re Wain.
                                                                                                                 lb] Nothing neW in this. INQUIRY fully considered 1988 policing: §214-5.
                                     [b] report not incorporating 1988 experience. Implication of a queuing
                                     system.
                                                                                                                 [a] No change o f substance; [b] aftermath
      (5) McDonnell                   [56] [a] amendment; [b] deletion
                                                                                                                 Not new. Issue fully considered by 1NQUIRY/SCRU IINY
      (6) Powell                      [65] deletion
                                                                                                                 SCRUTINY p.208. As indicated at [76], the Report quoted the passage
         (7) Lustis                   [76] deletion. Complaint that Stuart-Smith IJ did not comment on
                                                                                                                 describing the witness’s impressions o f 1988 conditions in the pens where
                                      “bow Liverpool fans always congregate very heavily behind the goal
                                                                                                                 Liverpool fans had congregated. Stuart-Smith LJ must liTWe been fully
                                      area".
                                                                                                                 aware o f the rest of the deletion, which adds nothing to the substance of
                                                                                                                 what was quoted. This witness was fully considered by the SCRUTINY.
     1        ........... - ...
                                                                                                                  [a] The claim is unfounded. Scrutiny Report (p.209) does not quote the
          (is) Crawford               [86] [a] deletion.
                                                                                                                  passage cited, but it does refer to it: "But his past experience relating to the
                                      None o f statement 31.5.89 (dealing with 1988) was incorporated into
                                                                                                                  shutting o f the centre pens is a question o f fact".
                                      amended report.
                                      Complaint that Stuart-Smith LJ fails to refer to deletion o f passage       Clear that Stuart-Smith LJ fully considered the point.
                                                                                                                  INQUIRY: §230 - fully aware that tunnel had been closed off in 1988.
                                      [94]:
                                      "At 1450 hours we had an instjuction believed verbal, that no more          SCRUTINY: p .2 19 §9: cited this passage from Inquiry Report.
                                      fans were to be allowed into the central pens, therefore, the wooden
                                      gate at the rear o f the tunnel was closed denying access. This was done
                                                                                                                  [b] Involves no material change.
                                      by PC 1278 Lang.”
                                      |bl amendment.

                                                                                                                                                                              SCIII-DULHC- 1/3
          000978
                                                     c
                  [102] [a] amendment: ‘stressed/adamant’ - Duckcnfield.          [a] Not material.
(9) Brookes
                  [b] deletion: officers’ distress.                               [1>] Not material.
                  [c] amendment: ‘centre section was now [too] full.              [c] Not new. INQUIRY: §184 - finding that by 2.52 pm “pens 3 and 4
                                                                                  were over-full even by this test. Many were uncomfortable. To allow any
                  [d] amendment: 2.54 to 2.56.
                                                                                  more into those pens was likely to cause injuries; to allow in a large stream
                  [e] deletion [107]
                  [f] deletion o f ‘observations’.                                was courting disaster"; §230 - “since pens 3 and 4 were full by 2.50pm, the
                                                                                  tunnel should have been closed off whether gate C was to be opened or
                                                                                  not”.
                                                                                  No need for SCRUTINY Report to refer to distinction full/too full,
                                                                                  fd] Not material.
                                                                                  [ej Not new.
                                                                                  [Ij Not evidence. Comments about kick-off and capacity fully considered
                                                                                  by INQUIRY. Comparison with Manchester United match was considered
                                                                                  by SCRU TINY (P.208).________________________ _________________ _

                  [118] [a] amendment,                                            [a] Establishes nothing new: was a factual correction o f an estimated time
(10) Burgess
                  [b deletion.                                                    or a guess. INQUIRY §66 concluded request came between 2.40-2.45.
                                                                                  Point is that it was established that the call came before gates opened.
                                                                                  |b] Not new. Not material.                       __________________ ________

( I I ) Walpole   [131] [a] deletion: did not hear radio message; packed solid.   [a] Comment about radio message adds nothing. ‘Packed solid’ remained
                                                                                  in the statement in an important sentence: [134] lines 4-7. Considered in
                                                                                  SCRUTINY: l\207.
                                                                                  [b] Opinion. All factors considered: INQUIRY, INQUES'I, SCRU 11NY.

(12) Groome       [143] [a] deletion: observations 1030-1230.                     [a| Irrelevant.
                  [b] deletion: re Insp.Calvctl.                                  [bj Irrelevant.
                  [c] amendment: ‘over the air’ to ‘from the control room’        [c| Change o f no substance. Aftermath.
                  [d] 3 deletions [148-149]                                       [d] Aftermath.
                  [e] deletions numbered (l)-(3), (5)-(l0).                       [e] (l)-(3), (5) and (7) considered by SCRUTINY, p.206; (6). (8)-(!0)
                                                                                  were comments fully considered in INQUIRY and SCRUTINY.

(13) Brophy       [157] deletions.                                                Nothing new. All considered INQUIRY.____________ __________________




                                                                                                                                            S C H E D U L E C - 2/3
     CD
     CD
     CD
     CD
     -vl
     CO
                                                                                       '   •
(14) Sanderson   [166] [a] amendment ‘going on’ to ‘being conducted’   [a] Change of no substance.
                 [b] 2 insertions.                                     (!>] Neither is significant.
                 [c] amendment: changes re technical work done.        |c) The amendment is an expansion of the technical work cairicd out. It
                 [c] amendment: ‘about 1440' to ‘about 1448'.          makes no change o f substance.
                 [f] insertion.                                        [e] Change unexplained. Relevance?
                                                                       [I] Adds nothing.

(15) Croot       [173] deletions.                                      Comment, nothing new.

(16) Huckstcpp   [194] deletion.                                       Fully considered by INQUIRY (Iluckstepp cross-examined); West
                                                                       Midlands and SCRUTINY (p.207).
                                                                       Per SCRUTINY, the unamended statement (7.5.89) was seen by
                                                                       INQUIRY and W.Midlands.

(17) France      [205] amendment.                                      No change o f substance.

(18) Cammock     [219] [a] amendment,                                  [a] No change o f substance.
                 [b] deletion.                                         [b] Irrelevant.

(19) Bennett     [240] [a] 3 deletions,                                [a] Nothing new.
                 [b] amendment.                                        [b] No change of substance.

(20) Ranisdcn    [257] deletions at [263] and [267-268],               [263] Was expressly considered by Stuart-Smith Li, SCRUTINY p.209.
                 Complaint that Scrutiny Report does not comment on    [267-8] was opinion which added nothing new.

(21) Hanson      [279] deletion.                                       Comment. Not new.

(22) Athorn      [295] deletion.                                       Not new.




 CD
 CD
 CD
 CD                                                                                                                           SC1I HDULI - C - 3/3
 GO
 CD
          WIIsTCKWORXH SH E R W O O D                                                                                       35 G reat P e t« Street
          S O LIC IT OR S AND P * f t L I » M e H T » B r A G E N T S                                                       Vv'cstm inster
                                                                                                                            L o n do n 5W1P 3 L R

         Oar ref:              SBE/24332/]/j«                                                                               Telephone: Ql7l 593 5000
         Your ref:             DMHCXB                                                                                       Fax: 0171 593 5099
                                                                                                                            DX: 2312 VICTORIA

                                                                                                                            DirectLine:                    0171 593 5107
         Garretts                                                                                                           Direct Fax:                    017 1 593 5044
         i City Square                                                                                                      Email: sbeastwood@winckworih5.co.uk
         Leeds LSI 2AL
                                                                                                                            13 M ay 1999
         For the attention o f David Harlock
                                                                                                                                           Please note our new
                                                                                                                                             fax number above
         Dear Sirs

         R -v - South Y o rk s h ire P olice A c th o rity ex parte C h ie f C onstable o f South Y o rksh ire
         Police

         We refer to previous correspondence regarding the further consideration by the South
         Yorkshire Police Authority o f funding in relation to the private prosecution o f our client Mr
         Duckenfield, and in particular your letters o f 1 April, requesting information, and 30 April
         enclosing correspondence (including a copy letter o f that date to W alker M om s raising a
         number o f points following the submission o f the Joint Opinion o f Counsel).

         As you w ill k n o w , we have worked closely with. W alker M orris in this matter both to
         progress the interests o f the tw o defendants M r Murray and M r Duckenfield, and in order to
         minimise, where possible, the duplication o f effort and thus keep the costs to the minimum
         &;iven the difficult issues that need to be explored in this matter.

         We have discussed your correspondence at length with M r M anning o f W alker Morris, and
         have the benefit o f seeing his letter to you dealing w ith the issues that have recently been
         raised, and accordingly have had the opportunity o f contributing as a result of those
         discussions to the content o f the letter, and adopt those contents insofar as the matters relate
         generally to both defendants. The Police Authority will be aware that, as a result o f the
         decision o f the DPP to d iscon tin u e the charge o f acting with intent to pervert the course of
         justice against M r Duckenfield, both defendants now face the same criminal charges, which
         are two charges o f unlawful killing, and one of wilful neglect to perform a public duty.

         Accordingly, the following comments are made in addition to those subm itted by Messrs
         Walker M orris, following the outline o f your letter o f 30 April 1999.

         Joint Opinion

         We believe the Opinion submitted provides a clear indication o f the strength o f Counsel’s
         conviction that the criminal defences ought to be maintained on behalf o f the Defendant.
         Messrs W alker Morris have forwarded a copy o f their detailed submissions to the DPP,
         w hic
             hdeal w ith the evidence in great detail. Accordingly, to assist the Authority we
         enclose herewith a copy o f the submissions made on behalf o f Kir D uckenfield to the DPP,


         PAUTKfiAS                    $• r u v H £ M W 1GGS         &OCETV. F tT T O M            Tf* WaTTS                  The- firm U a s z a tib c t
                                                                                                                             tn mttrsasjcfc*} r.c.tv*o?k eiis^ e ss.
         rJK:iK>LJl5 *.)WST0N         H U OH K a C D O U G a L D           IKVtNC                 T A X C O N S U LTA N T
                                                                    K O N A l P F A R ^ A tfT S   C£Qft.C-E 0 V U --         Th« fifth i* regulased by Ttw L a ~
         U K !a n h o o d             JO H S
                                                                                                                               she           c f isvesuzuxt feu#iftotj.
         I'A Ut. M O I U U S          PtTHRWILUAM5                  R O S C A T B O TK a*         C O N S U LTaN T
                  THATCHER.                  MUKKaY                 MMOf*£A5TW©OD                 f RJM4*. 1\0»jS0«4 ObC
                                                                                                                                        citu f
         ALT>ON C O K L O V           CHJUSTOrHERVINE               NAQNU C O O D E

£03   LT ’ON                                                                  G b S c iJ , 9 cZ T 0 «- 3 H » m Z - .M I j T                        ZZ'-ZT                 66 £0 -M
          which need to fee read, in concert with the Walker Moms sufemissioos, and the Authority
          will note that we have adopted those submissions for the purpose of the DPP dialogue. This
          reflects the ongoing desire of both firms of solicitors to maintain complementary assistance
          without undue duplication. Whilst our letter o f 9 October 1998 to the DPP (CPS) extends to
          matters other than the pure evidence, when read with the recent Opinion o f Counsel we
          believe the Authority' has legal advice, in the strongest form, to support a continuing
          defence on behalf of both officers.

          In the event that you believe further information is required before the Authority can make a
          decision in this matter we would be grateful for your advice by return. We have raised your
          concerns about the fullness of Counsel’s advice with Leading Counsel, and if further
          confirmation is sought, in the light of this letter and Walker Moms s recent correspondence,
          naturally we would wish to afford Leading Counsel the opportunity of providing that
          clarification so that the Authority is properly informed at the time of its decision.

          Police Superintendents Association

          We enclose herewith a copy letter dated 5 March 1999 which clarifies the context and
          extent of the PSA offer of financial assistance in relation to the funding judicial review
          alone.

           We have discussed the SYPA responsibility for costs with Mr Williams who confirms that
           his executive would wish all avenues of other potential financing of costs (such as the
           Authority, or Ann Adlington pursuant to the Costs Order obtained) be pursued and
           exhausted, before any financial contribution is actually paid. Mr Williams is aware of the
           proposal for the SYPA to meet on 21 May and would be prepared to attend that meeting if it
           would assist in resolving the issue of contribution.

           In this context, you have already been provided with a copy transcript of the judicial review
           proceedings for Wednesday 24 March and Thursday 25 March. We suggest it may be
           helpful to the Authority members if they were to view those transcripts prior to making any
           decision in this matter. The transcripts indicate the circumstances in which Mr Murray and
           Mr Duckenfield were given leave to take part in the funding judicial review proceedings,
           and the Court’s c o n firm a tio n that there was an arguable point The defendants were in fact
           required to take part as applicants because HFSG had raised a technical point about the
           standing o f the Chief Constable to make the challenge. In the circumstances, once the
           Court found in favour of the applicants on the funding question, an Order for Costs was
           made in favour o f the defendants against Ann Adlington. In the normal course, steps will
           be taken to have a Bill of Costs referable to the application, taxed with a view to recovering
           those costs.

           It is important for the Authority to bear in mind that Mr Murray and Mr Duckenfield were
           placed in a position o f considerable stress as a result of the decision to discontinue funding,
           and in light of the technical arguments raised by HFSG in the judicial review, were required
           to take part in that application, which role was upheld and approved by the Court. In the
           circumstances o f the case we invite the Authority to consider that the costs involved in that
           application (notwithstanding the kind offer of indemnity from the Police Superintendents
           Association) ought properly be a matter which the Authority ought to be responsible for.
           Quite clearly, the costs would not have been incurred but for the decision taken in January
           to discontinue financing the legal assistance of the defendants.



                                                          2
           LG 10$
tQ Q   Til‘Oil                                      6bScii 933TO - aaHDOS-.MljT            f3 :£T      66 ‘SO M
         Costs

         In our letter o f 3 February 1999 w e advised our best estimate o f legal costs to 12 January
         1999.

         You w ill have received separately, advice as to further costs incurred to 28 M arch 1999. It
         is not possible at the present tim e to provide an itemised account in regard to those costs,
         nor indeed is it possible to separate the particular costs as relating either to the M agistrates
         Court proceedings, the DPP decision, or the funding issue specifically. In due course we
         anticipate it will be necessary, and we will take steps to have our costs draughtsman provide
         the best possible separate costings required, as may be by the Court and other parties.

         We are enclosing herewith a copy o f the B ill o f Costs submitted to the Clerk o f the South
         Sefton M agistrates Court w hich remains contentious. As the Authority will know, to date
         the Cleric refuses to tax this bill, and subject to the decision taken by the Authority, we
         would wish to progress with the challenge o f this refusal. W e have requested advice from
         the Clerk (copy letter 7 May 1999 enclosed) and to date await a reply.

         In regard to future costs, we adopt the comments made in the Walker M orris letter as to the
         likely degree o f preparation required and manpower up to and including a 2 week
         committal.

         We are liaising very closely w ith W alker Morris to ensure that cost effective procedures 2 re
         in place, most particularly to deal with the foreshadowed further documentation being
         obtained by the private prosecutor, which we anticipate will be served prior to the
         committal heaxins on 5 July 1999. We have no way o f knowing exactly how much material
         will be served, and in any event we may wish to consider unused material on behalf o f the
         defendants, and a considerable amount o f preparation will obviously be required prior to the
         committal.

         Following on the outline provided by W alker Morris, we would agree that the best estimate
         of costs including Counsel and expenses for M r Duckenfield (and in this respect we confirm
         that the same hourly costings apply to both defendants) is in the region o f £125,000
         £150,000 plus VAT."

         We have noted Walker M orris's observations in regard to the Police Authority reserve and
         are bound to echo the comments that the private prosecution involves two high ranking
         defendants, each required to answer charges o f the utmost seriousness relating to their own
         conduct in April 1989. This case by its very nature is unique, and has not at any time
         followed what might be described as the standard progress o f a criminal prosecution.

         We believe we can speak on behalf o f all legal advisers involved in this case when we say
         that costs implications are at the forefront o f our minds ai all times, whilst o f course wishing
         to protect the interests o f the defendants in a proper professional fashion. We entirely
         appreciate that the sums o f m oney being discussed are substantial and urge the A uthority to
         accept that they properly reflect professional, cost-effective legal assistance given to
         defendants facing high profile criminal prosecutions in the most unusual o f circumstances
         which by their very nature, particularly in regard to the mass o f material that has in the 10
         years since the events in question, will require extremely detailed preparation.




                                                         3
          L0 I06
£03   TJJ-ON                                       Sb8c2*i 93cTO      3yHD0S-'J.IZ'T       1~3=£T      £6 SO-M
    Scnne o f the application

    We would agree with the outline in paragraph 4 o f your letter o f 30 April save that we join
    with W alker M orris in requesting the Authority consider assistance is regard to our client s
    costs o f the judicial review proceeding regarding the funding issue, for the reasons set out
    before In this regard we do have the benefit o f an Order against M s Arm Adlington
    although at this time w e ran offer no advice as to the likelihood o f that Order b^ing
    effectively pursued to satisfaction. W e confirm, as per the W alker M orris correspondence,
    that w e "have no details o f the DPP costs to date, and indeed have received no
    correspondence on behalf o f the DPP since the judgm ent o f the Divisional Court.

    We trust the above matters are o f assistance to you and the Authority in preparing for the
    meeting which we understand will take place on 21 May w ith the tim e and place details to
    be confirmed. In the event that it is considered the Authority requires any further input or
    assistance we would be grateful for your advice beforehand so that w e can assist where
    possible. We would be grateful prior to the meeting if you could clarify one aspect, relating
    xo resolutions o f the Authority made on 5 February 1999. We specifically refer to
    paragraph 4 and the deferred consideration o f the procedural issues raised by M s Adlington.
    In the event that further submissions and representations are invited prior to the Authority s
    final decision, w e would be grateful for your clarification as to what extent if any those
    procedural issues are to be considered by the Authority and as such require further comment
    on behalf o f the defendants.

    We await your advice accordingly.

    Yours faithfully____________________________




7    w m cK w ortn Mierwooa


    PS:      The above was dictated before your fax o f 12 May 1999 was received, and we will
             deal w ith the outstanding issues raised ASAP.




                                                   4
     L0I05
                                        ANN A D LIN G TO N -V - D U C K EN FIELD AND M URRA Y

                                            SUMMARY ESTIMATE OF COSTS INCURRED


         D ates:         1 J a n u a ry 1999 to 2S M arch 1999


                                                                (including VAT)

         Professional lim e:                    £48,000.00        (7,200.00)

         Counsel’s fees:                        £67,000.00       (10,000.00)

         Sundries:                               £2,000.00          (200.00)

         TO TA L                               £117,000.00       (17,400.00)




         P :\2 i5 3 2 M \D 0 0 2 9 .0




•1Q3   TJJ 'ON                                               6 6 8 3 9 3 3 TO   <- 3 3 H n O S - . M I JT   93 ;£T   66 SO M
South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
P.O. 3ox 37. Regent Street.
5ams!ey, South Yorkshire S7Q 2PQ.
Fax: Barnsley (0122S) 772899
W.J. WJlklnsan, 3A (Bcon), CPFA. Clark and Treasurer


                                                                            S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E
                                                                                             POLICE
Cur ref:    W J W /J IL                                      ^                         A U T H O R IT Y

Ycur raf: R 3M /3Q W /M U R R A Y



Data:      13 January 1SS9


This matter is being dealt with by.   Bill WHkinSOn      Direct Line;   01226 772803

Mr R Manning
Partner
Walker Morris
Solicitors
Kings Court
12 King Street
LEEDS LS1 2HL

Dear          ( m K.

HILLSBOROUGH: FINANCING OF DEFENCE COSTS

Having yesterday sought the advice of Leading Counsel following receipt of
representations concerning the financing of your client’s defence costs, I will shortly be
asking the Authority to consider the issue of financial assistance, and to review the
decisions taken to date. I will at the same time ask the Authority to give consideration to
your further applications for support.

 In these circumstances I have agreed with the Chairman of the Authority that the
 presentations by representatives of the defendants and the Hillsborough Family Support
 Group, which we had originally planned for Friday 15 January, should now be deferred to
 a later date. I apologise for any inconvenience this may cause.

 In these circumstances, I must draw three further matters to your attention:

 1    I am not at this stage in a position to authorise further payments in respect of legal
 costs in relation to your client's defence to the private prosecution.

 2    As you are aware, no decision has been taken as to funding any judicial review
 proceedings against the Crown Prosecution Sep/ice or any proceedings by way of review
 or appeal of any future adverse decision as to costs by the Sefton Magistrates Court.
 Clearly no costs should be incurred in respect of either of these matters unless your client
 has other sources of funding.

 3     One of the matters which will fall to be considered by the Authority both in relation to
 funding your client’s defence costs and in relation to funding any potential judicial review
 is the extent to which yourc->ent is entitled to legal aid. It is essential, therefore, that you
provide me with a full assessment of your client’s eligibility for legal aid, your estimate of
any contribution which might be required and an analysis of how such a contribution miqht
impact on his personal financial position. This information must be supplied in advance of
any meeting of the Authority at which the future funding of your client is to be considered
Please, therefore, treat this as a matter of urgency.

I will correspond with you further as matters develop.

Ynnrs s in ro rg lv _______




Bill Wilkinson
Clerk and Treasurer
    South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
    P.O. Box 37, Regent Street,
    Barnsley, South Yorkshire S7Q 2PQ.
    Fax: Barnsley (0122S) 772399
    W J . Wllklnsan, 3 A (Z c a n ), CFFA. Clark and Traasurar



                                                                                    S O U T H YO R K S H IR E
    Ocrrsf:   VVJW/JIL                                                                               POLIC E
                                                                                               A U T H O R IT Y
    Your ref: 243321 IS 3 &]e!



    Cate:13 January 1SS9


    This matter is being dealt with by:   Bill Wilkinson         Direct Line:   01226 772803

    Mr S Eastwood
    Winckworth Sherwood


•
    Solicitors and Parliamentary Agents
    35 Great Peter Street
    Westminster
    LONDON, SW1P 3LR

    Dear Wi                          A

    HILLSBOROUGH: FINANCING OF DEFENCE COSTS                         -   MR D DUCKENFIELD

    Having yesterday sought the advice of Leading Counsel following receipt of
    representations concerning the financing of your client’s defence costs, I will shortly be
    asking the Authority to consider the issue of financial assistance, and to review the
    decisions taken to date. I will at the same time ask the Authority to give consideration to
    your further applications for support.

    In these circumstances I have agreed with the Chairman of the Authority that the

•
    presentations by representatives of the defendants and the Hillsborough Family Support
    Group, which we had originally planned for Friday 15 January, should now be deferred to
    a later date. I apologise for any inconvenience this may cause.

    In these circumstances, I must draw three further matters to your attention:

    1    I am not at this stage in a position to authorise further payments in respect of legal
    costs in relation to your client’s defence to the private prosecution.

    2    As you are aware, no decision has been taken as to funding any judicial review
    proceedings against the Crown Prosecution Service or any proceedings byway of review
    or appeal of any future adverse decision as to costs by the Sefton Magistrates Court.
    Clearly no costs should be incurred in respect of either of these matters unless your client
    has other sources of funding.

    3     One of the matters which will fall to be considered by the Authority both in relation to
    funding your client’s defence costs and in relation to funding any potential judicial review
    is the extent to which your client is entitled to legal aid. It is essential, therefore, that you
    provide me with a full assessment of your client's eligibility for legal aid, your estimate of
any contribution which might be required and an analysis of how such a contribution might
impact on his personal financial position. This information must be supplied in advance of
any meeting of the Authority at which the future funding of your client is to be considered.
Please, therefore, treat this as a matter of urgency.

I will correspond with you further as matters develop.

Yours sincerely______________



Bi I Wiikinson
Clerk and Treasurer
                             Secretariat
                          jtreet,
                         KShire S70 2PQ.
                   -122S) 772339
                 n, BA(Econ). CPFA, Clerk and Treasurer




            W J W /V S



 our ref:    R 3 W 3 Q W /M U R R A Y



Date:   14 January 1SS9


This matter is being dealt with by.        Bill Wilkinson   Direct line:   01226 772803

Mr R B Manning
Partner
Walker Morris
Solicitors
Kings Court
12 King Street
LEEDS LS1 2HL

Dear Mr Manning

HILLSBOROUGH : FINANCING OF COSTS

i hank you for your letter of 14 January. We shall do our best to convene a meeting of the
Authority as soon as practicable but cannot tie ourselves to the next two weeks.

As to your third paragraph, you may not have fully understood my letter of yesterday. All I
am saying for the moment is that you should not incur further costs pending the meeting
of the Authority and that, if you do so, it will be at your own risk.

Yours sincerely




Bill Wilkinson
Clerk and Treasurer
                                                          H O M E O FFIC E
                                                Qusen Ar.r.c’s Gz:z L ond on S W ’ H 9A i
                                                             D :re :i ■‘ ■’ ’’•i 01*215
                                                                              01-2 23 300*


O'-'                PO L /5 7   102 7 / 1 / 2
V*’:.* !v V’V't.Y




The Clerk to the Police Authority

The Chief Officer of Police
                                                                                   4 December 1957




            OFFICE CIRCULAR KO 77/87
                    ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IK LEGAL PROCEEDINGS


   here is stitutcrv authority in section 4 3 of the Police Act 15 54 for
>}




                                 police fund to ceet expenditure incurred
tr*u




                          defending proceedings in tort. Also, acting in
                       ..^ral statutory' duty to ziaintain an^d'e:ruatg_aj}c
n,)n>''r)




                      Jorce for its area_, the police authority has
   iiirition to~reit exbenditurT~Tnc\JrrecT by officers in all kinds of
 lecral ^rcceedincs where the officers have acted in gccd faith in
.'•— suance of their duties, 'or the interests-of the force as a vhcie
F«.re involved.    The curzose of this circular is to give guidance ~c
 _■o'i'ce authorities to helo the= in considering requests on behalf c.
:‘
 X^~ce~s~^o'-~ ^•'nancial as*sistance.    This guidance has been discusses
 and" agreed with the local authority and vith the police sta_i
 associations.
2       r-re centra"* principle which should guide consideration of
individual case's "is‘that, where a police authority considers that an
o^f ■’cer has acted in good faith in pursuance of his duties or u*.a.
the interests of a force as a whole are involved, the o f f i c e r chcui-
have the suooort of the police authority to ensure that he             ^
services of “a lawyer and that he should not be out o f p o c k e . .  i-e
following paragraphs provide general guidance to the d
classes of proceedings.     Payments nade to officers in accordance
this cuidance will be eligible for police granw.
C R IM IN A L   R R O C Z Z D IK G S

                     v-v the       Crown   Prosecution   Service

        An officer who is the subject of a public prosecution
ai'ered cffer.ce ccicitted while carrying cut his duties
^ £ ~ 'c £r* is m the sare position as any other defendant
e x p e c t e d *■q w e ar the costs of his defence.         If he is acqu^-e
should, like               anv    other    defendant,    look   to the cc— v.
reirburserer.t          of  his  expenses.     If  the  costs  are  no. pa-d, c.._
t a "*d in full *ull    fror    central   funds,   the  police  aut-.cri.-y    ^
position to di             .de,  on  the  full   facts   whether   or   n o ;    * 0

payrent to th         :e     officer   or   to the   Police  .-ecera^on       -- ~ e i -- -
provided the :             \ding.    There   ray  be  cases  where   iw   -s     ^.o,,  -^
provide legal              dvice   and/or   legal   representation    even       vhe.-e
officer is fc^     founa guilty.       This ray arise for « c“ ?\ec^ c e ®?ith” to
where the officer has been carrying ou. a                                              te<r=
aorroved of but is found guilty as a result o*. whaw                                       i
found unlawful by the court in the light o- the ci^cu_swan~es
that particular case.


                             :10ns

           — ii ce c^*icer should be able to carry cut his duties m
  :cr.fidence      that, if he acts in gocd_ faith and exercises hi
                 «-e»Son»blv, his police authority will support ;*i~.
      ---------/                  s           ___ _____ w^ e a H l h f i n 2
 ^ ""a'case where* a r4rber of the public brings a prosecution
 I-* officer, the authority is satisfied that the officer has                -
 in thi* way, the Authority should provide or funa legal a^.ce
 and/or representation.
 5.   Where a court decides that a prosecution
 officer was not brought in good faith, it ray orcer ^
 to pay the whole or any part of the coSwS _incu-.-.e^w *   _,v fce
 ac^'n     the officer is acquitted on mdic-en*., his c^s.s
 |P.‘fro=*c«?ral                  funds.    In'either of these cases         the
  the colice authority providing financial support to J »                          o.--c«;
  not 'arise.             However,.yhere        the costs   of     an   ae^ltw.d
  not awarded by the court or awaraed onl> in pa w, the
  authority should consider whether to reirb.rse a,*                                         L e
  covered, taking into account the reasons, ii. any, g_ven
  court for failing to award all costs claired.


  CIVIL PROCEEDINGS
  rwn           Action ar^st                the _
                                                C h
                                                  1^     Qfficer for -Hxonc^l ....A£t^of
  Constables
  6    U^^e1' cec^^on 48(1) of the Police Act 1964, the chief
  of a force is^liable in respect of torts corritted by c°£Sw
  under his direction and control (which i ^ l u d e s special constables
  and officers of other.forces serving in the police           a.ea ^ ^
  rutual    aid   arrangements)   in the   per^o^a^ce       o d£t:£es or
  perforrar.ee of their functions. Under secw-on 45 (<.) any da.-s-s
                                                                                               2
7     Alternatively, the plaintiff ray be ^ f et e^ v ; ^ Stheg^d^rI9es
individual police officer,^                                h* s veil." Section 48(4) of the
twice over against the chie- ~~ ~                                     police         authority "to s.--
^ i c e Act 1964 specifically e_?o«e-S a p                                      .    fund £ny damages
          as thev thin* fit" to pay out .of ^                            ^ ° s v e incurs hisself,
cr costs avar'ded. against an                                             settleaent of a elate,
 and any suns paid in .connect. ._                                   against        officers     of -he
This     provision             applies to actions                     g            Eerving the police
 ^thority's own force, off leers of a"®-fe -o ce coastables £or -ha
 area under sutual aid                                                 *ive financial assistance
 noiice area.             1:1 co,,s:               co“ s'de- in particular whe.he.
•the authority
           i c r i t y will wish to co..s              ^ c -              -e
                                                                           e vxe;cised
                                                                               o'-cisea m his
                                                                                            s jjucgeten.
                                                                                                   -------
  'ffleer concerned acted                                          the officer, he =av seek his
   easor.ably. Where the c o j ~                               *h e costs not be &v&rzsz c.
   csts fro- the plai..-i-* » J 5:*rr‘                                tv should consider v..= ...e.
     -d^d cnlv in part, the police autho.--y s.-s- >                                        acccun
     -—     c -i--           -      ____
                                    c^s-^s  „
                                            not i.   r-n v p
                                                     covereo,.re d .   ^ a X i.A    _..-w
                                                                                    ***        , n c~sts
  -o reinburse any _ cc*-* a..y                                                    *
                                                                   ^ failing to ava:-n  aVirs. all  <_wS=.:=
              : -e
   easor.s, if any,  j - v     G i v e n CV s-.^e
  ciaine:
                                               4--^    r-‘u i   o f f i c e r ant
      Joint          actions n a r . i r . g - o ~ - e ^      *             In such       cases    it   is
  police o f     f   i - r n^be^brou             ;    sc^£                        ^of ^
  :-ccrtar.t that anv CiSw-»-u..                                 ^   ^a-ties nameo ... --
  — cpcsed settlement should invo.                            -- ^ ev" are represented by
  blair. together with advisers eve-*                         -. — -
  ■i         2LC.vis 2 .2r s •


  r--vi1 Act —     TTrd er the T ^ a Protection..fret 1984
                                                        :he Data Protection Act 15S4 a..
        Under sections 22 and 23 o. ^ e                           y         inaCCUracy, less
  "individual
         . , . v.*o
                 .    ,, .c ^ 0
                      s — .e.s a.e   d.2LZlclQ2*
                                                 &S  2-
                                                      personal data         is  en.i.-ec         ^0
   or   unauthorised d i s c l ^ s u.e oi              P       absence of any case la-
   compensation fro, the d 6t& « « ^ n v^ eethaer the acts covered- by
   these provisions,            it is J ^ c i                     v h i c h the g u i d a n c e -n
   sections 2 2 and             2  a aount to w o r t s ^ to B e c t i o n 4 8 of the Police
                                    3



   paragraphs 6 and 7 above FP- vever                       the position is broadly ♦*
   Act 1964 does                           (3) (a) of the 1984 Act constables a
   same.      Under section 38 (3) W                      fficer for the purposes c. ~ e
   treated as servants o, the °hi                             liable for the acts oi: h.s
   Act.     A chief constable is‘                     , and 23 in the same vay as^he -s
    officers falling vithin section                          48(1).      The position o. nc,.
    liable for their torts under se *-                         possible that in some oase^
    police officers is le*s,                 ^ re c a-ded as having liability for ^vf'*
    the chief                              would be proper for the police au-.x— .
    acts.    It
to    =eer      all    costs,    including        any   award   of
*        this liability.           It should be noted that -he 1-ab^-^.y o-
         U S s'-" u - ^ er the Act is not vicarious but his perse..a.
         U5s-        u..-e*                          „ _•      pj . svste~ of
 ' iabilitv. Therefore his own care m bavin* -r.Sw-wU^e- a s s             ^
                 c'-e^ V ’
                         --c ar,d recording data vhich voui^ reaso..a-^_y.
 ^;T:‘ s t ‘V r r o V and 'loss under section 23(3} of the Act shouic
 hii'responsibility under section 22(3) and he s S o u l c n o - be he.,
'liable if one cf his officers disregards the system es_a-— s.*

10.   Where condensation is sought Iron an individual o _ -
rolice authority will wish, in considering w h ® tah®*. vI %c c ou n t c*
costs vhich vould othervise fall on the officer, *c> t;a*      ±     4S(4)
the sare natters as in exercising their power unde         c  ^ j , ^ 4 t -es
of the Police A ct 1964 (see paragraph 7) .                  * n*eer th*
should apply the sane broad principles an~ in particul            v* e~e a
costs of anv conpensation awarded a g a m s . a c...e. cons-  -     ** - ^
non-colice officer is at fault and the chief constable is foun-
have*liability for the actions perforred.


 p-o ; C£ o f f i c e r s   Brincir.c C i v i l   Actions     fo r D e f apatiort

 it     r-.a>e - av be occasions vhen financial assistance -s so-,..«.
 fror. a^ — lice ‘authority to enable an officer to ^bring^or consice.
             a c'v5'1 action for defanation.
 discretion to "give s u c h assistance but _it will be eligible -c.
     ;ce crd"t cr-lv if the folloving crx't.eria are &1- — -*-•

          (a)     the defamation is serious;

          (b)    it relates to the actions cf an officer acting or
          said to be acting in the discharge of his duty;

          (c)         it has attracted public attention;

                 - n v~,-^cr t v e action               is   considered to be in the
          •      *"
          interests- —cf --tne force, cr                c_   — e ?noi
                                                             •     c- i ce se^-vice as a
                                                                      ‘Le
          vhole; and
          (e)     the action stands a reasonable chance of success.

    criterion (d) is central.        If o n l y the-reputation of t h e . individual
    officer is in cuestion, h e is i n t h e face position as any^ o~.e
    citizen and ru s t b e expected to see* his own *eaedy. ■ ^                       the
    allegation against a p a rt icular o ^ i c e r                   v ide- allegations
    refutation of the w h o l e force or b e an .xanple o wide. all eg:
    ,^,< - 5 * * v e #0-ce or a s i g n i f i c a n t • section of it.    In such, .cas


     orce.




                                                                                           4
- V    Q    U   Z    S T S   ,    P U B L IC   E N Q U IR IE S    AND             T R Is U K A ].£

                                                             chief Officers

,2          >-v interested           arty cay be legally ^ t i ^ o r l v ^ w O ^ v i t n e s s e s
I 2. :         h i s cvn expense s in c e                       are ^ a  ee ^ x^ t i t l e i t o ?e
                                                                                  p       e   n   s   e   s


          .=:.-_s .     An interested par-.y ~-l- no ----i                      blic tribunal,
 a        j u* “ -          , . _                     i r er.criirv c _ o
 r . : i : ; % n r ‘ ^ s i :of the forbe is affected, i z _ v i U
           thV'oolice authority to PJ?1                      4**;,            foroe.
      : i c e r t o b e l e g a l l y r e p r e s e n t e d on be,*a— o


                                                  w «t       r ~ ---------
                                                                                                                  .•         ,   ,     ,        f o r e   vhose   in ter£s    _

                       separate representation for                                                                                          tC;:ei i l l be occasions
                    ^ v o iv ed        cav be n e c e ssa r y .                       F o~                                           sed a tiv e    can n ot reasonable
                 f    w           the
      v h e e x p e c t e d t o r e p r e s e n t t h e s e p a r a t e i^ :eJ 'e| w| h i n t e r e s t s s h o u l d
                                                                                      s       e   p   a   r   a        t e           interests of such offers
      be                                         a u t ^ o ' - i t y rc no rn.ss i d ee rr Ss twiia
                                                                                               h a iw       ^          -F*? > ~-c ' * ^
      an:       (b ) t h e p o l i c e            s u c h c a s e s t h e a u t h o r i t y s h o i .1 C 5 ^ - ^ a b <*»-**-•*      Zv-
                                                                                                                        ove,
      be     r e p r e  s  e n  t e d  .    I n
                                                         icers.                 In
                                                                                in          considering     (b ) th e officers
      ass ' stance                to     the
                                         w i s h i n p a r t i c u l a r t o »s*«*s v h « ^                                       vith
       a u t h e r i t -v - S v* i lol f b e i n g h e l d t o b - a - e - o -                  -         _       s u c h fir.tir.=
       are
                              t o v h i c h t h e i n q u e s t r e l a t e s e „ « ’^ l o s t s * o* - * . * « *
       th e                                        ^ ^ 1 •-svn'-ppr 1TiGa -A.W— w**                                    th e    P o l i c e
                                                                                                      —,•
                                            I U ? & ■ f i n a n c i a l a s s i s ■ * e t;le o a 48(1> o:            a p p r c p r > ts
                 i 9 £ 4 c r f c r vr.ic:
                                                             circu la r.
                 ^—s the t e m s o . his


                    PL IC A T IO N S       ;0 R
                                                   *^“
                                                     ^vr",,vrr'TA.Tj ^AS S I S I AN *-
                                                   - -N --N — ^                                                                                                    ^   _     v ,
                                                                             *■                   _ ->                   <<n»»icial              assistance        _-.c_     .
                                   office:                      ishing to see*                                               . adv£nCe of as veil
                                              -t-v sS- h       oi uU lld
                                                          .V»i O       iUd haven a v e the   - — -c??o.wU.,..i
                                                                                           >-..=■      - --- -, . .      -^ 1e , » v:—
                                                                                                                                     —n t , T"O the w*.«  c*,e f
           p O i i - e        a - u . . - _ l - -            _              _ ^    * .> ,«    n '- n r .P .e d lT lQ S   k-O   S U j—
           a sl . ?  on  n                                                  for^a^fartisfstance                                      Jhe f iej/ffi-
               £<icer
           office               an     appl-ca^-u.i                                                                 -r-ecomenoation          x-o        *
              -:::.d put this, t og e t h e r v i t h his o«n                                                                n o r = a l ly be given whe
            s
            2 .uthority
              / j ^ r i c ; i %- v   -for
                                       w -   - aecis.o.,.
                                               *■*-'- ~ ------------ ------ •         - y      _ ?  £-v,v - t o s a k e r - e p r e s e n . a a o . s -
                                                                                                  : *.
            opportunity by the police a’
                                       -.---- ^
                ** he wishes to do so.

                                 X- it dec i de s t o give                                        iina^ cdiiJh£t SSi^ a the' information                                           cn
                                   i n f o m th. « « i « r                                                                       • —                                               -
                      t he y b a s e d t h e i r         4-0          inaccix:
                      ruent legal P « c. f ^ Sec.:°t0 recover
            a u t ho ri t y v i l l n o m i H y     y* ^s ^ e p ’- e s e n t a t i o n vas
            sati sf i e d t h a t no c l ^ * bleld involve the applicant in
            to r e c o v e r t h e = ™ «         uf f „ f     i; an authority 'refuses
                                           on the other nana,                                                                              liaht of subseguen>-                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                  ,

                                  ich assisi-wi^                        ~j                                    _^p>- to reel pne                                    ------
                a s s i s t a nnce ee s h o u l d b e ^                 e d i ir£J le " g a l a d v i c e                                             or a ssista n c e .
                               _d b y t h e o f f i c e r            in se e k in g xega

                                                                                                                                                                                        5
Assistance   frcr. Police F ed er a t i o n Funds

16.  Under Regulation 19 of the Police Federation Peculations 1?S9,
as amended, Federation funds nay be used to defray legal charges
incurred by a rerbe'r in connection with criminal proceedings
brought  against hia for an offence under the read traffic
enactments (other than offences involving driving vhen impaired by
drink cr drugs or taking a vehicle without authority), or for
offences of causing the death or injury of any person, cr for any
assault, or in connection vith his action for libel or slander. An
officer seeking financial assistance in circumstances covered ^by
Regulation IS should seek such assistance fror: the police authority
in the first instance. ,If the police authority does not consider
the request to fall within the teres of this circular, the
Federation say then consider the application within the terms cf
Regulation IS.   If the officer receives legal assistance fror: the
Federation the terns of Here Office Circular No 2 6/19 57 vill
continue to apply.

17.   General enquiries about the content of this circular ray be
addressed to Kr Vaghorn, Hose Office, FI Division on (01) 212 4203.

                                                    Yours faithfully




                                                    M J ADDISON




                                                                       6
    H OC4/199S                                                                                                    17 F e b r u a r y 199S


    i HIS CLRC tJ L a.R IS A BO U T :       F I N A N C I A L A S S I S T A N C E T O P O L I C E O F F I C E R S IN
                                            LEG A L PRO CEEDIN G S


    FROM:      POLICE R E SO U R C E S UNIT                         E XP IR Y DATE:          NONE


    l a st date for

    IMPLEMENTATION: I M M E D I A T E                               THIS C A N C E L S HO C:       7 7 /1 9 S ?


    FOR M O R E IN F O R M A T IO N CON TA CT :
                                                                    P O L IC E R E S O U R C E S UNIT
I                                                                   R O O M 610
I
!                                                                   5 0 Q U E E N A N N E ’S G A T E
I                                                                   L O N D O N S W 1 H 9 AT
!                                                                   T E L : 0171 27 3 3 6 0 6
                                                                    F A X : 0171 2 7 3 3 7 4 2


    THIS C I R C U L A R IS A D D R E S S E D TO:                   CHIE F OF F IC ER S OF P O L IC E
                                                                    ( E N G L A N D & WA LES)


i   COPIES A R E A L S O B E I N G S E N T TO:                      CLERK S TO T H E P O LIC E A U TH O R ITIES
                                                                    RECEIVER FOR T H E M ETR OPO LITA N
                                                                    PO LIC E DISTRICT




            Dear Chief O ffic e r/C le rk .                -• - -          -

            This circular:

             • provides updated guidance to police authorities cn financial assistance to police
               officers in legal proceedings.

             • distinguishes between officers involved in civil proceedings, crim inal..
               proceedings and other types of legal proceedings.

             • replaces HO Circular 77/1987.
Introduction

1.     It is important that police officers should be able to c an y out their duues in
the confidence that their police authority will support them, if they act in good faith
and exercise their judgement reasonably. The ioliowing guidance, which has been
prepared in consultation with ACPO, the. Superintendents Association, the Police
"Federation and the Association o f Police Authorities, should be read against this
principle.

Civil P r o c e e d i n g s

2.      Tinder section 88 (l)_of the_PoHceAct 1936 which re-enacts section 4 8 0 ) of
the Polic? Act 1964 rh ie f officers are liable xor torts committed by otficers under
their direction and control. Section 88(2) provides that any damages or costs
awarded asainst the chief officer and any costs they incur themselves (which are not
recovered) should be met from police authority funds.

3.     Alternatively, a court may award damages against individual police Ouicers.
Section 88(4) of the Police Act 1996 empowers a police authority “ to such an extent
as appears to it to be appropriate” to pay any damages or costs awarded against ^
officers (this Includes both officers of other forces serving in the police area under
mutual aid arrangements and special constables), any costs incurred by me orncers
themselves and any sum paid in connection with the settlement or a claim. It is^ler
police authorities to decide when to make assistance available, taking account of the
 circumstances of a particular case.

 4.       Police authorities are reminded that the discretionary powers in sections
 8S('4'i and (5^ of the Acr, enabling them to provide financial assistance to Ouicers
 involved Lh Iesal proceedings, apply to civil proceedings only. Sections 8S(4) and
 88(5) mav also aonlv to police ofticers who were members at the time of the actio^
 which save rise to the claim but who are no longer members.

 C r im in a l P r o c e e d i n g s

 5.     Section 88(4) does not apply to criminal proceedings, but police authorities
 may wish to consult their legal advisers as to whether they have any other power to
 provide such assistance (whether in respect of private prosecutions or prosecutions
 brought by the CPS). In this context, they may wish to note that section 111(1) of
 the Local Government Act 1972 enables police authorities to do anything which is
 calculated to facilitate, or is conducive or incidental to, the discharge of any of their
 functions ” . The provision applies to provincial authorities (but not the Metropolitan
 or City of London police) by virtue of Section 146A of the 1972 Act (as inserted
 by Schedule 14 to the Local Government Act 1985 and amended by Schedule 4 of
 the Police and Magistrates’ Courts Act 1994). It could be argued that to allow
payment to be made to officers (either former or serving) involved in criminal
proceedings would in some way facilitate or be conducive to a police authority’s
broad functions. For example, failure to provide financial assistance could
adversely affect the morale o f the force if officers had to meet their own costs after
an accuirtal.

6.      It is for individual police authorities to decide in the particular circumstances
of a case, and on the basis of legal advice, whether to make financial assistance
available to officers in criminal proceedings.      —

O ther tvpes of legal proceedings

7.        s;~ularlv there. is no exD<"^ statutory authority for providing nnancial
assistance m procccuings brougnt against ponce officers m tribunals otner than tne
l u l u s. It is for police authorities outside London (bearing in mind the
recommendations of chief officers) to decide whether to make financial assistance
available to officers (either former or serving) involved in Public Inquiries and
Tribunals. Police authorities will therefore need to consider whether section 111(1)
of the Local Government Act 1972 provides sufficient scope to enable financial
assistance to be siven in any particular case. In this respect tribunals may include
certain industrial tribunals where it is clear that officers have acted in good faith in
pursuance of their duties and the interest of the force as a wnole is involved. It is to
be expected that, where appropriate, the service’s grievance procedure
 arrangements should be exhausted beiore there is recourse to legal proceedings.
 These arrangements are set out in Home Office Circular 16/93, issued 10 March
1993.

S.      There are specific provisions in the Race Relations Act 1976 and the Sex
Discrimination Act 1975 for compensation, costs and expenses awarded against the
chief officer of police and any sum required for settlement, if approved by the
police authority, to be paid from the police fund.

9.      There is no express statutory authority for providing rmancial assistance to
an officer wishins to initiate court proceedings. The considerations set out in
paragraphs 5 to 7 above apply to such cases.




 LYNDA L O C K Y E R
 PO L IC E R E SO U R C E S U N IT




                                      ©
                                                                                                   2 Park Lane
H am m ond S u d d a rd s                                                                          Leeds
                                                                                                   LS3 1ES
                                                                                                   Telephone (0113) 284 7000
                                                                                                   DX No. 26441
                                                                                                   Fax (0113) 284 7001
                                                                                                   Peter.Metcalf@HammondSuddards.co.uk




 Ian Daines Esq
 Assistant Chief Constable
 South Yorkshire Police
 Police Headquarters
 Snig Hill
 Sheffield
 S3 8 LY




 OurRef:                                                           Y o u r Ref:                                                     D ale:

 PCM.SB.CHI.57-9                                                   ACC ID NMH                                                        12 February 1999



 Dear Ian

 Hillsborough Stadium Disaster 1989 - Judicial Review

 Here is a full paginated copy of the bundle as lodged incorporating the Application itself and the
 Affidavit. By way of confirmation I have endorsed the case number C05 82/99 on the index page.

 A minor point, but I must apologise for the fact that John Newing remains described as the President
 of the “Association o f Chief Officers” at paragraph 6 of the Affidavit. Because this was an obvious
 error which did not require discussion I merely noted it on an amendment copy but unfortunately
 then failed to include that particular copy in the loop of amendments.

 As agreed I have provided copy bundles to the solicitors for David Duckenfield and Bernard
 Murray. I await your instructions in relation to the HFSG letter but 1 have thought it appropriate to
 notify them o f the allocated case number. On reflection I believe that they are entitled to a copy
 bundle, and I am providing this.

 As agreed I will let you have an update by fax when I have any more information about the
 timetables etc.

 In the light of our conversation last week I should say that I have not as yet engaged Leading
 Counsel and propose to defer doing this until we have in any submissions from the Police Authority

 Offices also at:

 7 Devonshire Square              Trinity Court                      Pennine House                   Suite 688 Lloyd’s                       Avenue Louise 250
 Cutlers Gardens                  16 John Dalton Street              39-45 Well Street               One Lime Street                         1050 Brussels
 London                           Manchester                         Bradford                        London                                  Belgium
 E C 2M 4Y H                      M 60 8HS                           BD1 5NU                         EC3M 7HA                                Telephone (00) 32 2 627 7676
 Telephone (0171) 655 1000        Telephone ( 0 1(i i ) 830 5000     Telephone (01274) 734700        Telephone (0171) 327 3388/3399          Fax (00) 32 2 627 7686
 Fax (0171) 655 1001              F a x ( 0 l 6 l) 830 5001          Fax (01274)307239               F a x (0171)621 1217

 A list o f Partners can be viewed at the above address. This firm is regulated by the Law Society in the conduct o f investment business.
                                                                                                            2
                                                                                 12 February 1999
                                                                                   Ian Daines Esq
                                                                         Assistant Chief Constable
                                                                           South Yorkshire Police

and indeed from any other interested party. If available I have in mind to instruct Nigel Baker QC
who is in the same Chambers as Louise Varty and who dealt successfully with the Court of Appeal

case o f T -v- North Yorkshire County Council for me last year. However, in view of the expedited
time scale which we are hoping to achieve the choice may be limited by availability.

Ygurs sincerely



P C METCALF




                                                                             c h i .057*0009.syp. 1202.pcm.doc
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY




 Report on Financial Assistance granted to
      former officers towards their
  Legal Expenses and further Assistance
   sought by 9uch officers towards such
                expenses


             1 February 1999




         G arretts
              1 City Square
             LEEDS, LSI 2AL

               NJP.DH.AG
NOTE: THERE IS MATERIAL IN THIS TEXT AND THE APPENDICES WHICH
15 CONFIDENTIAL IT CONTAINS INFORMATION DISCLOSED BY MR
 DUCKENF1ELD. MR MURRAY AND THEIR ADVISERS WHICH IF IT
 BECOMES GENERALLY AVAILABLE AT THIS STAGE COULD PREfUDICE
THEIR LEGAL POSITION.                                         MEMBERS ARE THEREFORE REQUESTED TO
KEEP THIS REPORT SECURE AND DISCUSS ITS CONTENTS WITH NO-ONE
OUTSIDE THE MEMBERS OF THE POLICE COMMITTEE. ITS OFFICERS AND
ADVISERS.

PURPOSE OF THE REPORT

To consider:

i)          the decisions taken in principle on 27‘i>February 1998 to provide financial
              assistance to Mr David Duckenfield and Mr Bernard Murray in relation to
              certain criminal proceedings taken against them and to review and decide
             whether to reverse or confirm those decisions;

ii)         further applications for financial assistance from Mr David Duckenfield and
             Mr Bernard Murray to meet their respective legal costs and disbursements in
             proposed proceedings for judicial review of:

             a.          the decision of the Crown Prosecution Service not to intervene to take
                           over the conduct of the private prosecutions brought against them by
                           Ms Ann Adlir.gton, Solicitor, on behalf of the Hillsborough Family
                           Support Group ("HFSG");

             b           an adverse ruling by the Clerk to the South Sefton Justices on claims
                           made for the payment of costs from central funds;

iii)         written representations submitted by Ms Adlington, on behalf of the HFSG,
             tc the Authority;

RECOMMENDATIONS

1.         In the light of legal advice, including advice from leading Counsel members
          are recommended to resolve that, on balance, the Authority has no legal power
           to provide financial assistance to Mr David Duckenfield or Mr Bernard Murray
          in relation to their costs and expenses of defending the private prosecutions
          brought against diem by the HFSG, by Information dated 10 July 1998, and
          accordingly to determine that any previous decision of the Authority, or any


K C iA t!N U t\5 0 ur»IYORK5li:k trO L IC B /;N 4Xlllh.l>OC         1
                 officer acting under its authority, to make 9uch assistance available i9 null and
                 void.

         2.      In the light of legal advice, including advice from leading Counsel, members
                  are recommended to resolve that, on balance, Ihe A uthority has no legal power
                  to provide financial assistance to Mr David Duckenfield or Mr Bernard Murray
                  in relation to the costs of any judicial review proceedings brought by either of
                  them; whether relating to the decision of the Crown Prosecution Service not to
                  take over tlie conduct cf the private prosecutions and discontinue such
                  prosecutions, or to any decision of the Clerk to the Sefton Magistrates' Court to
                  challenge the payment of the officers' costs of proceedings before that court
                 from central funds, or to any other decision of any court, authority or body
                 arising from such prosecutions; and, accordingly, to reject the applications of
                 Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray for financial assistance in relation to such
                 proceedings,

         3.      In recognition of the fact that the legal advice provided to the Authority is that
                 it remains arguable that power exists to provide die assistance referred to in 1
                 and 2 above, to take such action as the Gerk and Treasurer, in consultation
                 with the Chief Constable, the Authority's legal advisers and die Chairman of
                 the Authority, may decide as appropriate to have die decisions referred to in 1
                 and 2 reviewed by the High Court and to expedite such review with a view to
                 clarifying the Authority's powers in this regard,

         4.      To defer consideration of the procedural issues raised by Ms Adlingtcn, in her
                 letters of 22 December 1998 to die Clerk and Treasurer and 5 January 1999 to
                 the members of die Audiority, until the legal power of the Authority to provide
                 die financial assistance referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 has been resolved to
                 the satisfaction of the Authority.




        r.CA.MHtTI\50lTH'r0nK5HIREPOLKT/PN-UttJII.( X X



too d                                                                                               IM
                                                                                                     OK
                                                                                                      )66
                                                                                                        .'8
                                                                                                          3d-1
                                                                                                             0
CONTENTS

A       Hillsborough Stadium Disaster - Investigations/Decisions/Events Post 15
        April 1989

B       The proceedings for which Financial Assistance is sought.

C       The decision making process to data.

D       The Potential Challenge,

E       Statutory Powers.

F       Procedural Considerations.

A       THE HILLSBOROUGH S TA D IU M DISASTER - IN V E S T IG A T IO N /
        DECISIONS/EVENTS POST 15 APRIL 1989

1.      17 April 1989; Lord Justice Taylor was appointed "to carry out an inquiry into
        die events at Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground on 15 April 1989 and to
        make recommendations about the needs of crowd control and safety at sports
        events",

2.      17 April 1989; Geoffrey Dear QPM, Chief Constable of West Midlands Police,
        appointed to c a rry out independent investigation of the disaster and gather
        evidence.

3.     19 April 1989; West Midlands Police assume responsibility for the inquiry.

4.     HM Coroner opens and adjourns inquests on 95 deaths that occurred at
       Hillsborough.

5.      4 August 1989: Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report mads public. The then
        Chief Constable, Peter Wright, referred the questions of manslaughter, by
        criminal negligence, to the Director of Public Prosecutions for a decision as to
        criminal liability,

6.      15 August 1989: Director of Public Prosecutions recommended that the matter
        should be subject of a full criminal investigation. Mr Dear, Chief Constable of
        West Midlands Police, invited to undertake this investigation. Also asked that
        if he discovers any matters against the Police (Discipline) Regulations, he
        enquires into them on behalf of South Yorkshire Police.



hGAaREvr\sod mtorioi tmrroucp/rv-uiwi t.tx.*;   j
7.     30 November 1989: Peter Wright, Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police,
        offers in conjunction with insurers to open negotiations with representatives of
        the bereaved to resolve all bona fide civil claims for compensation without
        having to await the outcome of legal hearings.

8.     15 December 1989: Agreement reached with representatives of the bereaved for
        settlement of civil actions without a decision as to liability.

9.     Full criminal and disciplinary investigation formally commenced.

10. IS January 1990: Lord Justice Taylor's Final Report is published.

11. 31 March 1990 Mt Dear's report is submitted to Director of Public Prosecutions,

12. 30 August 1990 Director of Public Prosecutions, Allan Green QC, concludes
         that there is insufficient evidence upon which a prosecution for manslaughter,
        or any other criminal offence, could be brought against any officer in the South
        Yorkshire Police, or any other person,

13. 19 November 1990 to 28 March 1991HM Coroner resumes inquests on 95
        deaths in the Hillsborough Disaster. Jury returns a verdict of accidental death.

14. 7 December 1990: South Yorkshire Police Authority approves financial
        assistance for 6 officers including Mr David Duckinfield and Mr Bernard
        Murray in connection with legal proceedings relating to the Inquest..

15. 7 May 1991 the Police Complaints Authority recommend disciplinary any
        charges be brought against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
        Superintendent Murray.

16. 11 July 1991 the Police Complaints Authority direct that Chief Superintendent
        Duckenfield should face four discipline charges of Neglect of Duty and one of
        Discreditable Conduct. In addition, Superintendent Murray should face one
        charge of Neglect of Duty.

17. November 1991 Chief Superintendent Duckenfield retires on medical grounds.

18. 13 January 1992 Police Complaints Authority gives leave not to proceed with
        the discipline charge against Superintendent Murray, as it would be
        inappropriate and unjust to pursue the charge against him alone, in the absence
        of his superior officer.




j\GA*ttr.l>SOciH'/OR(tfrt.R£t\3UCE/rN-030!l.OOC   4
19. 26 August 1992 Superintendent Murray retires on medical grounds.

20. The relatives of six deceased are granted an application for judicial review into
       tine inquest verdicts. They sought certiorari to quash the jury's verdict.

21. The judicial review concludes that the inquest verdicts were correct.

22. Inquest held by HM Coroner for West Yorkshire into the death of Anthony
       Bland (the 96lKvictim of Hillsborough). A verdict of accidental death wag
       returned.

23.    5 December 1996 the drama "Hillsborough" written by jimmy McGovern on
       behalf of Granada Television, is broadcast on the 1TV Network. Following this
       programme further material is submitted to the Home Office- Those
       representations related in particular to video evidence of the disaster and
       medical evidence about the time of death of the victims.

24.    30 June 1997 the Home Secretary made an oral statement to the House of
       Commons during the course of which he skated:



               "Madam Speaker, my Department, the office of the Attorney General and
               the Crown Prosecution Service have considered very carefully all the
               evidence which has been put forward in recent months.


              The Director of Public Prosecutions has taken the view that the material
               so far presented to her would not justify fresh criminal investigations.
              The then Attorney General also took the view, again on the material
              presented to him, that any application to the High Court for a new
               inquest would not have any realistic prospect of succeeding.


               Nonetheless, I am acutely conscious that the families of those who died at
               Hillsborough and many others including Hon Members of this House are
               very concerned that unresolved issues remain. I am determined to go as
               far as 1 can to ensure that no matter of significance is overlooked and that
               we do not reach a final conclusion without a full and independent
               examination of the evidence.


               I can therefore tell the House today that the Attorney General, die
               Director of Public Prosecutions and I have agreed that it is in the public



1VCAftnim\?OCTMYOH<W[KBlOLlCIVl,N*tHUl1.X<
                                         X;
                            interest that there 9 h o u ld be an independent scrutiny to ascertain
                            whether there now exists any new evidence relating to the disaster which
                             was not previously available. We are appointing Lord Justice 5tuart-
                            Smith, a senior Lord Justice of the C ourt o f Appeal, for that purpose".

           25.      18 February 1998, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's Scrutiny Report is presented to
                    the House of Commons. He concluded that:

                    25.1 there was no basis upon which there should be a further judicial inquiry
                             or a reopening of Lord Taylor's Inquiry;

                    25.2. there was no basis for a renewed application to the D ivisional Court or
                             fo r die A ttorney General to exercise his powers under the Coroners Act
                             1988;

                    25.3 he did not consider there was any m aterial w hich should be pul before
                             the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Police Complaints A uthority
                             which m ight cause them to reconsider decisions they had already taken.

           B        APPLICATIONS FOR FIN A N C IA L ASSISTANCE


           I        IN TR O D U CTIO N

           1.1      Applications have been submitted to the A uthority by M r David Duckenfield
                    and M r Bernard M urray, form erly a Chief Superintendent and Superintendent
                    respectively in the South Yorkshire Police Force, for financial assistance to meet
                    the costs of their legal representation in three different sets of legal proceedings
                    which w ill be referred to as "the C rim inal Proceedings", "the CPS proceedings'1,
                    and "the Sefton proceedings" in diis report. The C rim inal Proceedings take the
                    form o f private prosecutions by the HFSG relating to actions which the officers
                    took w hilst on duty at Hillsborough Stadium, on 15* A p ril 1989. The HFSG
                    alleges that those actions led to the deaths o f certain fans attending a match
                    between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest football clubs.               The other tw o
                    proceedings w ould, if launched, arise out of the crim inal proceedings.


           2       THE C R IM IN A L PROCEEDINGS

           2.1     The crim inal prosecutions brought by Ms A dlington, the solicitor representing
                    the HF5G, charge Messrs Duckenfield and M urray w ith the manslaughter of
                   John A lfred Anderson and James Gary Aspinall, tw o of the deceased from die



           !\G A ft$ETT\SD lfniYORiCSH*A£POUCP/FV-4)O01l .3OC




800   'd
                                                                                                 i£:£
                                                                                                    l (N
                                                                                                       Olfj6
                                                                                                           6,'8
                                                                                                              33-1
                                                                                                                 0
       Hillsborough disaster and also w ith w ilfu l neglect to perform a public duty. In
       addition, M r Duckenfield faccs a charge of intentionally perverting the course
       of justice in lyin g about the circumstances in w hich Gate C at Hillsborough
       Stadium became open.

2.2    The essence of the manslaughter and w ilfu l neglect charges appear to be that,
       being in a position of responsibility for ground safety, both officers allegedly
       acted widn recklessness or gross negligence in fa ilin g to take, demand or
       recommend obvious steps to avoid the overcrowding which led to the
       H illsborough disaster and in taking steps w hich added to the danger.

2.3    The essence of the charge of perverting the course of justice is that M r
       Duckenfield allegedly misled M r Graham K elly and M r Glen K irton of the
       Football Association and M r Graham M ackrell of Sheffield Wednesday Football
       Club about the reasons fo r the disaster by claim ing that Gate C had been forced
       by supporters, knowing this not to be the case, and w ith intent to disguise the
       real cause of the H illsborough disaster from any ensuing investigations on
       jud icia l proceedings.

2.4   A ll charges, if proven, are potentially punishable w ith im prisonm ent, at the
       discretion of the courts, and the charges of w ilfu l neglect to perform a public
       duty and intentionally perverting the course of justice are, if proven, also
       potentially punishable by any fine the court considers appropriate.

2.5   The com m ittal proceedings, at which Leeds Magistrates' C ourt w ill decide
       whether there is sufficient evidence against die tw o officers to ju stify a fu ll
       crim inal trial, is scheduled for early A p ril 1999.

2.6   Copies o f relevant correspondence relating to the applications submitted by M r
       Duckenfield and M r Murray, w hich were supported by the Chief Constable, are
       attached at Appendices B1 and B2, As previously reported, the Clerk and
       Treasurer acting on behalf o f the A uthority (and on the basis of advice from the
       Assistant Clerk and Solicitor) approved the provision of financial assistance to
       meet such reasonable expenses as the officers m ight incur in defending the
       crim inal proceedings.

2.7   The A uthority has already paid £11,824 costs o f the crim inal proceedings
       (inclusive of VAT) to the solicitors representing M r Duckenfield. A further
       invoice for £34,492.16 (inclusive o f VAT) fo r w ork up to 18^ September 1998 has




ACAfcAim\sotmiyorKsraRcroucc/pn-oooii.doc       7
       been submitted by M r Duckenfield's solicitors but not paid by the Authority.
       No invoices have, to date, been submitted by M r M urray's solicitor.



3     THE CPS PROCEEDINGS

3.1    The Director of Public Prosecutions under the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985,
       has a discretion, b n t not a duty., to take over the conduct c f private
       prosecutions. Having taken over such proceedings he may under Section 23 of
       the 1985 Act discontinue proceedings if the evidence is insufficient or if the
       proceedings w ould be contrary to tine public interests or to avoid duplication or
       fo r any other good reason.

3.2    In July 1998, the solicitors acting fo r M r Duckenfield and M r M urray wrote to
       the Crown Prosecution Service asking it to take over the crim inal proceedings
       brought against their respective clients by Ms A dlington on behalf of the HFSG.

3.3    On the 18 November 1998, the Crown Prosecution Service notified the solicitors
       that, having considered the evidence, die representations made by the parties
       and a ll the surrounding circumstances, it had decided not to intervene to take
       over any of the charges.               The Crown Prosecution Service has still, as at 1
       February 1999, not provided the reasons for diis decision, despite an
       undertaking to do so "in January 1999".

3.4    Eoth M r Duckenfield and M r M urray have obtained advice from Leading
       Counsel regarding the prospects of making a successful application for judicial
       review of the decision of the Crown Prosecution not to intervene, Details of the
       advice they have each received, as provided co the A uthority, appear at
       Appendices B3 and B4 together w ith relevant correspondence received from
       their respective solicitors both making and supporting the officers' applications
       fo r financial assistance to meet their legal costs and disbursements in relation to
       jud icia l review proceedings.             The basis of the challenge is that by not
       intervening the CPS has allowed prosecutions to continue where there is "no
       realistic prospect of prosecution" cc                                     de for Crown
       Prosecutors.

3.5   The cost estimate of taking such proceedings given by the solicitors acting for
       M r Duckenfield is in the region of £10,000 - £15,000. The cost estimate given by
       the solicitors acting fo r M r M urray is in the region of £15,000 taking into
       account travel costs.          The risk o f having to meet the costs o f the Crown
       Prosecution Service should also be taken into account (because the officers'


KCARMTI\?C'.THTO!<K?.HIHEroUCii/r\-M»nUiOC:
               application may fail). Counsel has advised that it could be expected that the
               latter costs w ould be low er than those of the officers1 independent solicitors
               and that it is unlikely that there w ould be tw o sets of costs awarded against the
               officers, if unsuccessful.


       4      THE SEFTON PROCEEDINGS

       4.1    The C rim inal Proceedings above were in itia lly commenced in the South Sefton
               Magistrates' Court.              However, as the alleged offences were not committed
               w ith in that area and neither defendant resides w ith in that Court's area, the
               officers' solicitors objected to the prosecution being undertaken at that Court.
               Those objections were upheld by the Court and an order was made for the
               payment of the defendants' costs from central funds. Thg Clgfk in the Justices
               has now questioned the claims which have been submitted fnr fKo                   ^
               costs because the A u th o rity has agreed to fund their legal representation (but_
               the Clerk has not yet made a fin a l ruling). The applications maae for funding
               to pursue a challenge to an adverscTdcdsion are included w ith in the papers
               w hich are attached as Appendices B3 and B4.

       4.2    The solicitors representing M r Duckenfield have provided a cost estimate of
               £5,000 to £7,500              Again die risk of the respondent's costs being awarded
               against Messrs Duckenfield and M urray must be borne in mind.




       jM3AKnLrn-NsnLTiiYnnicsii.nr.PO!.icr/rN.!)OQii.ooc



H
O 'd                                                                                       6
                                                                                           £:il (.M
                                                                                                  QI’ii)6
                                                                                                        6.'8
                                                                                                           3d-T
                                                                                                              0
         C           DECISION MAKING PROCESS TO DATE


         1           MATTERS TO BE CONSIDERED BY THE AUTHORITY

         1.1         In deciding whether to meet the legal costs of form er ChiefSuperintendent
                      David Duckenfield and form er Superintendent Bernard Murray, (whether in
                      relation to the crim inal proceedings or any o f the other potential proceedings
                      referred to above) the A uthority is subject to the public law principles of
                      decision making. Briefly, these are that it must (amongst other things):

                       •        act w ith in whatever statutory powers are conferred upon it by Act of
                                Parliament;

                       •        act w ith procedural fairness;

                       •        take all relevant considerations into account;

                       •       ignore a ll irrelevant considerations;

                       •       not act irrationally;

                       •       not fetter its discretion;

                       •       not unlaw fully delegate the decision making function.

         1 .2         Failure to comply with any of these principles will expose the decision to
                      challenge by judicial review.

         1.3          The decision making process to date in respect of financial assistance to M r
                      Duckenfield and M r M urray has been as follow s:


         2          MEETING OF THE POLICE AUTHORITY ON 1st AUGUST 1997

         2.1         A t this meeting, the Clerk and Treasurer and the Chief Constable submitted a
                     jo in t report inform ing members of the appointm ent of Lord Justice Stuart-
                     Smith to conduct a scrutiny into aspects o f the H illsborough disaster.

        2.2          A t that meeting, the A uth o rity made the follow ing resolutions:

                                  "1 - That approval be given to the provision of up to £500,000 from
                                 reserves fo r expenditure like ly to be Incurred in respect of the scrutiny,




        j \ G A n rjriT v s o trri nroftK St i m E r o u c i y rN -oao 11. d o c




no' d
                                                                                                      62 : Ll (MOM66. '83d-10
                        2 - That approval be given to a commitment to provide financial
                       assistance for legal representation for officers (se rv in g and retired)^ in_
                        rnrniPt-Hrm w u h Jn rd Tuatice Shiart-Smith's scrutiny in accordance w id i
                        tine principles set out in the Home Office C ircular 77/87 Financial
                        Assistance to Police Officers in Legal Proceedings.

                        3 - That the Clerk and Treasurer be authorised to determine individual
                        applications for financial assistance in consultation w ith the Chief
                        Constable”.


         3       MEETING OF THE POLICE AUTHORITY ON 27™ FEBRUARY 1998

^        3.1    Shortly after the presentation of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's scrutiny report to
W               the House of Commons, the members of the A uth o rity agreed to consider an
                item relating to Hillsborough. Assistant Chief Constable P aines gave an oral
                report to the A uth o rity on the findings of the Scrutiny and advised members
                that private prosecutions                had been threatened againat three officers.       The
                general issue of the provision o f financial assistance to the officers concerned
                was addressed.           It was      recognised that      actual decisions about financial
                support could be made only on ind ivid u a l application.                   Members were
                accordingly invited to delegate the determ ination of in d ivid u a l applications to
                 die Clerk and Treasurer. Members resolved as follow s;

                        "1 - That in the lig h t of the findings of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's inquiry
                        and his comments on the outcome, members do not believe there is any
                        new evidence to cause them to reconsider the A u th o fity s previous view ^
^                       and remain of the opinion that the officers acted in good faith. _

                         2 - That the A uthority agrees to authorise the C lerk and Treasurer to
                         consider applications for financial assistance from officers (serving and
                         re tired) in accordance- w iA the-provisinns of Home O ffice C ircular 77/jj2*
                         Financial Assistance to Police Officers in Legal Proceedings".

         3.2      On 28 February 1998, M r Duckcnfield applied to Assistant Chief Constable
                 Daines Daines fo r financial assistance from                   the   A u th o rity fo r legal
                 representation. On 2»* M arch 1998, Assistant Chief Constable Daines wrote to
                 fhp r.lprlc and Trpasurer asking them to approve M r Duckenfield's request A t
                 die request of the A uthority's solicitor, Ms Maureen Oades, Assistant Chief
                 Constable Daines provided supporting infnrmaHnn nn ^                            199ft fr        _____
_                Clerk and Treasurer. These letters are attached at Appendix B l. Follow ing
                  ^0     mu          ^



          J\.GAK«t'mSOUTHrOftK5Hllit!W>UCE/fN-«im1.UOC           11




£10 'd                                                                                                 =     f\!0H) 66 , 'SSi-K1
             receipt of this letter, the Clerk and Treasurer approved M r Duckenfield's
             appicaHoiTtowards the costs of legal representation"m the event oi! a private
             prosicWKffTBelng brought against him in connection w ith Hit- HUlabuiuugli
             disaster!                            '           '                     '


       4     MEETING OF THE POLICE AUTHORITY ON 24™ APRIL 3998

             On 24th A p ril, the Chief Constable and Clerk and Treasurer submitted a join t
              report to members requesting that members note the expenditure of £11,900 on
              the Chief Constable’s costs in connection w ith the Scrutiny from the earmarked
              reserve and requesting members to agree that the earmarked reserve continue
              to be held for purposes related to the H illsborough disaster. The A uthority
              resolved as follows:

                      "1 - That tine use of the funds to date be noted.

                      2 - That the A uthority agree, fo r the time being, to m aintain the
                      earmarked reserve fo r future costs associated w ith the Hillsborough
                      Stadium disaster, subject to periodic reports and expenditure from the
                      reserve".


              APPLICATION OF 28™ JUNE 1990 FROM MR BERNARD MURRAY

              By letter dated 28th June 1998, M r M urray informed the C hief Constable that his
              w ife had accepted a summons on his behalf arising from the events of tine
              Hillsborough disaster and requesting that the Police A uthority reimburse any
              legal expenses that he may incur in defending himself. The next day, Assistant
              Chief Constable Daines wrote to the C leik and Treasurer setting out the
              reasons for his support of M r M urray's application and the application was
              approved by the Clerk and Treasurer that day.


       6      THE CLERK AND TREASURER'S DECISIONS

              In approving both of these applications, the Clerk and Treasurer consulted the
              A uthority's legal adviser and took in to account a number cf considerations.
              These included:

       6.1    The terms of the Home Office C ircular 4/1998 relating to financial assistance to
              police officers in legal proceedings.



       !\CAUHEri’SOL'niYORI<SH!HEPOUCT/FN--OOeil.DOC


HO'd
                                                                                        O f ;. I   ( X0K) 66 , ' 8 3 d - I O
6.2   The principles for the exercise of an A uthority's discretion to assist police
      officers w ith legal costs and expenses stated in R -u- Derbyshire Polio: Authority
      ex parte Wilson and Dalton (1989) and in the earlier Home Office circular 77/87

6.3   The reports of:

      6.3.1     Chief Constable Peter W right to the Finance and General Purposes
                Committee on 15th Septembet 1989.

      6.3.2     Chief Constable Richard Wells to the Police A uthority on 19lh Octobcr
                 1990.

       6.3.3     The Deputy Chief Constable to the Police A u th o rity on    November
                 1990.

       6.3.4     The C lerk and Financial O fficer and Chief Constable to the Police
                 A u th o rity on 7ih December 1990.

         and the opinions expressed in those reports.

6.4    The decision of the Director o f Public Prosecutions in^99cTjihat there was
       insufficien t evidence upon w hich prosecution fo r manslaughter or any other
       crim inal offence could be brought against any officer in the South Yorkshire
       Police or any other person.

6.5    The decision of the Director of Public Prosecutions 1^1997 y a t die m aterial so
       far presented w ould not ju stify fresh crim inal in vestigators.

6.6    The inquest findings of accidental death.

6.7    The fact that disciplinary charges of neglect of duty directed by the Police
       Complaints A u th o rity against M r DucJken/ieid and M r M urray were never
       determined due to the early retirement of M r Duckenfield.

6.8    The Home Secretary's statement ^f^O ^June 1997a^nouncing the appointm ent
       of Lord Justice Stuarl-Smith to conduct a Scrutiny.

6.9    The Scrutiny report of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

6.10 The letters from Assistant Chief Constable Daines supporting the applications.




j\G/\mnTr\foUTiiYonK3iiiHEPOLici;/FNJi«ui.noc
        D         POTENTIAL CHALLENGE


        1       Ms Adtlngton, on behalf of Hie HFSG, has raised a number of questions about
                the decision making process to date and has indicated that she is considering
                 cotm»e«cirtg judicial review proceedings against the A uthority.                            ^


        2        On 22"<i December 1998, follow ing a report by the BBC that the A uth o rity had
                 agreed to pay the legal costs of Messrs Duckenfield and M urray, Ms A dlington
                 wrote to the Clerk and Treasurer to die A uthority (Appendix D l) challenging
                 the A uthority's power to provide such assistance on a number of grounds,
                 including the follow ing:

                 2.1         that there was no tepal authority under statute for the A uthority to pay
                             the legal coats of a police officer (serving or form er) in relation to crim inal
        I                    proceedings against him /he r;

                 2.2         that even if such an authority existed, it had been exercised im properly in
                             this case as the A uthority had taken into account a number of irrelevant
                             considerations, i gnored a number of relevant considerations and
                             delegated powers, w hich it should itself have exercised, to the Q e rk and
                             Treasurer.


        3        On 5th January 1999, the solicitor to the A uthority sought prelim inary advice
                 from banister, M r Bernard Phillips. He confirmed that the general principle of
                  whether to afford assistance at a ll was a matter for the discretion of the
                  A uthority. In the lig h t of the representations received from M rs Adlington,
                  however, he believed that the decision should be reconsidered by the
                  A uthority.
                  m    mmn       mm




        4         On 5*h January 1999 Ms A dlington wrote a further letter to all the members of
                  the A uthority (which members have already received) making additional
                  points about the propriety of the decision to make financial assistance available
                  to the officers. She has subsequently supplemented that letter w ith a fax to
                  Garretts, the solicitors instructed by the A uthority, dated 29 January 1999
                  (Appendix D2).




            KGARREnV'CWHWflWmRETCUCS/T.N-OorHI’CC


910 d                                                                                                       fiM
                                                                                                              OlD
                                                                                                                66.'8
                                                                                                                    3d-1
                                                                                                                       0
           12ihJanuary                    Jicitor to the Authority took legal advice on the two
                                         Adlington frnm Teading Counsel, gichard Mawrey
      OC. His advice, which is referred to in mote detail in Sections E and F below,
      was that dnere was a power to provide financial assistance to police officers in
      legal proceedings.          However, this could only be exercised in appropriate
      circumstances and only to cover ''out of pocket" expenses, (but not expenditure
      which would otherwise be paid from central funds or by the Legal Aid Board).
      He added that the HFSG might seek to challenge the procedure by which such
      powers had been exercised because it covered jnore than "out of pocket"
      expenditure, with some prospect of success and that accordingly the Authority
      should be asked to reconsider its original decision in order to ensure it took
      take account of all relevant considerations, including those Mr Adlington
      alleges might have been overlooked earlier.


     ✓6 1 U 5* January 1999, th&Authority instructed Garretts, solicitors, to advise the
      AiNkagity in terruuddisring its decision to make financial assistance available to
      the officers for the criminal proceedings and considering the new applications
     Jor financial support forfjudicial review proceedings} Garretts, whose advice is
      also referred to below in more detail, expressed” its own concern about the
      statutory power to give financial support to officers in these circumstances and
      recommended that a second opinion be sought from Presiley Baxendale QC
      ;tnd Mark Shaw . Their advice was then taken and, for die reasons set out
       below, they reinforced Garretts’ concern about the existence of such a power.


         On 19th January 1999, following a conversation with Garretts about the
         challenge from Mrs Adlington, the solicitors representing Mr Murray wrote
         to them commenting on that challenge (Appendix D3).                         This was
         supplemented by a letter of 27thJanuary 1999 (Appendix D4).




5\cAintiT\sournYOhksi :mi2Pouct/i-'N-wmi.txx        19
        E        STATUTORY POWERS


        1      HOME OFFICE GUIDANCE

        1.1    Home Office Circular 77/87 - (Financial Assistance to Police Officers in Legal
               Proceedings) (attached as Appendix El) specifically stated, in the context of
               private prosecutions that where a member of the public brings a prosecution
               against an officer, in circumstances where he has acted in good faith and
               exercised his judgement reasonably, the Authority should provide or fund legal
                advice and/or representation. The Circular stated that an Authority had a
                discretion "to meet expenditure incurred by officers in all kinds of legal
                proceedings where the officers have acted in good faith in pursuance of their
                duties, or where the interests of the force as a whole ate involved".

        12 Circular 4/1998 (attached as Appendix E2) issued on 17 February 1998,
                replaced circular 77/87 with immediate effect. This circular, in common with
                circular 77/87 with immediate effcct, also stated that it is important that police
                officers should be able to carry out their duties in the confidence that their
                Authority will support them if they act in good faith and exercise their.,
                judgement reasonably. However, it deals with the issue of an Authority's power
                to provide such assistance much less categorically than its predecessor. In
                particular, it states:

                         5. "Section 88(4) [of the Police Act 1996, which allows Police Authorities
                             to pay the costs of police officers who are sued for damages for loss or
                             damage caused to others by their alleged negligence or other torts]
                             does not apply to criminal proceedings, but police authorities may
                             wish to consult their legal advisers as to whether they have any other
                             power to provide such assistance (whether in respect of private
                             prosecutions or prosecutions brought by the CPS). In this context,
                              they may wish to note that section 111(1) of the Local Government Act
                              1972 enables police authorities to do anything "which is calculated to
                              facilitate, or is conducive or incidental to. the discharge of any of their
                              functions"              It could be argued that to allow payment to be made
                              to officers (either former or serving) involved in criminal proceedings
                              wouldfo some way facilitate or be conducive to a policy authority^
                              broad functions. For example, failure to provide financial assistance
                              could adversely affect the morale of the force if officers had to meet
                              their own coats after an acquittal.


         j\crtHRErr\5ci. rHYonksmnrroLics/KN'-iHitii.Doc


810'd                                                                                           Zt-Ll   (\‘CI?)66 , ' 8 3 J - ! 0
              6.   It is for individual police authorities to decide in the particular
                   circumstances of a case, and on the basis oflegal advice, whether to
                   make financial assistance available to          officers in criminal
                   proceedings."

1.3   It will be noted that the latest Home Office Circular specifically invites Poljge
      Authorities to take legal advice whether the power to provide such assistance
      exists, rather than asserting with certainty that it does in particular (non tort)
      cases. Nevertheless, like its predecessor, the latest Circular does appear to_
      contemplate that the Authority is capable of giving the assistance in the right^
      case.


2     ADVICE OF RICHARD MAWREY QC

2.1   Richard Mawrey expressed the view                  that a power to provide financial
      assistance to officers and former officers in legal proceedings of all types was
      within the scope of section 6(1) of the Police Act 1996 read with section 111(1) of
      the Local Government Act 1972.

      Section      6   of die Police Act 1996 gives the Police Authority its basic duty to
      secure nthe maintenance of an efficient and effective police force for its area".

      Section 111(1) of the Local Government Act 1972, which applies to police
      authorities as it applies to local authorities, states;

              "Without firpjudire tn anv powers exercisable apart from this section but
              subject to the provisions of this Act and any other enactment passed
              before or after this Act, a local authority shall have power to do anything
              (whether or not Involving the expenditure, borrowing or lending of
              money or die acquisition or disposal of any property or rights) which is
                             1" fnrilitfi*-?),.?*           or incidental to, the discharge of
              any of their functions.’1
              (        ‘ '
2.2    In this regard, Mr Mawrey relied upon K -v- Derbyshire Police Authorihi ex parte
       Wilson and Dalton (1989) in which two police officers challenged a decision of
       the Derbyshire Police Authority not to pay part of the legal expenses they
       incurred in being represented at an auditor's enquiry into illegal expenditure.
       In that case, Lord Justice Ralph Gibson overturned the decision of a panel of
       the police authority not to award reimbursement of costs on the grounds that
       the decision had been improperly taken by five members of the authority,


J\UAnKirtt\SCUTHTOWtKHIRJ>rOUCE/FN.UlM'.OOC         17
               rather than the whole authority. But he rejected a furiJhe^ontention that
               because the officers had acted in good faith, the authority should automatically
               have granted them financial assistance with theif costs. Richard Mawiey QC
               thought that this indicated that"the judge had implicitly accepted that a poEce
               authority could provide assistance with legal costs, (even in non tort cases
               which were outside the powers granted by section 88 of the Police Act 1996).
                %



        3      GARRETTS' ADVICE

        3.1     As already stated, Garretts were instructed to advise the Authority of the
                relevant factors to be taken into account in reconsidering the officers'
                applications for financial assistance with the criminal proceedings and the
                applications for support with the CPS proceedings and Sefton proceedings.

        3.2     After they were instructed, however, they raised fresh doubts about the basic
                power of the Authority to meet the officers' costs of the criminal proceedings
                and related judicial review proceedings. In particular, they were concerned
                that legal cases, following the Wflson and Dalton case, on section 111(1) of the
                Local Government Act 1972, had_.con3iderablv weakened the argument that the
                Authority had power under Section 6(1) of the Police Act 1996 and section
                111(1) of the Local Government Act 1972 to grant financial assistance to police
                officers in proceedings other than tort proceedings. In particular, they felt that
                die existence of section 88(4) of the Police Act 1996_(specifically allowing police
                authorities to pay such costs in tort cases) made it strongly arguable that such
                costs could not be paid in other types of proceedings.

        3.3 Given these concerns, Garretts recommended that a second opinion be sought
                from Presiley Baxendale QC and Mark Shaw.


        4       ADVICE OF PRESILEY BAXENDALE QC AND MR MARK SHAW

        4.1     Counsel advised that they had initially been attracted by the argument that the
                Authority had power to pay "out of pocket' legal costs and expenses of officers
                in all types of proceedings, where they had acted in good faith and it was
                otherwise appropriate. The wide duty conferred on the Authority by section 6
                of tine Police Act 1996 to maintain an effective and efficient police force, in
                conjunction with Section 111(1) of the Local Government Act 1972, appeared to
                give a very broad discretion to the Authority to preserve the morale of the
                police force without which, an effective and efficient policc force could not be


        j\G A M irrT \ SCUTHTOKJQHlHF.FOl.es/tN-W gi1, OOC




OcO'd
                                                                                         n-Ll   (KOI'i!66 , '83J-1e
        maintained. Accordingly, if it was, in the Authority's view, genuinely and
        reasonably necessary, in ofder to maintain police morale, to meet the out of
        pocket costs and expenses of police officers, incurred in defending themselves
        against criminal or civil proceedings, it was arguably within Section               6   of the
        Police Act 1996, coupled with Section 111(1) of the Local Government Act 1972,
        to pay such costs.

4.2     Counsel also considered, however, that diere were powerfuljrguments against
        this interpretation including the following:

        4.2.1       If there were a general power under section         6   of the Police Act 1996 to
                    indemnify officers against the costs of legal proceedings arising from
                    the performance of their duties, there would be no reason for section
                    88(4) of the Police Act 1996 specifically to allow the recovery of such
                    costs in tort proceedings. Section 88(4) would simply be unnecessary.

        4.2.2       The issue turns on the proper construction of the Police Act 1996. In
                    London Borough of Sutton -v- Morgan Grenjbll & Co Limited (1996) the
                    Court of Appeal stated that where Parliament had enacted specific
                    provisions setting-out how a local authority was intended to perform its
                    functions, there was no room to imply other means of carrying out
                    those functions under section 111(1) of the Local Government Act 1972.
                    In particular, where a local authority was intended to have power to
                    incur financial obligations that power must specifically be identified by
                    statute. This was an example of a well established general principle of
                    statutory interpretation: where Parliament specifies one particular
                    matter, it impliedly excludes any other allied matters.              In addition,
                     section     6   of the Police Act 1996 is so wide in its language that counsel
                     doubt that recourse to section 111(1) of the Local Government Act 1972
                     could usefully expand it. The real question is the relationship between
                     section 6 and section 8 8 .

         4.2.3       In the Wilson and Dnllvn case, both parties had accepted that the basic
                     power to meet the officers' costs existed, and accordingly this did not
                     fall to be decided by the judge, The power to pay costs was therefore
                     assumed not decided. Similarly, a Circular is only guidance. It does not
                     define or modify the law and should not be assumed to be correct,

         4.2.4       Mr Justice Denning stated in Ashy -v- Golden W\ne Co Limited (1948) die
                     public policy that the punishment inflicted by a criminal court is


 )\GARRET!\SOL'THYORKSI U lltrO lJC fc/ fN-MOOl 1.DOC   19
                       personal to the offender and tha\ such an offender is not entitled to
                       recover from a third party an indemnity against tine consequences oT
                       criminal proceedings whether that be a fins, an award against him of
                       the other party's costs or the accused's own legal costs. This public
                       policy helps to explain why section 88(4) of the Police Act 1996 does not
                       cover criminal proceedings.

              4.2.5     A judge would not necessarily consider it desirable fot the Authority to
                        have such a power. Counsel considered that, in the light of Askey -v-
                        Goltkft Witte Co Limited, tt^was doubtful if a police authority was
                        intended to havejynwer to indemnify officers against costs of a case in
                        whirh thpy were found guiltv. An acquitted detendant would, in any
                        event, normally receive an award that lus/her reasonably incurred non
                        legally-aided costs be paid in full out of central funds, unless the
                        accused was at fault in bringing suspicion on himself or was found not
                        guilty on a technicality see Practice Dtrectbn (Crime: Costs) (1991) 1 WLR
                        498. Accordingly, in the normal run, an acquitted police officer should
                        have no (of few) costs to pay himself/herself, which a police audiority
                        would need to meet.

        4.3   Counsel stressed that they had both found this issue difficult and that there
               was no guarantee which way a Court would decide.             There were certainly
               strong policy reasons why the Authority should have power to support its
               officers (current and former) in this way. Given the points summarised in
               paragraphs 4.2.1 to 4.2.5 above, however, they had considerable doubts about
               the power of the Authority to support die costs eidier of the criminal
               proceedings or the judicial review proceedings (neither being covered by
               Section 88(4) of tine Police Act 1996), particularly before any judgement had
               been given in those proceedings.
                                                                                                        X
        4.4    Counsel are also mindful of the terms of line latest Home Office Circular. They
               do not lightly advise that it is wrong but it is much more hesitant tha^its
               predecessor. Counsel sense, therefore, that the Home Office may have its own
               doubts about the existence of this power.

        4.5    Accordingly, whilst thev wished to review die matter further in the light of any
               representations made on behalf of the officers, the Chief Constable or the
               HF5G, their current recommendation was that the Authority should resolve to
               reverse its earlier decision and decide dnat it has no power to provide die
               financial assistance which had been sought. It should then co-o|


        nCAMK!‘f\1»t7H Y 0R WHiWil’OLKty PN-0001LXC   JO




uO' d
                                                                                        Sfr: i l   {.\0K)66 . '83d-10
           those patties in bringing the matter before a court for a n e a rly decision on_
                                     v iew ot tKelr legal powers was correct. The Authority'ssolicitors,
           Garretts, agree with tharrecommendation anci will be available at the next
           meeting of the Authority to discuss it with members.                    _

F          PROCEDURAL CONSIDERATIONS

1.         Members will note from the correspondence from Ms Adlington that the
            decision to provide financial assistance to Messrs Duckenfield and Murray for
            their legal costs and expenses of the criminal proceedings is also challenged on
            procedural grounds. Representations are also made that it would not be
            appropriate to provide such assistance in relation to any challenge to the
            decision of the Crown Prosecution Service not to take over and discontinue the
            criminal proceedings or any other challenge to decisions taken in the course of
             the criminal proceedings, given the circumstances of these cases.

2.           Given the doubts about the underlying legal power of die Authority to provide
             such assistance at all, it is recommended that the Authority defers considering
             consequential procedural matters until the Authority has secured an
             authoritative (judicial) determination of the existence and extent of its
             underlying statutory power to provide the officers with financial assistance for
             criminal 01 judicial review proceedings.

 3.          If the Authority accepts the recommendations set out in this report, it is hoped
             i-w fln rnnrgmed will co-operate in an urgent judicial review application. If—
              the existence of the power is then established, the Authority will need to
              proceed immediately to decide how it should be exercised. It is hoped that a
              hearing can be secured before the Court in late February or early March to
              enable all concerned to know where they stand before the committal heating in
              the Leeds Magistrates' Court in April. It should be in everyone's interests to
              clarify the legal position as soon as possible. This can be done definitely only
              by the Court.




     A U A nR E T T S SO l'fH W H B iroU irtlllC E /nx.O M II.O C lC
                                                                         APPENDICES

Note:- the numbering of the Appendices relates to the relevant sections of the
Report

B1            Application dated 28 February 1998 from Mt David Duckenfield for judicial
                assistance in relation to the criminal proceedings and supporting letters
                dated 2 March 1998 and 5 March 1998 from A C C Daines.

B2             Application dated 28 June 1998 by Mr Murray for financial assistance in
                relation to the criminal proceedings and supporting letter dated 29 june
                1998 from Assistant Chief Constable Daines.

B3 & B4 Applications on behalf of Mr Murray and Mr Duckenfield for financial
        assistance in relation to possible judicial review proceedings dated
                 December 1998 and copies of advice received on die prospects of a
                 successful judicial review of the decision of the Crown Prosecution Service
                 not to take over the prosecution and discontinue it.

D1              Letter dated 22 December 1998 from Ms Adlington to the Clerk and
                 Treasurer to South Yorkshire Police Authority.

D2              Fax dated 29 January 1999 from Ms Adlmgton to Garretts, solicitors.

 D3           Letter dated 19 January 1999 from Walker Morris to Garretts.

 D4           Letter dated 27 January 1999 from Walker Morris to Garretts.

 El           Cancelled Home Office Circular 77/87.

 E2            Home Office Circular 4/1998.




  J \ C A R n m \ 5 0 l 1 ‘H V O :iK 9lU W ;iW C R /FN ^O O C I1.lX JC         22
CONFIDENTIAL

SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY

5 FEBRUARY 1999

REPORT OF THE CHIEF CONSTABLE

Hillsborough Stadium Disaster 1989: Financial Assistance to Officers Facing Private
Prosecutions


1.0   Introduction

1.1   Today members of the Police Authority are to consider one of the most weighty
      issues that each member is likely to encounter in their time serving on the Police
      Authority. The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster was the single most traumatic event
      in the 25 year history of South Yorkshire Police and, nearly ten years afterwards,
      the shockwaves still reverberate, often with terrible tolls on people’s emotions and
      their health.

1.2   In this report I will summarise the principle facts of the disaster, make some
       observations on these particular private prosecutions and some general
       observations on private prosecutions.

2.0   The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster

2.1   On 15 April 1989 an FA cup semi final football match was due to be played at the
      home of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club; the Hillsborough Stadium. Liverpool
      and Nottingham Forest were the two teams.

2.2   Overcrowding occurred in the areas behind the Liverpool goal in the period
      immediately before and after the 3.00 pm kick off. The crowd crush caused the
      deaths of 96 spectators (95 people died that day, one person lived in a vegetative
      state until his death in 1993).

2.3   The disaster happened in full view of over 50,000 spectators. It was transmitted, as
       it unfolded, by BBC Television. It was recorded by the football club’s CCTV system
       and the police CCTV system.         Sports photographers took hundreds of still
       photographs. The impact of the Hillsborough Disaster is unique because it was
       beamed live into the homes of millions and was recorded so graphically.

2.4   Lord Justice Taylor was invited to conduct a public enquiry and the West Midlands
       Police were commissioned to gather evidence. The Taylor enquiry considered
       3,776 statements, 1,550 letters, 71 hours of video tape, hundreds of photographs
       and the personal and public testimony of 174 witnesses. Taylor’s interim report
       (published 4 August 1989) analysed the causes of the disaster and apportioned
       blame.

2.5   In March 1990 the West Midlands Police submitted a report to the Director of Public
       Prosecutions (DPP). In August 1990, Mr Allan Green, then the DPP, concluded that
       there should be no prosecution of any person for any matter arising frorri the
       disaster.

2.6   Between November 1990 and March 1991 the Sheffield Coroner and jury heard 230
       witnesses. The jury returned verdicts of accidental death. In 1993, relatives of six
       of the deceased applied to the High Court to quash the inquest verdict; the High
       Court turned down the application. In December 1993, the West Yorkshire Coroner
       returned a verdict of accidental death of the 96th victim who had recently died.

2.7    In December 1996, Granada Television broadcast a drama programme titled,
       “Hillsborough”. The drama purported to show the discovery of significant evidence
       which had not been considered by previous enquiries. The Hillsborough Family
       Support Group (HFSG) is an association of some of the relatives of some of the
       deceased. They pressed for a fresh enquiry into the disaster.

2.8    In June 1997, the Home Secretary announced the establishment of a scrutiny to
       look into the reports that fresh and relevant evidence had been found. Lord Justice
       Stuart-Smith, an Appeal Court Judge, reported in February 1998. He found that
       there was no relevant material which should be put before the DPP which might
       cause her to reconsider the decision not to prosecute. The DPP, then Dame
       Barbara Mills, considered the position and decided there should be no prosecutions.
       The Home Secretary, and other Government Ministers, accepted Stuart-Smith’s
       findings.

2.9    In June 1998, the solicitor to the HFSG, Ms A Adlington, began a private
       prosecution at South Sefton (Merseyside) Magistrates against David Duckenfield
       and Bernard Murray. Mr Duckenfield was a chief superintendent at the time of the
       disaster and was in charge of the police operation. Mr Murray was a superintendent
       and was in charge of the control room arrangements. They are each charged with
       the manslaughter of two named individuals and with the criminal offence of, being a
       public servant, neglecting their duty (culpable malfeasance in public office). Mr
       Duckenfield is also charged with attempting to pervert the course of justice.

2.10   The Police Authority agreed to pay the costs incurred by Mr Duckenfield and Mr
       Murray in defending themselves against these private prosecutions.

2.11   Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray challenged the jurisdiction of South Sefton
       Magistrates, the case was withdrawn and Ms Adlington started them afresh at
       Leeds Magistrates.

2.12   The DPP has a legal right to intervene in a prosecution initiated by a private person.
       He can take over the prosecution and pursue it or take it over and discontinue the
       prosecution. Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray invited the DPP to take over the
       prosecution and discontinue it. On 19 December 1998 the DPP, now Mr David
       Calvert-Smith, announced that he would not intervene to continue or discontinue the
       prosecutions. If the DPP had been satisfied that there was sufficient evidence to be
       confident of a conviction and that the public interest required a prosecution, Mr
       Calvert-Smith would have been obliged to take over the prosecution and conduct it
       through the Crown Prosecution Service.

2.13   Those are the background facts to the private prosecutions of two retired officers.

3.0    Some Observations on the Private Prosecution

3.1    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny examined the previously made decisions about
       the disaster and he looked at the purported fresh evidence. I will quote extensively
       from those parts of his report that deal with the question of criminal prosecution.
       (He also dealt with the Coroners inquest, the police disciplinary process and the
       public enquiry but those matter are not relevant to today’s issues.)



                                             2
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith wrote;

i)     “The Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) had the responsibility of deciding
        whether criminal proceedings, in practice charges of manslaughter, should
        be brought against any corporate body or individual. In their submissions to
        me Counsel for the Family Support Group have only invited me to make a
        recommendation to the DPP in the case of Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray.”
        (para 25, chapter 1)

ii)    “The DPP, accepting the advice of two very experienced Queen’s Counsel,
        concluded in 1990 that there was not sufficient evidence to justify such
        charges against either of these officers. The fresh evidence, therefore,
        would have to be of sufficient significance that there is, in my view, a real
        possibility that in considering it the DPP might change her mind and institute
        proceedings for manslaughter, or any other offence, against one or both of
        these officers.” (para 26, chapter 1)

iii)   "I have read the joint opinion of Counsel dated 6 August 1990 which gave
        advice to the Director of Public Prosecutions on the possible criminal
        proceedings against Mr Murray and Mr Duckenfield, amongst others.
        Although the material available to Counsel was more extensive than that
        which was placed before Lord Taylor, because by that time the criminal
        investigation carried out by the West Midlands Police had been completed,
        Counsel stated that

            “the criminal investigation, for all its thoroughness, has not significantly
            added to or contradicted Lord Justice Taylor’s findings.            In our
           judgement, therefore, the Taylor analysis of the facts is as firm a base as
            any from which to approach the question of Criminal Liability.” (para 52,
            chapter 1)

iv)    “Counsel then set out a full, detailed and careful resume of the facts based
       on the evidence then available. I have not found any error or omission in
       this resume, nor in my view is any particular aspect understated or
       exaggerated. I have also considered the statement of the law set out in the
       opinion. Counsel considered both the offences of manslaughter and
       culpable malfeasance in public office. They were plainly correct to consider
       that the latter offence would be no easier to establish than manslaughter in
       the circumstances of the case." (para 53, chapter 1)

v)     “In order to recommend that the DPP reconsider the decision not to
        prosecute, therefore, I must be satisfied that any fresh evidence establishes,
        or may establish, facts not previously considered by Counsel or the
        significance of which was not fully appreciated, which makes it more likely
        that charges of manslaughter could be established. Essentially this relates
        to Mr Duckenfield’s and Mr Murray’s knowledge and appreciation of the risk
        in doing what they did or omitted to do." (para 54, chapter 1)

vi)    “From my meetings with the bereaved families and their representatives, I
        am left in no doubt that there was widespread disappointment at the DPP’s
        decision not to prosecute. They find it difficult to understand in the light of
        Lord Taylor’s trenchant criticisms of the South Yorkshire Police and the fact
        that the Force have been paying compensation.” (para 55, chapter 1)

vii)   “What the Director of Public Prosecutions had to bear in mind, however, is
        the significantly different and greater degree of culpability which is involved
        in manslaughter, or culpable malfeasance in public office, as against the
        degree of negligence which gives rise to liability, and compensation
        payments, under civil law. Any prosecution of an individual police officer
        would have to establish his individual responsibility. It would not be enough
        simply to prove the composite failure of the police operation, (para 56,
        chapter 1)

viii)   “The causes of the disaster were many and complex. So far as these two
         officers were concerned, the prosecution would have to prove to the high
         standard required for a criminal conviction that the failure to give the order to
         close off the tunnel when Gate C was opened amounted to the serious
         degree of recklessness necessary to constitute manslaughter, (para 57,
         chapter 1)

ix)     “I do not consider that there is any material which should be put before the
         Director of Public Prosecutions or the Police Complaints Authority which
         might cause them to reconsider the decisions they have already taken.”
         (para 5, chapter 7)

        “None of the evidence I was asked to consider added anything significant to
        the evidence which was available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry or the Inquests”,
        (para 6, chapter 7)

I donot know the strength of evidence held by the           private prosecutor but I am
bound to make the following observations;

a)      Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray have not been living abroad, they have not
         been in hiding; they have been available for prosecution throughout the
        (nearly) ten years since the disaster. One must therefore ponder why the
         private prosecutions were not started earlier.

b)      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny was established largely because of
        claims by the Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG) that they had
        uncovered significant fresh evidence. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith decided
        those claims were not accurate and referred to some of their arguments as
        ‘irresponsible’. After his report was published, HFSG again claimed to have
        uncovered fresh evidence.

c)      After beginning the private prosecutions, Ms Adlington wrote to me to ask for
        copies of all the witness statements. It is normal procedure to gather
        evidence before launching a prosecution, not after. This leads me to
        conclude that HFSG do not have the relevant fresh evidence they claim to
        have discovered.

d)      Three Directors of Public Prosecutions (Mr Green, Dame Barbara Mills and
        Mr Calvert-Smith) have each reviewed the case and decided not to
        prosecute.

e)      Ms Adlington and leading figures in HFSG have, in recent years, made a
        number of outspoken statements which lead me to question their objectivity
        and judgement. When the Home Secretary accepted Lord Justice Stuart-
        Smith’s report, Mr Trevor Hicks, Chairman of HFSG, said, “New Labour, new
        cover up”. Mr Hicks threatened to prosecute the previous Chief Constable,
        Richard Wells, for malfeasance in public office by allowing Mr Duckenfield to
        retire from the police service on medical grounds before he had faced a
        disciplinary tribunal. These are only two examples, others can be given.
3.5   The HFSG are not just conducting a prosecution against Mr Duckenfield and Mr
      Murray, they are also lobbying the Authority to cease funding the cost of Mr
      Duckenfield and Mr Murray’s legal defence. Thus the HFSG are seeking to impose
      a financial penalty on Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray and to limit their ability to
      defend themselves.

3.6   I am bound to question whether Ms Adlington, solicitor to HFSG, has made a
      professional assessment of the evidence and whether it is likely to produce a
      conviction or whether the prosecution of Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray is motivated
      by other factors.

3.7   Members of the HFSG have said that it is unfair that they have to struggle for funds
      while Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray have access to the Authority’s funds. I do not
      know what funds are held by HFSG or whether they publish accounts. In summer
      1997 a pop concert raised a reported £500,000 for their funds. It is incumbent upon
      the prosecutor to be in a position to sustain the prosecution. Neither I or my legal
      advisors have before encountered a case where a solicitor prosecuting a case has
      tried to influence the funding arrangements for the defence. In her submission to
      the Authority, Ms Adlington made it clear that she sought a revocation of funding in
      order to influence the defendants’ ability to defend themselves.

4.0   General Observations on Private Prosecutions

4.1   Police officers have to make split second decisions which affect people’s liberty and
      even their lives. Those decisions are open to challenge through the police
      complaints procedure, action in the civil courts and action in the criminal courts.

4.2   Private individuals can initiate prosecutions, that is a valuable safeguard against
      official inertia. The DPP can terminate a private prosecution, that is a valuable
       safeguard against capricious prosecution.

4.3   Home Office Circulars offer Authorities guidance on how to deal with applications
      from officers for funding to meet the cost of defence against a prosecution. This
      Authority agreed to fund the defence costs of Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray.

4.4   In the limited time available I have not been able to research policy in other forces.
       However, the Metropolitan Police comprises about 23% of all police officers in
       England and Wales. Any officer who faces a private prosecution is defended by the
       Metropolitan Police solicitors department or solicitors employed by them for that
       purpose.

4.5   Some commentators have suggested that Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray’s costs are
      taking funds away from the policing of South Yorkshire. In a superficial sense that
      is correct but that is not a situation of their choosing. However at a more profound
      level the decision to pay their costs sustains the morale of the Force and its efficient
      functioning.

4.6   I consider it vital to the morale and good management of the Force that officers
      should know that, if they act in good faith when performing their dangerous duties,
      the Chief Constable and all the Police Authority will do whatever it can to support
      them. If officers do not have that confidence, they will push decisions up the rank
      structure, thereby delaying resolution of problems and reducing the ability of
      managers to manage. In medical circles, the fear of litigation is prompting talk of
      “defensive medicine”; using valuable resources to eliminate every conceivable
      cause of illness. In policing terms, “defensive policing” would mean that officers
      would be less inclined to make those necessary split second decisions of life and

                                             5
       liberty if they thought that, years after the event, after previous enquiries,
       they might face the cost of defending themselves against the action of a
       private individual.

5.0     Legal Issues

       This report has been concluded (midday Monday, 1 February 1999) in time
       for circulation to members. Barristers are still considering the legal issues. If
       their advice is that the Authority cannot meet Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray’s
       defence costs then discussion will be truncated. However, if the Authority’s
       decisions to date have been lawful, as I believe they have, then I would
       recommend that the present funding arrangements continue. Indeed legal
       advice may well be that the funding arrangements cannot be rescinded once
       granted. I would also recommend that the Authority look favourably upon
       the request for funding to seek a judicial review of the DPP’s decision not to
       intervene in the prosecutions.

      If there is a conflict of view between Counsel advising the Authority and
      Counsel advising the Chief Constable, and the decision is taken that the
      officers will not be funded for the criminal prosecutions as previously agreed,
      I would have to consider either making a legal appeal or, jointly with the
      Authority, seeking a declaration from the Divisional Court.


M 11 Hedges
Chief Constable
CONFIDENTIAL: SUPPLEMENTARY REPORT

SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY

5 FEBRUARY 1999

REPORT OF THE CHIEF CONSTABLE

Hillsborough Stadium Disaster 1989: Financial Assistance to Officers Facing Private
Prosecutions


1.0   Introduction

1.1   With the papers previously circulated to members, your Clerk and Treasurer
      included advice from his solicitors (Garretts). As mentioned in the last paragraph of
      my previous report I have obtained advice from Counsel (Ms Louise Varty) which I
      summarise herewith.


2.0   Legal Advice to the Chief Constable from Counsel

2.1   I attach Ms Varty’s advice. She supplies answers to the following questions:

      Question 1

      Does a Police Authority have the discretion to pay the legal costs involved in
      defending a private prosecution against serving or retired officers?

      Answer: Yes. There is power to grant financial assistance.

      Question 2

      Has the South Yorkshire Police Authority exercised its discretion properly in
      respect of Duckenfield and Murray?

      Answer: Yes. That power has been properly applied in granting assistance.

      Question 3

      Can the Authority now add a condition (Legal Aid) to the undertaking already
      given to Duckenfield and Murray?

      Answer: No. It would be inappropriate to require the officers to apply for Legal Aid.

      Question 4

      Can the Authority pay the cost of Duckenfield and Murray bringing a judicial
      review challenge to the DPP’s decision?

      Answer: Yes. Financial assistance can and should be extended to allow the
      defendants to apply for judicial review of the DPP’s decision on Counsel’s advice.
      Question 5

      Could the Authority lawfully rescind the undertaking it has given to pay
      Duckenfield and Murray’s costs in defending the criminal prosecution?

      Answer: No. The Police Authority may well leave themselves open to an application
      for judicial review by the defendants if funding is withdrawn now.

2.2   Unfortunately, we are now in a position where lawyers are offering conflicting
      advice. As mentioned in my previous report this dilemma can only be resolved by
      your Clerk and Treasurer and I going to the High Court to ask for a declaration from
      a judge on this unresolved issue.




M 11 Hedges
CHIEF CONSTABLE




                                           2
                      RE ADLINGTON V DUCKENFIELD & MURRAY



                                      ADVICE



      BACKGROUND


      1.     In July 1998 a private prosecution was commcnced against former
      officers of South Yorkshire Police, David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray
      arising out of the Hillsborough disaster.


  2.    Thus far, the Defendants have received financial assistance from the
  South Yorkshire Police Authority or at the very least acted on the
  understanding that financial assistance will be forthcoming. Pursuant to a
  resolution in August 1997, financial assistance was given for legal
  representation for officers in connection with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
  Scrutiny. Then in the light of the Scrutiny, on 27th February 1998, the Police
  Authority authorised the Clerk and Treasurer to consider applications for
  financial assistance from officers in respect of any private prosecution which
  may be made. While we do not have any documentation in respect of the
  individual applications which were made, we know that both Duckenfield and
  Murray were granted assistance.


  3.   The private prosecution is now at a very important stage. On 18th
 December 1998 the DPP decided not to intervene in the prosecution. At a
 hearing at Leeds Magistrates Court on 21st December 1998 those acting for
 the Defendants decided to apply for judicial review of that decision and
 informed the Prosecution. Further, given their intention to apply for judicial
 review, those acting for the Defendants attempted to extend the tight timetable
 imposed by the Magistrates’ Court leading up to the fixed date for an old-style




                                                         0 113 284 700 1    PAGE .
FEB    ’ 99   13:36
      committal. They were unsuccessful. The stipendary magistrate acceded to the
      submission made by the Prosecution that it was essential that the action be
      proceeded with speedily and that it was for the Defendants to make their
      application for judicial review as soon as ever possible.


      4.     The day after that hearing, the private prosecutor wrote to the Clerk to
      South Yorkshire Police Authority and argued that decision/s made by the
      Authority to provide financial assistance to the two Defendants were made
      “irrationally and unlawfully”. This letter was then followed by copy letters
      sent to each of the members of the Police Authority dated 5th January 1999
     which further argued in detail that the decisions to grant funding were
     “unlawful, irrational and procedurally improper, and that a further such
     decision would now be unlawful in any event.”


     5.     We understand that after the Clerk to the Police Authority received the
     letter of 5th January 1999, he sought die advice of Leading Counsel, Richard
     Mawrey Q,C. Those instructing me have been given to understand that
     Leading Counsel advised that there should have been applications made for
     Legal Aid before seeking financial assistance from the Police Authority.

     6.      I am asked to advise on the following matters :

     (i)    whether the decisions made by the Police Authority to provide financial
     assistance were ultra vires ;


 (ii) those considerations which the Police Authority should take into account
 when making a decision whether or not to provide financial assistance in these
 circumstances;


 (iii) the weight which should be given to the relevant considerations in
 deciding whether or not to fund.

 THE LAW




EB    ’ 99   13:37                                             0113   284   7001   P AGE. 0 0 3
        7.    The first question to be addressed concerns the root power by which the
        Police Authority are entitled to grant funding in these circumstances.

        8.      Pursuant to section 6(1) of the Police Act 1996 :

        “Every police authority established under section 3 shall secure the
        maintenance of an efficient and effective police force for its area.”


        2.     The wording of this provision is very similar to the previous provision
        at section 4 (1) of the Policc Act 1964 :

        “It shall be the duty of the police authority for every police area for which a
        police force is required to be maintained to secure the maintenance of an
        adequate and efficient police force for the area, and to exercise for that
        purpose the powers conferred on a police authority by this Act.”


           *n &-v Derbyshire Police Authority ex parte Wilson and another The
    Times 8.8.89 the Divisional Court considered an application for judicial
    review of the decision of the Derbyshire Police Authority not to pay any part
    of the legal expenses of two police officers with regard to an auditors inquiry.
    The Divisional Court proceeded on the basis that section 4 of the Police Act
    1964 provided the statutory basis for the payment of money to police officers
    with regard to legal expenses. Then, as now, there was specific statutory
    provision with regard to the payment of damages and legal expenses in respect
    of actions concerning torts brought against police officers. This was provided
    for formerly in section 48(4) of the Police Act 1964 and now in section 88(4)
    of the Police Act 1996.


    4.     Save with regard to actions in respect of torts, there has been and is no
    specific statutory provision concerning the provision of assistance to police
    officers facing legal proceedings.




2 FEB    ’ 99   13:38                                           0113   284   7001   PAGE. 004
     5.      There are two relevant Home Office Circulars 77/1.987 and 4/1998.
     Interestingly, they both offer guidance to police authorities against a
     background of essentially the same statutory provisions.

     6.     The 1987 Circular referred specifically to the general statutory power
     to maintain an adequate and efficient police force. This was plainly a
     reference to section 4 of the 1964 Act. The Circular stated that pursuant to
     that power “the police authority had a discretion to meet expenditure incurred
     by officers in all kinds of legal proceedings where officers have acted in good
     faith in pursuance of their duties, or the interests of the force as a whole are
     involved”. The stated purpose of the Circular was to offer guidance to help
     police authorities as to when assistance should be granted.

 7.     The Circular featured a “central principle” that “where a police
 authority considers that an officer has acted in good faith in pursuance of his
 duties or that the interests of the force as a whole are involved, the officer
 should have the support of the police authority to ensure that he has the
 services of a lawyer and that he should not be out of pocket”.

 8.     A distinction was drawn between those cases where an officer was
 facing a public prosecution brought by the Crown Prosecution Service, and
 those where an officer was facing a private prosecution. While it was said that
 an officer who was the subject of a public prosecution must be expected to
 bear the costs of his defence, with regard to private prosecutions the following
 provision was m ade:


 “A police officer should be able to carry out his duties in the confidence that,
 if he acts in good faith and exercises his judgment reasonably, his police
 authority will support him. If, in a case where a member of the public brings
 a prosecution against an officer, the authority is satisfied that the officer has
 acted in this way} the Authority should provide or fund legal advice and/or
 representation.”




EB    ’ 99   13:39                                          0 113 £ 8 4   7001   P AGE.
                •   No doubt the reasoning behind the distinction drawn in the Circular
               etween public and private prosecutions was that prima facie a public
              prosecution is properly justified, while the same presumption cannot be made
                 , fe8ard ‘° * priVa,e P o t i o n . A poUce officer, by reason of his
              employment, is put in the most difficult situations and is liable to face a
              number of allegations made by those without scrapie. Equally, he is liable to
                   Pnvate prOSecUtions w“ h° ut proper foundation. As a result, an officer
              who has acted in good faith should have the comfort of knowing that he will
              have financial support from his authority.


              10. H e Circular of 1998 is rather more vague in its terms, but it is
             important to note that it does not contradict the earlier Circular. The
             introduction section restates the “central principle” of the 1987 Circular:

             “It is important that police officers should be able to cany out their             in
                 COnfidence      their P ^ c * authority will support them, if they act in good
            faith and exercise their judgment reasonably."


            In my view, it is highly significant that this principle is restated.


             11. Interestingly, the 1998 Circular goes on to leave it to police authorities
            and their legal advisers to consider whether they have power to grant
            ass,stance in respect of private and public prosecutions. It is snggested that
            section 111(1) of the Local Government Act 1972 may assist. Further, it is
Q       suggested that a justification for providing financial assistance may be the
        maintenance of morale. It is noteworthy that the Circular does not suggest
        that funding should not be provided to an officer facing a public prosecution
        but leaves the matter open.


        [2■ Ip ^      Derbyshire Pqljce Authority ex part. W i l , „ n
        Court had no difficulty proceeding on the basis that the PoUce Authority had
        power to grant financial assistance to officers in respect of an auditor’s inquiry
        into allegations of illegal expenditure. While it would appear that it was not




    2 FEB    ’ 99   13:39                                             0113   284    7001   P AGE. 0 0 8
              specifically argued before the Court that the Police Authority had no power to
              grant financial assistance, the Court went into some detail in considering the
              Authority's power and how it should be exercised.

              13. In Wilson the status of a Home Office Circular was touched upon. The
              Court stated, as is obvious, that a circular is not a regulation and does not have
              the force of statutory law. However, they went on to refer to and to endorse
              what was said by Scarman LJ in Bristol DC v Clark [1975] 3 All ER 976
             concerning the status of Home Office Circulars. Scarman U said at p i450 : “I
             do not think it possible to rely on those circulars as imposing any direct
             statutory duty upon a housing authority ; but I think they are a good indication
             as to the puiposes to be served by the Housing Acts and as to what are relevant
             matters within the language of Lord Greene MR in the Weduesbiiry case, to be
40           taken into account by a local authority serving a notice to quit upon a council
             tenant in arrears of rent.” In other words, the circulars assist with regard to
             what is intended by the relevant statute. Further, the Court went on to say that
             the relevant circular assures a police authority with regard to those matters
             which will not be questioned by the Secretary of State.

             14.     Where then have we got to ? In su m m ary :

             (a) the statutory provisions under the 1964 and 1.996 Acts are essentially the
             sam e;

             (b) pursuant to section 6 of the Police Act 1996 the Police Authority is
             required to secure the maintenance of an efficient and effective police force
             for its area ;


             (c) both relevant Home Office Circulars recognise the importance that
             police officers should be able to carry out their duties in the confidence that
             their police authority will support them, if they act in good faith and exercise
             their judgment reasonably ;




     2 FEB    ’ 99   13:40                                            0113   284   7001   PAGE. 0 0 7
         (d)    there is nothing in the later Circular to suggest that it is improper to
         extend financial assistance to officers facing criminal proceedings, indeed,
         there is suggested justification for doing so ;

         (e) the earlier Circular made a firm recommendation that financial
         assistance should be provided to officers facing private prosecutions ;

         (f) In Wilson the Divisional Court proceeded on the basis that there was
         statutory power by virtue of the predecessor to section 6 of the 1996 Act to
         provide financial assistance in circumstances other than those where officers
         are facing actions brought in tort.

        15. In the light of the above, I am confident that the Police Authority had
        power to grant financial assistance to both Murray and Duckenfield.


        16. Indeed, having made the decision to provide financial assistance, I am
        concerned that to withdraw it in these circumstances would be the subject of
        challenge from the officers bearing in maid the following :

        (a) The present informal challenge to the Police Authority’s excise of its
        powers is made by the private prosecutors who despite their somewhat
        disingenuous claim that they do not want to see the defendants without
        financial assistance in defending their prosecution, plainly seek to cause the
        Defendants problems with funding.

        (b)     This challenge comes at a crucial stage in the private prosecution. The
        Defendants seek to make a judicial review application in respect of the DPP’s
        decision not to intervene in the prosecution. They have a limited amount of
        time in which to make the application and are the subject of a pressing
        timetable with regard to die old-style committal proceedings.

        (c) The Defendants have not as yet sought to apply for legal aid and now
        face the prospect of having to make such application at this crucial stage in the




2 FEB    ’ 99   13:4 1                                          0113   £84   7001   P AGE. 0 0 8
         proceedings.


         17. It seems to me that there are grounds here for the Defendants to assert
         that they have a legitimate expectation that financial assistance will be provided
         such that if financial assistance were to be withdrawn they could challenge any
         such decision by way of judicial review.


          18. I turn now to look at the sort of considerations which the Police
         Authority should heed when deciding whether or not to grant financial
         assistance to an officer. The two Home Office Circulars seek to grapple with
         two essential considerations:


        (a) Much is asked of police officers in acting on behalf of the Force. They
        have to make difficult decisions, often in the heat of the moment, where lives
        are at risk or individuals exposed to injury. It is essential to morale, and
        necessary in order to avoid defensive policing, that police officers know that if
        they make mistakes, or face litigation arising from their work on behalf of the
        Force that they will receive financial support.

        (b)     The wicked or the undeserving should not receive financial assistance.

        The net effect of grappling with these two considerations has been the
        formulation of the principle that police officers should be able to carry out
        their duties in the confidence that their police authority will support them, if
        they act in good faith and exercise their judgment reasonably. This the
        product of an attempt to balance the two considerations.


         19. In the light of Wilson, it would appear that while the question of
        whether an officer has exercised his or her judgment reasonably may be taken
        into account, the question of whether the officer acted in good faith is rather
        more important. Ralph Gibson LJ stated at p23 :

        Thave no doubt that a police authority, if satisfied of good faith on the part of




2 FEB    ’ 99   13: 4 2                                         0113   284   7001   PAGE. 009
              the officer, would normally act, and be pleased to act, on the central principle
              stated in the circular ; but discretion is given to the authority and it is
              impossible, in my view, to hold that, once good faith is established, a police
              authority must disregard clear evidence of ncgligence or a failure to “exercise
              judgment reasonably”          The decision whether evidence of such negligence
              in a particular case justifies withholding reimbursement, wholly or in part, is,
              of course, entrusted to the police authority.'’


              Thus, while a police authority is entitled in the exercise of its discretion to take
              into account both whether the officer concerned has acted in bad faith and
              whether he or she has exercised his or her judgment reasonably, the first of
              the two considerations is rather more important than the second. This stands
             to reason. If an officer has acted in bad faith, there is good reason not to
             provide funding. If he or she has acted in good faith, but fine distinctions are
             to be drawn with regard to whether the exercise of his or her judgment was
             reasonable, there would still be good justification in providing funding.

             20. As I have stated above, both Home Office Circulars emphasise the
             importance of the public policy consideration that officers who act in good
             faith and exercise their judgment reasonably should carry out their duties in
             the confidence that the police authority will support them. It strikes me that
             this is of paramount importance. Police officers should not have to worry that
             they will have to meet their own costs or have to try to apply for legal aid
             should the next defendant they arrest take out a private prosecudon for assault.
(0           Of all the considerations which the Police Authority should have in mind in
             deciding whether to grant financial assistance, it seems to me that this is the
             most important.


             21. In the light of the above, there is no proper reason to conclude that the
             Police Authority did anything other than to exercise their discretion properly
             in. granting the Defendants legal assistance. While there is reference to the
             earlier Home Office Circular in their decision of February 1998,1 understand
             that they had the later Circular. Moreover, they took into account the




     2 FEB    ’ 99   13:43                                            0 113 £ 8 4   7001   P A GE . 0 1W
         appropriate criteria in reaching their decision.

         22. I have been able to speak by telephone to Ms Baxendale QC and Mr
         Mark Shaw who are in the process of advising the Police Authority as to their
         powers. It appears that while they understand and appreciate the weight of the
         reasoning or analysis outlined above, they have some concerns. The essence of
        their concerns can be shortly stated. Section 88 of the Police Act 1996
         provides a specific power to pay any damages or costs awarded against an
        officer in respect of proceedings for tort. There is no specific provision for
        meeting criminal costs. Can section 6 of the Police Act 1996 be construed so
        as to imply a power to provide financial assistance in respect of proceedings
        other than those provided for in section 88, in circumstances where Parliament
        has not made any specific provision ? They suggest that the application of the
        linguistic cannon of construction “expressio unius est exclusio alterius” (which
        means - to express one thing is impliedly to exclude another) weighs in the
        balance against there being a power to assist financially the officers.

        23. Further, I understand that Ms Baxendale QC and Mr Shaw refer to three
        cases which they say support their concerns:

        Sttflon LBC v Morgan Grenfell 29 HLR 608
        BurgQine v Waltham f orest LBC 95 LGR 520
        Askev v Golden Wine Co Ltd [1948] 2 All ER 35.

        24. I propose to deal first of all with the three cases. I have to say that in
        my view none of these cases properly assists in determining whether or not the
        Police Authority had power to provide financial assistance.


        25. In Sutton a local authority provided a guarantee in respect of a loan to a
        bank. The bank sought to enforce the guarantee. The local authority relied
        upon section 111 of the Local Government Act 1972 which provides for a
        general power to facilitate the discharge of their functions. It was held that
        the guarantee was not enforceable as the local authority had acted ultra vires.




2 FEB    ’ 99   13:44                                         0113   284   7001   P AGE. 0 1 1
             This was not all surprising in the circumstances. By virtue of section 111(3)
             and section 58 of the Housing Associations Act 1.985, the local authority's
             power to provide guarantees was expressly limited to certain circumstances
             which did not apply to the circumstances of the guarantee in issue.

            26. There is no question of section 6 of the Police Act 1996 being fettered
            by any express provision limiting the circumstances in which legal assistance
            can be provided to those outlined in section 88. It is also worth noting that
            section 6 of the 1996 Act is even wider than section 4 of the 1964 Act. There
            is no provision in section 6 that the police authority exercise their powers as
            conferred by the Act, as there is with section 4. Section 6 creates an
            unfettered obligation to maintain an efficient and effective police force.

w            27. I move on to B ursoine. If anything Burgoine suggests that a local
             authority can provide an indemnity to its employees. In that case a local
            authority sought to indemnify an employee who set up a company to build and
            operate a water park. It was held that the setting up of the company was an
            ultra vires act (the local authority had no statutory power or discretion to do it
            in circumstances where the exercise of their power was specifically provided
            for), and as a matter of simple construction, the terms of the indemnity did not
            cover the liability incurred. However, Neuberger J considered that a local
            authority could validly grant an indemnity to an employee who incurred
            liabilities when they undertook activities lying outside the capacities of the
            local authority. In a commentary on the case in Local Authority Law 6.6.97,
            it was suggested that this approach was to be commended : “In the absence of
            such a power local authorities and councils would no doubt, experience
            substantial difficulties in recruitment of persons to carry out their business.”
            This sort of worry has to be a real consideration in this case.

            28. Aijl^ey concerns whether an individual who is convicted of a criminal
            offence can recover any financial penalty incurred and costs from a third
            party. Not surprisingly, it was held that his punishment was personal to him
            and he could not through the Civil courts recover in respcct of these sums




    £ FEB    ” 39   13:44                                           0 113 2 8 4   7001   P AGE . 0 1 2
from a third party. This is a far cry from whether a police authority should
provide financial assistance to a police officer facing a private prosecution
arising from what he has done in the course of his duties. The public policy
considerations are very different.

29. I am of the firm view that these cases do not begin to suggest that the
Police Authority acted ultra vires in providing financial assistance to the
Defendants in this case. The cases are all readily distinguishable from this
case.

30.   I turn to the application of the principle expressio unius est exclusio
alteiius. This cannon of construction “operates only where not outweighed by
other interpretative factors” (Bennion on Statutory Interpretation p970).
Further, it is said that “it is doubtful whether the maxim does any more than
draw attention to a fairly obvious linguistic point, viz that in many contexts the
mention of some matters warrant an inference that other cognate matters were
intentionally excluded” ( Cross on Statutory Interpretation 2nd edn 1987 pi 38-
139 and referred to again in Bennion on Statutory Interpretation p970). Thus,
it has to be borne in mind that this maxim is only of limited assistance.

31. The maxim has been applied to effect in pretty limited circumstances.
The most relevant category of case in which it has been applied concerns Acts
which set out specific penalties. It has been held in a number of cases referred
to in Bennion that where an Act sets out particular penalties, the penalties can
only be imposed in the circumstances which are prescribed. This is
understandable. It would clearly be wrong to apply something as draconian as
a penalty in circumstances not specifically covered by an Act. Further, in
Felix v Shiva [1983] QB 82 at 90-91 (referred to in Bennion p972), the Court
of Appeal held that where the County Courts Act 1959 had made specific
provision for parties before the Co^jpty Courts to apply for interim payments,
and where the provision had not been brought into effect, a general power
could not be relied upon to assert that interim payments could be applied for
before specific provision had been made. Again, this decision made a good
          deal of sense. There was specific provision as to how the power would come
          into effect and it could not be brought into effect by some other route.

           32. The situation we face here is very different. Section 6 is unfettered. It
           is difficult to see how an efficient and effective police force could be
           maintained without providing financial support to officers who have been
           acting on behalf of the Force in good faith who find themselves enmeshed in
           litigation. The specific obligation in section 88 is to deal with awards of
           damages in tort actions so that members of the public have a remedy. Without
           section 88 no recovery could be made against a Force in respect of the torts of
           officers, since there is otherwise no vicarious liability. Section 88 also
           provides that if an action in tort is brought against an individual officer, the
          police fund may meet an award of damages and costs. It makes great sense
          that the obligation to meet such awards be specific. The public needs to know
          that recovery can be made in such circumstances from police officers. Section
          88(4)(b) allows for a police authority to pay to a police officer any costs
          which he docs not recover in an action brought against him. This provision is
          incidental to the rest of section 88. Section 88 does not deal at all with the
          provision of financial assistance to police officers who need such assistance in
          o r d e r to defend themselves against litigation.



          33. I cannot see that it makes any linguistic sense to deduce from the mere
          presence of section 88(4)(b) that there is no power at all to assist financially
          officers who face litigation of all varieties. The maxim referred to by those
          advising the Police Authority only helps us to make linguistic sense of the Act.
          Quite simply there is no specific provision for officers to be assisted
          financially in conducting litigation. Section 88(4)(b) is incidental to an
          essential provision by which recovery can be made against police forces for
          actions in tort. Section 88(4)(b) docs not deal with assisting officers
          financially to defend proceedings, but merely to make up any shortfall in costs
          incurred and not recovered. It does not deal with proceedings other than those
          brought in tort. It is a very specific narrow provision and is not inconsistent
          with the application of a general power in unrelated circumstances. Surely to




2   FEB   ’ 99   13:46                                           0113   £84   7001   PAGE. 0 1 4
          seek to find an inconsistency offends against a common sense reading of the
          Act.


          34. There is nothing in the Police Act 1996 which precludes the provision
          of financial assistance where an officer faces a private prosecution. There is
          no provision which suggests that financial assistance is limited to the
          circumstances provided for by section 88. Wilson clearly suggests that section
          6 provides the power to provide such assistance. The Home Office Circulars,
          which are of assistance in deducing statutory intention, emphasise the
          importance of providing financial support to officers who act in good faith
          and exercise their judgment reasonably. The Police Authority can quite
          properly conclude that in order to maintain an efficient and effective police
          force such financial support should be provided where officers face private
          prosecutions.

          35. There are very strong public policy reasons, which I have referred to
          above, as to why financial assistance should be available.

          36. It is to be remem bered that the CPS have declined to prosecute as a
          result of separate deliberations in 1990 and 1997. Plainly, they did so on the
          basis that there was no realistic prospect of conviction. The DPP has declined
          to intervene. It would appear that he has concluded that the prospects of
          success are still not good enough, but he is unable to conclude that there is
          clearly no case to answer such that he should intervene to terminate the
          prosecution. Can it be right that in these circumstances, where there is no
          realistic prospect of conviction, that officers who face a prosecution in respect
          of actions taken in the course of their duties, should be left to deal with the
          costs of their defence on their own ? Surely, the failure to support will
          undermine morale and the ability of the Force to police efficiently and
          effectively ? What is to be done if it becomes known that if a private
          prosecution is brought against a police officer he is left to his own devices ?
          It takes little imagination to imagine how the unscrupulous might use this.
          Moreover, can it be right that as a result of pressure from a prosecutor, who




£   FEB    99   13:4'                                             113   £84   700 1   PAGE. 0 1 5
           is far from disinterested, defendant police officers are deprived of financial
           assistance, when it was previously thought that they should have such
           assistance ?

            37.    If the Police Authority do have the power to grant financial assistance in
           circumstances such as these, and I think they do, it would appear that it falls
           within the ambit of their discretion to decide the form such funding is to take.
           As a purely hypothetical matter, I see no reason why funding could not be
           limited to making good any loss by way of legal aid contribution after the
           verdict. However, I find it hard to see how this could work in practice. A
           decision to make up a legal aid contribution could very easily prejudice the
           grant of legal aid* If a decision were to be made to assist financially on this
           sort of basis at this sort of stage, it is hard to justify why full financial
           assistance were not being granted. It seems to me that it would be inconsistent
          with the public policy considerations which indicate that officers acting in
          good faith should be supported. In order to provide assistance in any form the
          Authority has to conclude that (a) it has power to provide such assistance (b)
          that it should do so in all the circumstances. Once it is concluded that
          assistance should be provided, I find it difficult to see how it could properly be
          limited to refunding the legal aid contribution.

           38. It follows from the views I set out above, that I cannot see any proper
          justification for requiring officers to apply for legal aid in the first instance.
          There is no form of statutory requirement that this should be done. It has
          never been suggested in any Home Office Circular. There is no case law
          which suggests that it is a requirement. If it were a requirement, it would
          undermine the public policy justification for providing funding. It would be
          inconsistent with the maintenance of an efficient and effective police force.

          39. I understand that it may be difficult for the Defendants to obtain legal
          aid. At the very least it would involve substantially divesting themselves of
          any capital. I do not think that the Legal Aid Board could require the
          Defendants to exhaust their remedies in pursuing alternative forms of funding




2   FEB    ’ 99   13:48                                           0113   284   7001   PAGE.016
           as a condition to granting assistance. There is no specific provision to this
           effect. But I have to say that I doubt that they will find it easy to obtain legal
           aid. If they can, it will cost them dearly in financial terms. Again, I cannot
           see that news of this will do anything for morale in the Force. I fear that it
           will be pretty devastating.

          40. If the Police Authority have the power to assist police officers
          financially in the way that I contend that they have above, it would be well
          within their discretion to extend funding to covcr a judicial review application
          in respect of the DPP’s decision if Leading Counsel so advises. If Leading
          Counsel were to advise in favour of an application, there is no question but
          that legal aid would be available in respect of such an application if the
          officers were legally aided. If they continue to enjoy funding from the Police
          Authority, it would be wrong to deprive them of funding for an application
          which would be available were they legally aided,

          SUMMARY

          41.     In summary :

          (a)     there is power to grant financial assistance ;

          (b)     that power has been properly applied in granting assistance ;

          (c)     it would be inappropriate to require the officers to apply for legal aid ;

          (d) financial assistance can and should be extended to allow the Defendants
          to apply for judicial review of the DPP’s decision on counsel’s advice ;

          (e) the Police Authority may well leave themselves open to an application
          for judicial review by the Defendants if funding is withdrawn now.

          42.     I hope that I have addressed all points of concern. Please do not hesitate




2   FEB    ’ 99   13:43                                             0 113   284   7001   PAGE. 0 1 7
      to contact me should there be any queries.

               fcTY
      9 BEDFORD ROW
      LONDON
      28.2.99




FEB   ’ 99   13:49                                 0113   £84   7001   PAGE. 0 1 8
                         THE CHIEF CONSTABLE OF
                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE



                         RE    ADLINGTON      V
                         DUCKENFIELD & MURRAY




                         ADVICE




                         HAMMOND SUDDARDS,
                         LEEDS.
                         REF: PCM.SB.CHI.57-9




2   FEB   ’ 99   13:50            0113   2S4   7001   PftGE. 0 1 9
    10/02    99 WED 02:00 FAX 01712422511                                   JOHN GOLDRING QC                                                              0 0 02




                                                                                             A p p lic a n t : ....... 1st                  19




            IN T H E H IG H C O U R T O F J U S T IC E                                      C r o w n O f f i c e R e f N o ... 1 9 9 9
            Q u e e n ’ s B e n c h D iv is io n
            C r o w n O ffic e L is t


            I N T H E M A T T E R o f a n a p p lic a tio n b y T H E C H I E F C O N S T A B L E Q F
            S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E P O L IC E F O R L E A V E T O A P P L Y F O R J U D IC IA L
            R E V IE W


®           I I A N D A 1 N E S , A s s is ta n t C h ie f C o n s ta b le o f S o u th Y o r k s h ir e P o lic e , P o lic e
            H e a d q u a r te r s . S n ig H i l l , S h e ffie ld , S 3 S L Y M A K E O A T H A N D S W E A R as
            fo llo w s :


            1.         I a m th e A s s is ta n t C h i e f C o n s ta b le o f S o u th Y o r k s h ir e P o lic e , 1 a m d u ly
            a u th o r is e d to s w e a r th is a f f id a v it o n b e h a lf o f th e C h i e f C o n s t a b le o f S o u t h
            Y o r k s h ir e P o lic e .    I m a k e t h is a f f i d a v i t i n s u p p o r t o f a n a p p l i c a t i o n f o r l e a v e
            to a p p ly f o r j u d i c i a l r e v ie w o f c e r ta in d e c is io n s o f th e S o u th Y o r k s h ir e P o lic e
            A u t h o r it y m a d e o n 5 th F e b r u a r y 1 9 9 9 r e f e r r e d to in R S C A p p e n d ix A F o r m
            N o 86A.


            2.         S a v e as s ta te d h e r e in , a ll fa c ts a n d m a tte rs d e p o s e d to w it h in th is
            a f f id a v it a re w it h in m y k n o w le d g e , in fo r m a tio n a n d b e lie ! .


            3.         I h a v e re a d th e N o tic e o f A p p lic a tio n p re p a re d b y th o s e a d v is in g th e
            C h i e f C o n s t a b l e a n d c o n f i r m t h a t t h e f a c t u a l a s s e r t io n s c o n t a i n e d t h e r e i n a r e
            tru e .


            4.         T h e r e is n o w p r o d u c e d a n d s h o w n t o m e :


             (a )      m a r k e d I D 1 a c o p y o f th e d e c is io n s m a d e b y th e S o u th Y o r k s h ir e P o lic e




      10    FEB       ’99    2:00                                                                             0 17 1 2 4 2 2 5 11        P O G E .0 0 2
10/02 ’99 WED 02:01 FAX 01712422511                                      JOHN COLORING QC                                                          ® 003




       A u th o r ity o n 5 th F e b ru a ry 1 9 9 9 ;


       (b )         m a r k e d I D 2 a le tte r fr o m th o s e a c tin g o n b e h a lf o f th e S o u th Y o r k s h ir e
       P o lic e A u t h o r it y w h ic h in d ic a te s th a t th e y d o n o t o p p o s e th e a p p lic a tio n f o r
       le a v e to a p p ly f o r ju d ic ia l r e v ie w a n d s u p p o r tin g th e a p p lic a tio n f o r a n
       e x p e d ite d s u b s ta n tiv e h e a r in g ;


       (c )         m a r k e d I D 3 c o p ie s o f th e in fo r m a t io n s la id a g a in s t D a v i d D u c k e n f ie ld
       a n d B e r n a r d M u r r a y d a te d ; 1 0 th J u ly 1 9 9 8 .


       (d )         m a r k e d I D 4 c o p ie s o f th e d e c is io n s m a d e b y th e S o u th Y o r k s h ir e P o lic e
       A u th o rity o n 1st A u g u s t 1 9 9 7 a n d 2 7 th F e b ru a ry 1 9 9 8 ,


       (e )         m a r k e d ID S c o rre s p o n d e n c e re c e iv e d fr o m T h e A s s o c ia tio n o f C h ie f
       P o lic e O f f ic e r s [p le a s e d e ta il o th e r le tte r s ] d e a lin g w it h th e c o n c e r n w h ic h
%      t h e s e b o d i e s h a v e w i t h r e g a r d t o t h e d e c i s i o n m a d e b y t h e P o l i c e A u t h o r i t y a r id
       th e n e e d to h a v e th is a p p lic a t io n d e t e r m in e d as a m a t t e r o f u r g e n c y .


       5.           I t is m y e x p e r i e n c e t h a t t h e r e h a s n e v e r b e e n a n y q u e s t i o n b u t t h a t a
       P o l i c e A u t h o r i t y h a s t h e p o w e r t o g r a n t f i n a n c i a l a s s is t a n c e t o a p o l i c e o f f i c e r
       w h o fa c e s le g a l p r o c e e d in g s b r o u g h t in re s p e c t o f h is o r h e r c o n d u c t w h ils t o n
        d u ty .      I k n o w o f n o o th e r c a s e o r s e t o f c irc u m s ta n c e in w h ic h th e P o lic e
        A u t h o r i t y ’ s p o w e r t o g r a n t a s s is t a n c e h a s b e e n q u e s t i o n e d o r c h a l l e n g e d .     As
        can be            seen fro m        th e le tte r f r o m          th e C h ie l ^ o jis t a b le           o f D e r b y s h ir e
        C o n s ta b u la r y , P re s id e n t o f th e A s s o c ia tio n o f C h ie f O ffic e r s , th e d e c is io n th a t
        t h e r e is n o p o w e r t o p r o v i d e f i n a n c i a l a s s is t a n c e w h i c h is t h e e s s e n t i a l s u b j e c t
        m a t t e r o f t h i s a p p l i c a t i o n is c o n t r a r y t o c u r r e n t p r a c t i c e a n d u n d e r s t a n d i n g .
        T h e r e s o l u t i o n o f t h i s is s u e is a m a t t e r o f n a t i o n a l i m p o r t a n c e .


        6.           I a m g r e a t l y c o n c e r n e d a t t h e s u g g e s t i o n t h a t t h e r e is n o p o w e r to
        p r o v i d e f i n a n c i a l a s s is t a n c e t o p o l i c e o f f i c e r s w h o f a c e l e g a l p r o c e e d i n g s .    I
        c o n s id e r it a b s o lu te ly v it a l th a t o f fic e r s s h o u ld k n o w th a t i f th e y a c t in g o o d
        f a it h in p e r f o r m in g t h e ir d u tie s th a t t h e ir P o lic e A u t h o r i t y w i l l s u p p o r t t h e m




  10   FEE         ’ 99    2:01                                                                             0171242^511                PAGE. 0bo
    10/02    99 WED 02:01 FAX 01712422511                                   JOHN COLORING QC                                                          ® 004




            in th e e v e n t th a t th e y fa c e litig a tio n .


            7.           I f e a r t h a t i f o f f ic e r s d o n o t e n jo y th e c o n f id e n c e t h a t t h e y h a v e th is
            f o r m o f s u p p o r t , t h a t w e w i l l s e e d e f e n s i v e p o l i c i n g . T h a t is , o f f i c e r s d e c i d i n g
            n o t to a c t w h e n fa c e d w it h a d if f ic u lt s itu a tio n in c a s e it re b o u n d s u p o n th e m ,
            o r o ffic e r s s e e k in g to p u s h d e c is io n m a k in g u p th e r a n k s tru c tu re r a th e r th a n
            ta k in g r e s p o n s ib ility th e m s e lv e s .            I t is a b s o l u t e l y v i t a l t h a t o f f i c e r s f e e l
            c o n fid e n t a b o u t im m e d ia t e d e c is io n m a k in g .                 T h i s is e s s e n t i a l t o p r o p e r

            p o lic in g .                                              3 m


             8.           P o lic in g n e c e s s a r ily in v o lv e s s itu a tio n s o f c o n f lic t . P o lic e o f f ic e r s d a ily
            d e a l w i t h t h e u n s c r u p u l o u s w h o a r e w e l l p r a c t i s e d in t a k i n g a d v a n t a g e o f a n y
            w e a k n e s s e s w h ic h th e y m a y b e a b le to e x p lo it.                 I t ta k e s little im a g in a tio n to
             th in k o f h o w th e th r e a t o f p r iv a t e p r o s e c u tio n m a y b e u s e d to in t im id a t e w h e r e
            p o lic e o ffic e r s d o n o t h a v e th e c o n fid e n c e th a t th e y w i l l r e c e iv e p o lic e
             a u t h o r it y a s s is ta n c e s h o u ld a n y s u c h th r e a t b e re a lis e d .


             9.           I a m c o n c e r n e d th a t i f p o lic e o ffic e r s c a n n o t a c t in th e k n o w le d g e th a t
             th e y w i l l b e s u p p o r te d i f th e y fa c e lit ig a t io n th a t it w i l l im p a c t o n r e c r u itm e n t.


             10.          A s a r e s u lt o f th e H ills b o r o u g h S ta d iu m D is a s te r t r a g ic a lly 9 6 p e o p le
             d i e d . T h e i m p a c t o n S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e h a s b e e n e n o r m o u s . S u c h is t h e
£            p r o f ile o f th e p r iv a te p r o s e c u tio n th a t th e w h o le F o r c e w i l l k n o w o f th e
             d e c is io n o n th e p a r t o f th e P o lic e A u t h o r it y to c e a s e f u n d in g . I h a v e n o d o u b t
             th a t th e d e c is io n w i l l b e th e s u b je c t o f m u c h c o n c e r n w it h in th e F o r c e , b o th
             w it h r e g a r d to th e w a y t h a t D a v i d D u c k e n f ie ld a n d B e r n a r d M u r r a y h a v e b e e n
             tre a te d a n d h o w th e d e c is io n w i l l a ffe c t a ll c u rre n t o ffic e r s .                  F u rth e r, g iv e n
             t h e p r e s s c o v e r a g e o f e v e n t s , i t w i l l n o t h a v e e s c a p e d a n y o f f i c e r ’ !> a t t e n t i o n
             th a t th e d e c is io n to c e a s e f u n d in g c a m e a b o u t as a r e s u lt o f r e p r e s e n ta tio n s
             m a d e b y th e p r iv a te p ro s e c u to r.

            ^                                                                                                                .             .
                11.        T h e d e c is io n to c e a s e fu n d in g h a s c o m e at a c r u c ia l s ta g e in th e p r iv a te
             p ro s e c u tio n .      T h e d e c is io n c a n o n ly h a v e c o m e as a m a jo r b lo w to th e tw o




      10    FEB       ’ 'd‘3    E:0 1                                                                          017 12422511                PRGE.004
10/02 '99 WEI) 02:02 FAX...01712422511                                  JOHN GOLDRING QC                                                               @005




       f o r m e r o f f ic e r s w h o h a v e th u s fa r a c te d in th e b e lie f th a t th e y h a d f in a n c ia l
       a s s is t a n c e . C l e a r l y , t h e q u e s t i o n o f w h e t h e r t h e y h a v e f u n d i n g o r n o t h a s t o b e
       d e te r m in e d as a m a tte r o f a b s o lu te u r g e n c y e ith e r so th a t f u n d in g c a n b e
       r e s u m e d so th a t th e y c a n c o n tin u e p r o p e r ly to d e fe n d th e p r o s e c u tio n b r o u g h t
       a g a in s t th e m o r s o th a t th e y c a n m a k e a lte r n a tiv e f in a n c ia l a r r a n g e m e n ts .


       12.        I n a ll th e c ir c u m s ta n c e s , th e C h i e f C o n s ta b le s e e k s le a v e to a p p ly f o r
       ju d ic ia l r e v ie w as s o u g h t in R S C A p p e n d ix A F o r m N o 8 6 A a n d th e re a fte r,
       th e s u b s ta n tiv e r e l i e f c la im e d .


       S W O R N e tc ...




  10   FEB      ’ 99      2 : 0 1                                                                         01712422511               P Pi U E .kJ 0 5
10/02    99 WED 02:02 FAX 01712422511                                    JOHN GOLDRING QC                                                             @006




                                                                THE QUEEN


                                                                          and


                               T H E S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E P O L IC E A U T H O R IT Y
           E X P A R T E T H E C H IE F C O N S T A B L E O F S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E P O L IC E


                       J U D G M E N T , O R D E R , D E C IS IO N O R O T H E R P R O C E E D IN G


        T h e d e c is io n s m a d e b y th e R e s p o n d e n t o n 5 th F e b r u a r y 1 9 9 8 :


         1. -      t h a t t h e R e s p o n d e n t h a s n o l e g a l p o w e r t o p r o v i d e f i n a n c i a l a s s is t a n c e t o
         M r D a v i d D u c k e n f ie ld o r M r B e r n a r d M u r r a y in r e la tio n to t h e ir c o s ts a n d
         e x p e n s e s o f d e f e n d in g th e p r iv a t e p ro s e c u tio n s b r o u g h t a g a in s t t h e m b y th e
         H ills b o r o u g h F a m ily S u p p o rt G ro u p ( " H F S G ” ), b y in fo r m a tio n d a te d 1 0 th
         J u ly 1 9 9 8 , a n d th a t a n y p r e v io u s d e c is io n o f th e R e s p o n d e n t, o r a n y o f f ic e r
         a c t i n g u n d e r it s a u t h o r i t y , t o m a k e s u c h a s s is t a n c e a v a i l a b l e is n u l l a n d v o i d .


         2.        th a t th e R e s p o n d e n t h a s n o le g a l p o w e r to p r o v id e f in a n c ia l a s s is ta n c e to
         M r D a v i d D u c k e n f ie ld o r M r B e r n a r d M u r r a y in r e la t io n to th e c o s ts o f a n y
        ju d ic ia l r e v ie w p r o c e e d in g s b r o u g h t b y e ith e r o f th e m : w h e t h e r r e la t in g to th e
         d e c is io n o f th e C r o w n P r o s e c u tio n S e r v ic e n o t to ta k e o v e r th e c o n d u c t o f
         p r iv a t e p r o s e c u tio n s a n d d is c o n tin u e s u c h p r o s e c u tio n s , o r to a n y d e c is io n o f
         th e C l e r k to th e S e f t o n M a g is t r a t e s ’ C o u r t to c h a lle n g e th e p a y m e n t o f th e
         o f f ic e r s ’ c o s ts o f p r o c e e d in g s b e fo r e th a t c o u r t f r o m c e n tr a l fu n d s , o r to a n y
         o th e r d e c is io n o f a n y c o u r t, a u th o r ity o r b o d y a r is in g f r o m s u c h p ro s e c u tio n s ;
         a n d , a c c o r d in g ly , to r e je c t th e a p p lic a tio n s o f M r D u c k e n f ie ld a n d M r M u r r a y
         f o r f in a n c ia l a s s is ta n c e in r e la t io n to s u c h p r o c e e d in g s .


                                                             R E L IE F S O U G H T


         J u d ic ia l r e v ie w in th e f o r m o f :




  10    FEB     ’ 99      £:02                                                                              0 17 1 2 4 2 2 5 11         PAGE. 0 0 6
    10/02     99 WED 02:03 FAX 01712422511                                       JOHN GOLDRING QC                                                           ® 007




            (1 )     C e r t io r a r i to q u a s h th e d e c is io n s o f 5 th F e b r u a r y 1 9 9 9 id e n t if ie d a b o v e .


            (2 )     A       d e c la r a t io n th a t th e R e s p o n d e n t h a s v ir e s to p r o v id e                        fin a n c ia l
            a s s is t a n c e t o D a v i d D u c k e n f i e i d a n d B e r n a r d M u r r a y i n r e l a t i o n t o t h e i r c o s t s
            a n d e x p e n s e s o f d e f e n d in g th e p r iv a t e p r o s e c u tio n s b r o u g h t a g a in s t t h e m b y
            th e H ills b o r o u g h F a m ily S u p p o r t G ro u p .


            (3 )      A       d e c la r a tio n    th a t th e R e s p o n d e n t h a s v ir e s to p r o v id e                      fin a n c ia l
            a s s is t a n c e t o D a v i d D u c k e n f i e l d a n d B e r n a r d M u r r a y i n r e l a t i o n t o t h e i r c o s t s
            a n d e x p e n s e s o f d e f e n d in g th e p r iv a t e p ro s e c u tio n s b r o u g h t a g a in s t t h e m b y
            t h e H F S G a s a n d w h e n s u c h c o s ts a n d e x p e n s e s a r e i n c u r r e d a n d i r r e s p e c t i v e o f
            th e -o u tc o m e o f th e p r o s e c u t io n a n d a n y a p p lic a tio n fo r c o s ts m a d e a g a in s t th e
            p r iv a te p ro s e c u to r.


            (4 )         A    d e c la r a t io n th a t th e R e s p o n d e n t h a s v ir e s to p r o v id e fin a n c ia l,
            a s s is t a n c e t o D a v i d D u c k e n f i e i d a n d B e r n a r d M u r r a y i n r e l a t i o n t o t h e i r c o s t s
            a n d e x p e n s e s o f d e f e n d in g th e p r iv a t e p ro s e c u tio n s b r o u g h t a g a in s t t h e m b y
            th e H F S G ir r e s p e c tiv e o f w h e th e r th e y h a v e a tte m p te d to o b ta in o r c o u ld
            o b ta in f in a n c ia l a s s is ta n c e b y w a y o f L e g a l A i d a n d / o r a d e c la r a t io n t h a t th e
            a v a i l a b i l i t y o r o t h e r w i s e o f l e g a l a i d is a n i r r e l e v a n t c o n s i d e r a t i o n .


£           (5 )         A     d e c la r a tio n th a t th e R e s p o n d e n t h a s v ir e s to p r o v id e                        fin a n c ia l
            a s s is ta n c e to D a v i d D u c k e n f i e l d a n d B e r n a r d M u r r a y in r e la t io n to th e c o s ts
            a n d e x p e n s e s o f a n y ju d ic ia l r e v ie w p r o c e e d in g s b r o u g h t b y e ith e r o f t h e m
            r e la tin g to th e d e c is io n o f th e D ir e c t o r o f P u b lic P r o s e c u tio n s n o t to in t e r v e n e
            in th e p r iv a te p r o s e c u tio n .


                                          G R O U N D S O N W H I C H R E L IE F IS S O U G H T


             1.          T h e is s u e s i n t h i s c a s e a r e :


             (a )            w h e t h e r th e R e s p o n d e n t w a s in e r r o r in la w in r e s o lv in g o n 5 th




      10    FEB     ’ 99        2:02                                                                                  0 17 1 2 4 2 2 5 11        PAGE.007
10/02 '99 WED 02:03 FAX 01712422511                                     JOHN GOLDRING QC                                                           @008




       F e b r u a r y 1 9 9 9 t h a t i t h a d n o l e g a l p o w e r to p r o v i d e f i n a n c i a l a s s i s t a n c e t o
       D a v i d D u c k e n f ie ld o r B e r n a r d M u r r a y m r e la tio n to th e ir c o s ts a n d e x p e n s e s
       o f d e f e n d in g th e p r iv a t e p r o s e c u tio n s b r o u g h t a g a in s t t h e m b y th e H F S G b y
       in fo r m a tio n d a te d        1 0 th J u ly 1 9 9 8 a n d in d e te r m in in g th a t a n y p r e v io u s
       d e c i s i o n o f t h e A u t h o r i t y , o r a n y o f f i c e r a c t i n g u n d e r it s a u t h o r i t y , t o i n d ic e
       s u c h a s s is ta n c e a v a ila b le w a s n u ll a n d v o id ;


       (b )      w h e t h e r th e R e s p o n d e n t w a s w r o n g in la w in r e s o lv in g th a t it h a d n o
       l e g a l p o w e r t o p r o v i d e f i n a n c i a l a s s is t a n c e t o D a v i d D u c k e n f i e l d a n d B e r n a r d
       M u r r a y in r e la t io n to a n y ju d ic ia l r e v ie w p r o c e e d in g s in r e s p e c t o f th e p r iv a t e
       p r o s e c u tio n b r o u g h t a g a in s t th e m ;


       (c ) -    w h e t h e r th e R e s p o n d e n t h a s v ir e s to p r o v id e f in a n c ia l a s s is ta n c e a s a n d
       w h e n c o s ts a r e in c u r r e d in d e f e n d in g th e p r iv a t e p r o s e c u t io n o r w h e t h e r
       p o w re r is l i m i t e d to m e e t i n g a n y c o s ts i n c u r r e d a n d n o t r e c o v e r e d .


        (d )      w h e t h e r th e R e s p o n d e n t h a s v ir e s to p r o v id e f in a n c ia l a s s is ta n c e
       irrespecti v e o f the a v a i l a b i l i t y o f l e g a l a id .


        2.        A s to th e A p p l i c a n t :


        (a )      T h e A p p l i c a n t is t h e C h i e f C o n s t a b l e o f S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e . A s s u c h i t is
        h is d u t y t o s e c u r e t h e e n f o r c e m e n t o f t h e l a w i n h is a r e a a n d h e is r e s p o n s i b l e
        f o r t h e d i s p o s i t i o n a n d c o n t r o l o f h is f o r c e .   D a v id D u c k e n fie ld a n d B e rn a rd
        M u r r a y a re f o r m e r p o lic e o ffic e r s w h o w e r e a c tin g in th e c o u rs e o f t h e ir
        p o l i c i n g d u t i e s a t t h e t i m e w h e n i t is a l l e g e d t h a t t h e y c o m m i t t e d c r i m i n a l
        o ffe n c e s .     T h e d e c i s i o n i n q u e s t i o n is o f v e r y r e a l c o n s e q u e n c e t o t h e
        A p p lic a n t. I f it b e c o rre c t in la w th a t a p o lic e a u th o rity h as n o p o w e r to g r a n t
        f in a n c ia l a s s is ta n c e to p o lic e o ff ic e r s            w h o s u b s e q u e n tly fa c e a p r iv a t e
        p r o s e c u tio n a r is in g f r o m th e ir c o n d u c t w h e n a c tin g in th e c o u r s e o f t h e ir
        d u t ie s , it w i l l h a v e         v e ry    s i g n i f i c a n t r e p e p G -tts s to n s w i t h   re g a rd      to   th e
        r e c r u itm e n t o f p o lic e o ffic e r s , d is c ip lin e a n tk jiio r a le !)            T h e A p p lic a n t m a d e
         r e p r e s e n ta tio n s b e fo r e th e R e s p o n d e n t b e fo r e it m a d e th e d e c is io n s in q u e s tio n .




  10   FEB      ’ 39      £ :09                                                                             0 1 7 1 £ 4 2 2 5 11        PAGE.008
10/02        99 WED 02:04 FAX 01712422511                                   JOHN GOLDRING QC                                                          0009




        In th e c ir c u m s ta n c e s , th e A p p lic a n t h a s a s u ffic ie n t in te re s t,


        (b )      T h e A p p lic a n t h a s n o a lte rn a tiv e re m e d y .

                                                                                                         0
        THE FACTS                                                                          ^4 1


        3.          O n 1 5 th A p r il 1 9 8 9 th e H ills b o r o u g h S ta d iu m D is a s te r o c c u rre d .                      B o th
        D a v id D u c k e n fie ld , th e n C h ie f' S u p e rin te n d e n t D u c k e n f ie ld , a n d B e r n a r d
        M u r r a y , th e n S u p e r in te n d e n t M u rra y ., w e r e o n d u ty a t th e S ta d iu m th a t d a y .
        T h e y h a v e b o th s in c e r e t ir e d f r o m th e F o r c e o n m e d ic a l g r o u n d s .


        4.         In 1 9 9 0 a n d 1 9 9 7 th e C r o w n P r o s e c u tio n S e r v ic e c o n s id e r e d w h e th e r
        th e re w a s e v id e n c e to s u p p o r t a n y p r o s e c u tio n a r is in g o u t o f th e H ills b o r o u g h
        D is a s te r a n d d e c id e d a g a in s t a n y f o r m o f p r o s e c u tio n . P la in ly th e y d id s o o n
        t h e b a s is t h a t t h e r e w a s n o r e a l i s t i c p r o s p e c t o f c o n v i c t i o n .


        5.          O n 1 0 th J u ly 1 9 9 8 a p r iv a te p ro s e c u tio n w a s b r o u g h t b y M s A d lin g t o n ,
        a s o lic ito r re p re s e n tin g th e H ills b o r o u g h F a m ily S u p p o r t G r o u p a g a in s t D a v id
        D u c k e n fie ld       and B e rn a rd            M u rra y .        T h e o ffic e r s        a re c h a rg e d       w ith     th e
        m a n s la u g h te r o f J o h n A lf r e d A n d e r s o n a n d J a m e s G a r y A s p in a ll, t w o o f th e
        d eceased fro m              th e H i lls b o r o u g h d is a s te r , a n d a ls o w i t h w i l f u l n e g le c t to
        p e rfo rm        a p u b lic        d u ty .      F u rth e r, M r D u c k e n fie ld                   fa c e s   a c h a rg e    of
        in te n tio n a lly p e r v e r tin g th e c o u rs e o f ju s tic e in ly in g a b o u t th e c irc u m s ta n c e s
        i n w h i c h G a t e C a t t h e S t a d i u m c a m e to b e o p e n e d .


        6.          O n 2 7 th F e b r u a r y 1 9 9 8 in th e lig h t o f th re a te n e d p r iv a te p r o s e c u tio n s
        a g a in s t o ffic e r s in v o lv e d in th e H ills b o r o u g h D is a s te r , th e R e s p o n d e n t
        c o n s id e r e d th e g e n e r a l q u e s t io n o f w h e t h e r f in a n c ia l a s s is ta n c e s h o u ld b e
        g r a n te d to th e o ffic e r s c o n c e r n e d .              I t w a s r e c o g n is e d th a t a c tu a l d e c is io n s
        a b o u t fin a n c ia l s u p p o rt c o u ld o n ly b e m a d e o n in d iv id u a l a p p lic a tio n .                         The
        R e s p o n d e n t re s o lv e d as f o llo w s :


         "1.        T h a t i n t h e l i g h t o f t h e f i n d i n g s o f L o r d J u s t ic e S t u a r t - S m i t h ’ s i n q u i r y




  10    FEB      ’ 99      £:03                                                                                   01712422511              PAGE.009
10/0 2        99 WED 02:04 FAX 01712422511                                JOHN GOLDRING QC                                                             lg]010




         a n d h i s c o m m e n t s o n t h e o u t c o m e , m e m b e r s d o n o t b e l i e v e t h e r e is a n y n e w
         e v id e n c e to c a u s e t h e m to r e c o n s id e r th e A u t h o r it y s p r e v io u s v i e w , a n d
         r e m a in o f th e o p in io n th a t th e o ffic e r s a c te d in g o o d fa ith .


         2.        T h a t th e A u t h o r it y a g re e s to a u th o ris e th e C le r k a n d T r e a s u r e r to
         c o n s id e r a p p lic a t io n s f o r f i n a n c i a l a s s is ta n c e f r o m          o ffic e r s (s e r v in g a n d
         r e tir e d ) in a c c o rd a n c e w ith th e p r o v is io n s o f H o m e O f f ic e C ir c u la r 7 7 /8 7 ,
         F in a n c ia l A s s is ta n c e to P o lic e O f f ic e r s in L e g a l P r o c e e d in g s ” .


         7.         In M a r c h 1 9 9 8 a n a p p lic a tio n m a d e b y M r D u c k e n fie ld fo r fin a n c ia l .
         a s s is t a n c e w a s a p p r o v e d . I n J u n e 1 9 9 8 a n a p p l i c a t i o n m a d e b y M r M u r r a y f o i
         f i n a n c i a l a s s is t a n c e w a s a p p r o v e d .


         8.        P u r s u a n t to th e s a id d e c is io n s , th o s e a c tin g f o r M r D u c k e n f ie ld a n d M r
         M u r r a y i n d e f e n d i n g t h e c r i m i n a l p r o c e e d i n g s h a v e d o n e s o in t h e e x p e c t a t i o n
         th a t t h e ir c o s ts w o u ld b e m e t b y th e R e s p o n d e n t.              V e r y s ig n ific a n t s u m s h a v e
         b e e n in c u r r e d b y w a y o f d e fe n c e c o s ts .


         9.        D u r in g      th e A u tu m n           o f 1 9 9 8 th e D ir e c t o r o f P u b lic P r o s e c u tio n s
         c o n s id e r e d w h e th e r to in te r v e n e             in th e p r iv a te p r o s e c u tio n .               On      1 8 th
         D e c e m b e r 1 9 9 8 it. w a s a n n o u n c e d t h a t t h e D P P w o u l d n o t i n t e r v e n e ^


          10.       T h e p r i v a t e p r o s e c u t i o n is p r o c e e d i n g s w i f t l y , p u r s u a n t t o a t i g h t
          tim e ta b le , to a fix e d c o m m itta l d a te o n 1 9 th A p r il 1 9 9 9 .


          1L         A t a n in t e r lo c u t o r y h e a r in g c o n c e r n in g th e p r iv a te p r o s e c u tio n a t L e e d s
          M a g i s t r a t e s C o u r t o n 2 1 s t D e c e m b e r .1 9 9 8 t h o s e a c t i n g f o r t h e t w o f o r m e r
          o f f ic e r s in d ic a t e d t h a t t h e y p r o p o s e d to a p p ly f o r j u d i c i a l r e v i e w               o f th e
          d e c i s i o n o f t h e D P P n o t. t o i n t e r v e n e .            T h e y s o u g h t to e x t e n d th e t ig h t
          tim e ta b le im p o s e d b y th e M a g is tr a te s              C o u r t le a d in g u p to th e f ix e d d a te f o r
          c o m m it t a l. T h e y w e r e u n s u c c e s s fu l. T h e s tip e n d a r y m a g is tr a te a c c e d e d to th e
          s u b m i s s i o n m a d e b y t h e p r o s e c u t i o n t h a t i t w a s e s s e n t ia l t h a t t h e p r o s e c u t i o n b e
          p r o c e e d e d w it h s p e e d ily .




  10     FEB      ’ 99      2:04                                                                             0 17 1 £ 4 2 2 5 1 1        PRGE. 0 1 0
10/02    99 WED 02:05 FAX 01712422511                                     JOHN GOLDRING QC                                                     @011




                                                 €>               Pl<k)H S<cP4oGV
        12.       O n 2 2 n d D e c e m b e r 1 9 9 8 a n d 2 3 r d D e c e m b e r 1 9 9 8 re s p e c tiv e ly M r
        M u r r a y a n d M r D u c k e n f i e l d m a d e a p p lic a t io n s to th e R e s p o n d e n t to e x t e n d
        f in a n c ia l a s s is ta n c e to c o v e r th e p r o p o s e d a p p lic a t io n f o r j u d i c i a l r e v i e w o f th e
        d e c is io n o f th e D P P n o t to in te r v e n e .


        13.       In D e c e m b e r 1 9 9 8 a n d J a n u a r y 1 9 9 9 th e p r iv a te p r o s e c u to r m a d e
        w r itte n re p re s e n ta tio n s b y w a y o f le tte r to th e R e s p o n d e n t c o m p la in in g a b o u t
        th e p r o v is io n o f f in a n c ia l a s s is ta n c e to th e o f f ic e r s a n d s u g g e s tin g t h a t in
        p ro v id in g      a s s is ta n c e to th e f o r m e r o ffic e r s               th e R e s p o n d e n t h a d       a c te d
        u n la w fu lly .     F u rth e r, c o m p la in t w a s m a d e a b o u t a n y p ro p o s e d fu n d in g o f a n
        a p p l i c a t i o n f o r j u d i c i a l r e v i e w o f t h e d e c i s i o n o f th e D P P .


        14.       In th e lig h t o f th e c o m p la in ts a b o u t fu n d in g fr o m th e p r iv a te p r o s e c u to r,
        th e R e s p o n d e n t s o u g h t le g a l a d v ic e a n d th e n h e ld a m e e tin g o n 5 th F e b r u a r y
        1 9 9 9 t o d e t e r m i n e w h e t h e r o r n o t i t h a d p o w e r to g r a n t f i n a n c i a l a s s i s t a n c e t o
        th e fo r m e r o ffic e r s .           R e lu c ta n tly , o n 5 th F e b ru a ry 1 9 9 9 th e R e s p o n d e n t
        r e s o lv e d th a t it h a d n o p o w e r . M o r e s p e c ific a lly , it r e s o lv e d as f o llo w s :


        “ 1 ... th e A u t h o r it y h a s n o le g a l p o w e r to p r o v id e f in a n c ia l a s s is ta n c e to M r
        D a v i d D u c k e n f i e l d o r M r B e r n a r d M u r r a y in r e la t io n to t h e ir c o s ts a n d
        e x p e n s e s o f d e f e n d in g th e p r iv a t e p r o s e c u tio n s b r o u g h t a g a in s t th e m b y th e
        H F S G , b y in f o r m a t io n d a te d 1 0 th J u ly 1 9 9 8 , a n d th a t a n y p r e v io u s d e c is io n o f
        t h e A u t h o r i t y , o r a n y o f f i c e r a c t i n g u n d e r it s a u t h o r i t y , t o m a k e s u c h
        a s s is t a n c e a v a i l a b l e is n u l l a n d v o i d .


        2.         I n th e lig h t o f le g a l a d v ic e , in c lu d in g a d v ic e f r o m L e a d in g C o u n s e l,
        m e m b e r s a re r e c o m m e n d e d to r e s o lv e th a t, o n b a la n c e , th e A u t h o r it y h a s n o
        l e g a l p o w e r t o p r o v i d e f i n a n c i a l a s s is t a n c e t o M r D a v i d D u c k e n f i e l d o r M r
        B e r n a r d M u r r a y in r e la t io n to th e c o s ts o f a n y j u d i c i a l r e v ie w p r o c e e d in g s
        b r o u g h t b y e it h e r o f t h e m : w h e t h e r r e la t in g to th e d e c is io n o f th e C r o w n
        P r o s e c u tio n S e n d e e n o t to ta k e o v e r th e c o n d u c t o f p r iv a t e p r o s e c u tio n s a n d
        d is c o n tin u e s u c h p r o s e c u tio n s , o r to a n y d e c is io n o f th e C l e r k to th e S e f t o n




  10    FEB     ’ 99      £ :04                                                                              0 17 1£ 4 £ £ 5 11     PAGE.011
10/02    99 WEI) 02:05 FAS 01712422511                                        JOHN GOLDRING QC                                                               @012




        M a g is t r a t e s ’ C o u r t to c h a lle n g e th e p a y m e n t o f th e o f f ic e r s ’ c o s ts o f
        p r o c e e d in g s b e fo r e th a t c o u r t f r o m c e n tr a l fu n d s , o r to a n y o t h e r d e c is io n o f
        any      c o u rt, a u th o r ity           or body             a r is in g     fro m          s u c h p r o s e c u tio n s      ; and,
        a c c o r d in g ly , to r e je c t th e a p p lic a tio n s o f M r D u c k e n f ie ld a n d M r M u r r a y fo r
        f i n a n c i a l a s s is t a n c e i n r e l a t i o n t o s u c h p r o c e e d i n g s .


        3.         in r e c o g n itio n o f th e fa c t th a t th e le g a l a d v ic e p r o v id e d to th e A u t h o r it y
        is t h a t i t r e m a i n s a r g u a b l e t h a t p o w e r e x i s t s t o p r o v i d e t h e a s s i s t a n c e r e f e r r e d
        to in       1 a n d 2 a b o v e , to t a k e s u c h a c tio n as th e C le r k a n d T r e a s u r e r , in
        c o n s u lta tio n w it h th e C h i e f C o n s ta b le , th e A u t h o r it y ’ s le g a l a d v is e r s a n d th e
        C h a ir m a n o f th e A u t h o r it y , m a y d e c id e as a p p r o p r ia te to h a v e th e d e c is io n s
        r e fe r r e d to in 1 a n d 2 r e v ie w e d b y th e H ig h C o u r t a n d to e x p e d ite s u c h r e v ie w
        w i t h a v i e w t o c l a r i f y i n g t h e A u t h o r i t y ' s p o w e r s i n t h is r e g a r d . ”


        1 5 .1     A s is e v i d e n t f r o m t h e t h i r d r e s o l u t i o n m a d e b y t h e R e s p o n d e n t , t h e
        R e s p o n d e n t a c c e p t s t h a t t h e q u e s t i o n o f w h e t h e r t h e r e is p o w e r t o g r a n t
        f i n a n c i a l a s s is t a n c e is , a t t h e v e r y le a s t , a r g u a b l e .


        1 5 .2     T h e R e s p o n d e n t d o e s n o t o p p o s e a n a p p lic a tio n f o r le a v e to a p p ly f o r
        ju d ic ia l r e v ie w -


        THE LA W


         16.        P u r s u a n t to s e c tio n 6 ( 1 ) o f th e P o lic e A c t 1 9 9 6 :


        “E v e ry        p o lic e     a u th o r ity       e s ta b lis h e d u n d e r s e c tio n              3 s h a ll s e c u re      th e
        m a i n t e n a n c e o f a n e f f i c i e n t a n d e f f e c t i v e p o l i c e f o r c e f o r it s a r e a . ”


         17.        P u r s u a n t to s e c tio n 1 1 1 ( 1 ) o f th e L o c a l G o v e r n m e n t A c t 1 9 7 2 :


         “ W it h o u t p r e ju d ic e to a n y p o w e r s e x e r c is a b le a p a rt f r o m th is s e c tio n b u t
         s u b je c t to th e p r o v is io n s o f th is A c t , a lo c a l a u t h o r it y s h a ll h a v e p o w d e r to d o
         a n y th in g (w h e th e r o r n o t in v o lv in g th e e x p e n d itu r e , b o r r o w in g o r le n d in g o f




  10    FEB      ’ 99      2:05                                                                                    0 17 1 2 4 2 2 5 1 1     P A G E . 0 12
10/02    99 WED 02:06 FAX 01712422511                                      JOHN GOLDRING QC                                                              @013




        m o n e y o r t h e a c q u i s i t i o n o r d i s p o s a l o f a n y p r o p e r t y o r r i g h t s ) w h i c h is
        c a l c u l a t e d t o f a c i l i t a t e , o r is c o n d u c i v e o r i n c i d e n t a l t o , t h e d i s c h a r g e o f t h e i r
        fu n c tio n s .”


        18.        P u r s u a n t to t h e ir d u t y u n d e r s e c tio n 6 o f th e P o lic e A c t 1 9 9 6 , a n d its
        p r e d e c e s s o r s e c t i o n 4 o f t h e P o l i c e A c t 1 9 6 4 w h i c h is i n v e r y s i m i l a r t e r m s ,
        p o lic e a u th o r itie s n a tio n w id e h a v e as a m a tte r o f p r a c tic e o v e r m a n y d e c a d e s
        g r a n te d f in a n c ia l a s s is ta n c e to p o lic e o f f ic e r s to d e f e n d le g a l p r o c e e d in g s in
        a p p r o p r ia te c a s e s .                                                                 :


        19.        A s lo n g a g o as th e R o y a l C o m m is s io n o n th e P o lic e 1 9 6 1 - 1 9 6 2 , th e
        p r a c t i c e w h e r e b y p o l i c e o f f i c e r s w e r e g r a n t e d f i n a n c i a l assistance, w h e n
        p r o c e e d in g s w e r e b e g u n a n d n o t a fte r th e c a s e h a d b e e n h e a r d a n d d e c id e d , in
        o r d e r to m e e t a n d d e fe n d p r iv a t e p ro s e c u tio n s w a s r e c o g n is e d a n d n o
        r e c o m m e n d a tio n s w e r e m a d e to a lte r th e p r a c tic e .


        2 0 .1     T w o H o m e O f f ic e C ir c u la r s h a v e p u rp o rte d to o ffe r g u id a n c e to p o lic e
        a u t h o r it ie s in d e c id in g w h e t h e r o r n o t to o f f e r f in a n c ia l a s s is ta n c e to p o lic e
        o f f ic e r s to d e f e n d lit ig a t io n b r o u g h t a g a in s t th e m in r e s p e c t o f t h e ir c o n d u c t
        w h e n a c t i n g i n t h e c o u r s e o f t h e i r p o l i c e d u t ie s .


        2 0 .2     H o m e O f f i c e C i r c u l a r N o 7 7 / 8 7 in c l u d e s t h e f o l l o w i n g p a s s a g e s :


        " . . . A l s o a c t i n g i n p u r s u a n c e o f it s g e n e r a l s t a t u t o r y d u t y t o m a i n t a i n a n
        a d e q u a t e a n d e f f i c i e n t p o l i c e f o r c e f o r it s a r e a , t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y h a s
        d is c r e t io n to m e e t e x p e n d it u r e in c u r r e d b y o ff ic e r s in a ll k in d s o f le g a l
        p r o c e e d in g s w h e r e th e o ffic e r s h a v e a c te d in g o o d fa ith in p u rs u a n c e o f th e ir
        d u t i e s , o r t h e in t e r e s t s o f t h e f o r c e a s a w h o l e a r e i n v o l v e d . ..


                   T h e c e n tr a l p r in c ip le w h ic h s h o u ld g u id e c o n s id e r a tio n o t in d iv id u a l
        c a s e s is t h a t , w h e r e a p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y c o n s i d e r s t h a t a n o f f i c e r h a s a c t e d i n
        g o o d f a i t h i n p u r s u a n c e o f h is d u t i e s o r t h a t t h e i n t e r e s t s o f a f o r c e a s a w h o l e
        a re in v o lv e d , th e o f f ic e r s h o u ld h a v e th e s u p p o r t o f th e p o lic e a u t h o r it y to




  10    FEB      ’ 99       £ :06                                                                              0 17 1 2 4 2 2 5 1 1        PAGE. 0 1 3
10/02     99 WED 02:06 FAX 01712422511                                        JOHN GOLDRING QC                                                              ® 014




        e n s u re th a t h e h a s th e s e r v ic e s o f a l a w y e r a n d th a t h e s h o u ld n o t b e o a t o f




                  A p o l i c e o f f i c e r s h o u l d b e a b l e t o c a r r y o u t h is d u t i e s i n t h e c o n f i d e n c e
        t h a t , i f h e a c t s i n g o o d f a i t h a n d e x e r c i s e s h is j u d g m e n t r e a s o n a b l y , h i s p o l i c e
        a u th o r ity w i l l s u p p o rt h im . I f in a c ase w h e re a m e m b e r o f th e p u b lic b rin g s a
        p r o s e c u t i o n a g a i n s t a n o f f i c e r , t h e a u t h o r i t y is s a t i s f i e d t h a t t h e o f f i c e r h a s
        a c te d in th is w a y , th e a u t h o r it y s h o u ld p r o v id e o r f u n d le g a l a d v ic e a n d / o r
        re p re s e n ta tio n .”


        2 1 .3    H o m e O f f ic e C ir c u la r 4 / 1 9 9 8 in c lu d e s th e f o llo w in g p a s s a g e s :


        “ l.~      I t is i m p o r t a n t t h a t p o l i c e o f f i c e r s s h o u l d b e a b l e t o c a r r y o u t t h e i r
        d u tie s in th e c o n fid e n c e th a t t h e ir p o lic e a u th o r ity w i l l s u p p o r t th e m , i f th e y
        a c t in g o o d f a i t h a n d e x e r c i s e t h e i r j u d g m e n t r e a s o n a b l y . . . . . .


        6.         I t is f o r i n d i v i d u a l p o l i c e a u t h o r i t i e s t o d e c i d e i n                     Lhe p a r tic u la r
        c i r c u m s t a n c e s o f a c a s e , a n d o n t h e basis o f l e g a l a d v i c e , w h e t h e r t o m a k e
        f i n a n c i a l a s s is t a n c e a v a i l a b l e t o o f f i c e r s i n c r i m i n a l p r o c e e d i n g s . ”


        22.        In R v D e r b y s h ir e P o lic e A u th o r ity e x p a rte W ils o n a n d D a lto n T h e
        T im e s 8 .8 .8 9 th e D iv is io n a l C o u r t c o n s id e re d a n a p p lic a tio n f o r ju d ic ia l
        r e v ie w o f th e d e c is io n o f th e D e r b y s h ir e P o lic e A u t h o r it y , in th e e x e r c is e o f
         th e ir d is c r e tio n , n o t to p a y a n y p a r t o f th e le g a l e x p e n s e s o f t w o p o lic e o f f ic e r s
         w ith r e g a r d to a n a u d ito rs in q u ir y .                  T h e D iv is io n a l C o u r t p r o c e e d e d o n th e
         b a s is t h a t s e c t i o n 4 o f t h e P o l i c e A c t 1 9 6 4 p r o v i d e d t h e s t a t u t o i y b a s i s f o r t h e
         p a y m e n t o f m o n e y t o t h e p o l i c e o f f i c e r s w 'it h r e g a r d t o l e g a l e x p e n s e s .
         A lt h o u g h it w o u ld a p p e a r th a t th e r e w a s n o s p e c ific a r g u m e n t as to w h e t h e r
         th e A u t h o r i t y h a d p o w e r to g r a n t f in a n c ia l a s s is ta n c e , th e s o u r c e o f th e
         A u t h o r it y ’ s p o w e r w a s c o n s id e r e d b y th e C o u r t a n d n o t fo u n d w a n tin g . R a lp h
         G i b s o n L J s t a t e d t h a t “ s e c t i o n 4 o f t h e P o l i c e A c t 1 9 6 4 ,, d e f i n e s t h e d u t y o f
         t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y a n d t h e purposes f o r w h i c h t h e a u t h o r i t y m a y s p e n d t h e
         m o n e y p r o v id e d , n a m e ly , to s e c u r e th e m a in t e n a n c e o f a n a d e q u a t e a n d




  10    FEB      ’ 99      2:06                                                                                     0 17 1 2 4 2 2 5 11     P A G E . W14
10/02      99 WED 02:07 FAX 01712422511                                    JOHN GOLDRING QC                                                             ® 015




       e ffic ie n t p o lic e fo r c e ”


       23.          F u r t h e r , in W ils o n th e s ta tu s o f a H o m e O f f ic e C ir c u la r w a s c o n s id e r e d .
       T h e C o u r t r e f e r r e d to a n d e n d o r s e d w h a t w a s s a id b y S c a r m a n L J in B r i s t o l
       D is t r ic t C o u n c il v C la r k [ 1 9 7 5 ] 3 A l l E R 9 7 6 c o n c e r n in g th e s ta tu s o f H o m e
       O f f ic e C ir c u la r s to th e e ffe c t th a t th e y a re a g o o d in d ic a tio n o f th e p u rp o s e s to
       b e s e r v e d b y th e r e le v a n t s ta tu te .


       24.          B o t h H o m e O f f ic e C ir c u la r s r e c o g n is e th e im p o r ta n c e o f th e p r in c ip le
       th a t p o lic e o f f ic e r s s h o u ld b e a b le to c a r r y o u t t h e ir d u tie s in th e c o n f id e n c e
       th a t th e ir p o lic e a u th o r ity w ill s u p p o rt th e m i f th e y a c t m g o o d f a it h a n d
       e x e rc is e th e ir ju d g m e n t r e a s o n a b ly .        T h e e a r l i e r 1 9 8 7 C i r c u l a r is p l a i n l y p u t
       o n t h e b a s i s t h a t t h e r e is a p o w e r t o g r a n t f i n a n c i a l a s s is t a n c e . T h e l a t e r 1 9 9 8
       C i r c u l a r d o e s n o t s u g g e s t c h a t i t is i m p r o p e r t o e x t e n d f i n a n c i a l a s s i s t a n c e to
        o f f i c e r s f a c i n g c r i m i n a l p r o c e e d i n g s a n d s u g g e s t s t h a t t h e r e is p o w e r a n d
       ju s tific a tio n fo r d o in g so.


        25.         T h e r e a r e v e r y s t r o n g p u b l i c p o l i c y r e a s o n s as t o w h y i t s h o u l d b e o p e n
        t o a p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y t o p r o v i d e f i n a n c i a l a s s is t a n c e t o p o l i c e o f f i c e ! s f a c i n g
        lit ig a t io n , a n d m o r e s p e c if ic a lly as m th is c a s e a p r iv a t e p r o s e c u tio n , a r is in g
        o u t o f h i s o r h e r c o n d u c t a c t i n g i n t h e c o u r s e o f hi.s o r h e r p o l i c e d u t i e s .
        M u c h is a s k e d o f p o l i c e o f f i c e r s i n a c t i n g o n b e h a l f o f a F o r c e . T h e y h a v e t o
        m a k e d if f ic u lt d e c is io n s , o fte n in th e h e a t o f th e m o m e n t, w h e r e liv e s a re a t
        r is k o r in d iv id u a ls e x p o s e d to in ju r y . F u r th e r , th e y a re d a ily d e a lin g w it h th e
        u n s c r u p u lo u s a n d s itu a tio n s o f c o n f lic t .           P o lic e o ffic e r s , b y v ir tu e o f th e ir
        d u tie s , a re lia b le to h e m a d e th e s u b je c t o f litig a tio n a n d , in d e e d , lit ig a t io n
        w ith o u t p ro p e r ju s tific a tio n .           I t is e s s e n t i a l t o M T io ra lo , a n d r e c r u i t m e n t , a n d
         n e c e s s a r y i n o r d e r t o a v o i d d e f e n s i v e p o l i c i n g t h a t p o l i c e o i l s e e rs k n o w t h a t i f
         th e y m a k e m is ta k e s , o r fa c e lit ig a t io n a r is in g f r o m th e ir w o r k o n b e h a lf o f th e
         F o r c e th a t th e y w ill r e c e iv e fin a n c ia l s u p p o rt w h e re th e y h a v e a c te d in g o o d

         fa ith .


         26           In th is c a s e th e f o r m e r p o lic e o f f ic e r s la c e a p r iv a te p r o s e c u tio n w h i c h




  10     FEB        ’ 99        07                                                                            0 17 1 £ 4 £ 2 2 5 1 1     PAGE . 0 1 5
10 ■'02 ’99 WED_ 02:07 FAX 01712422511                                     JOHN GOLDRING QC                                                                      @016




       is b r o u g h t i n t h e n a m e o f a s o l i c i t o r w h o is s a i d t o r e p r e s e n t t h e H F S G .                    On
       s o r ^ t h r e e ) o c c a s i o n s th e D P P h a s d e c lin e d to p r o s e c u te th e s e o f f ic e r s .                 T h is
       m u s t b e o n th e b a s is th a t th e p r o s p e c ts o f s u c c e s s d o n o t j u s t i f y a p r o s e c u t io n .
       Y e t t h e p r i v a t e p r o s e c u t o r is s u b j e c t t o n o s u c h r e s t r a i n t s a n d t h e p r o s e c u t i o n
       c o n t i n u e s . I t is c o n t e n d e d t h a t t h e p u b l i c p o l i c y i n t e r e s t i n p r o v i d i n g f i n a n c i a l
       a s s is t a n c e t o o f f i c e r s w h o f a c e p r o s e c u t i o n s w h e r e t h e r e is n o r e a l i s t i c p r o s p e c t

       o f su ccess a re o v e rw h e lm in g .                                                              L     f f l -


       27.         I n s u m m a r y , i t is c o n t e n d e d t h a t t h e R e s p o n d e n t h a s p o w e r a r i s i n g f r o m
       s e c t i o n 6 o f t h e P o l i c e A c t 1 9 9 6 t o g r a n t f i n a n c i a l a s s is t a n c e , w h i c h h a s b e e n
       r e c o g n i s e d i n t w o H o m e O f f i c e C i r c u l a r s a n d b y t h e D i v i s i o n a l C o u r t in.

       W ilson.


       28          A t th e P o lic e A u t h o r it y m e e tin g o n 5 th F e b r u a r y 1 9 9 9 th o s e a c tin g fo i
       th e R e s p o n d e n t in d ic a te d th a t th e y c o n s id e r e d t h a t :


        (a )       E v e n i f th e R e s p o n d e n t h a d p o w e r to g r a n t f in a n c ia l a s s is ta n c e to
        D u c k e n f i e l d a n d M u r r a y t o d e f e n d t h e p r i v a t e p r o s e c u t i o n , i t w a s l i m i t e d to
        m e e t i n g c o s t s n o t r e c o v e r e d a t t h e e n d o i t h e p r o c e e d in g s .


        (b )        T h e g r a n t o f f in a n c ia l a s s is ta n c e w a s d e p e n d e n t u p o n th e f o r m e r p o lic e
        o ffic e r s e x h a u s tin g a lte r n a tiv e s o u rc e s o f fu n d in g in c lu d in g le g a l a id .


        29.         I t is c o n t e n d e d t h a t t h e p o w e r a r i s i n g f r o m s e c t i o n 6 o f t h e P o l i c e A c t
         1 9 9 6 t o p r o v i d e f i n a n c i a l a s s i s t a n c e is n e i t h e r e x p r e s s l y n o r i m p l i e d l y f e t t e r e d
        in th e m a n n e r s u g g e s te d a n d th a t a n y s u c h c o n d itio n s a re in c o n s is te n t w it h th e
         d u ty o f th e R e s p o n d e n t to m a in ta in a n e ffic ie n t a n d e ffe c tiv e p o h c e fo r c e .


         3 0 .1      O n 5 th F e b r u a r y 1 9 9 9 th e R e s p o n d e n t re s o lv e d th a t it d id n o t h a v e
         p o w e r to g r a n t f in a n c ia l a s s is ta n c e to th e f o r m e r p o lic e o f f ic e r s s o as to a l l o w
         th e m to s e e k ju d ic ia l r e v ie w o f th e D P P 's d e c is io n n o t to in t e r v e n e in th e

         p r iv a te p r o s e c u tio n .




  10   FEB        ’ 39    2:07                                                                                   0 1 r‘ 1 £ 4   £5 11       Fl f i u b - L11 b
10/02     99 WED 02:08 FAX 01712422511                                      JOHN GOLDRING QC                                                           @01




        3 0 .2     I t is c o n t e n d e d t h a t t h e R e s p o n d e n t h a s p o w e r t o g r a n t f i n a n c i a l
        a s s is t a n c e t o p o l i c e o f f i c e r s f a c i n g l i t i g a t i o n a s a r e s u l t o f its d u t y p u r s u a n t t o
        s e c tio n 6 o f th e P o lic e A c t 1 9 9 6 to m a in t a in a h j^ e f f e c t iv e a n d e f f ic ie n t p o lic e
        fo r c e . In th e e v e n t th a t th e R e s p o n d e n t h a s p o w e r to g r a n t f in a n c ia l a s s is ta n c e
        t o a p o l i c e o f f i c e r f a c i n g a p r i v a t e p r o s e c u t i o n , s u c h a s s is t a n c e c a n n o t p r o p e r l y
        b e s p e c i f i c a l l y l i m i t e d t o s i m p l y d e f e n d i n g t h e p r i v a t e p r o s e c u t i o n a n d to
        e x c lu d e th e s o r t o f s te p s w h ic h a le g a lly a id e d d e f e n d a n t in c r im in a l
        p r o c e e d in g s w o u ld p r o p e r ly ta k e o n le g a l a d v ic e e x te n d in g b e y o n d th e s p e c ific
        c r im in a l ju r is d ic tio n .


        31,       I n th e lig h t o f th e a b o v e , th e A p p lic a n t c o n te n d s th a t th e R e s p o n d e n t w a s
        w r o n g i n l a w i n r e s o l v i n g t h a t i t h a d n o p o w e r t o p r o v i d e f i n a n c i a l a s s is t a n c e
        to th e f o r m e r o f fic e r s b o th w it h r e g a r d to d e fe n d in g th e c r im in a l p r o s e c u tio n
        a n d in re s p e c t o f a n y ju d ic ia l r e v ie w a p p lic a tio n a ris in g th e r e fr o m .


        E X P E D IT IO N


        32.       G i v e n ( a ) t h e p r o p o s e d c o m m i t t a l d a t e o f 1 9 t h A p r i l 1 .9 9 9 ( b ) t h e t i g h t
        t i m e t a b l e i m p o s e d u p o n t h e p a r t i e s in t h e r u n u p t o t h e c o m m i t t a l d a t e ( c ) t h a t
        th o s e a c t in g f o r D u c k e n f ie ld a n d M u r r a y s e e k to a p p ly f o r j u d i c i a l r e v i e w o f
        th e D P P ’ s d e c is io n n o t to in t e r v e n e in th e p r iv a t e p r o s e c u t io n ( d ) t h a t i f th e
        f o r m e r o f f i c e r s a r e t o b e w i t h o u t f i n a n c i a l a s s is t a n c e f r o m t h e R e s p o n d e n t i n
        d e f e n d in g th e p r iv a t e p r o s e c u tio n th e y n e e d to s e e k fu n d s f r o m e ls e w h e r e ( e )
        th e f o r m e r o ffic e r s c u r r e n tly f in d th e m s e lv e s s u d d e n ly w it h o u t a n y s o u rc e o f
        f i n a n c i a l a s s i s t a n c e t o d e f e n d t h e p r i v a t e p r o s e c u t i o n , t h is a p p l i c a t i o n m u s t b e
        h e a r d a n d d e te r m in e d as a m a tte r o f e x tre m e u rg e n c y .


        33.        I t is r e c o g n i s e d b y b o t h t h e A p p l i c a n t a n d t h e R e s p o n d e n t t h a t t h i s
        a p p lic a tio n m u s t b e d e te r m in e d as a m a tte r o f e x tre m e u rg e n c y .


        34.        B o th D a v id D u c k e n fie ld a n d B e rn a rd M u r r a y a re c u r r e n tly r e c e iv in g
        m e d ic a l tr e a tm e n t as a r e s u lt o f w h a t o c c u r r e d a t d ie H ills b o r o u g h S ta d iu m .
        T h u s f a r , t h e y h a v e a c t e d in t h e e x p e c t a t i o n i h a i t h e R e s p o n d e n t w i l l s u p p o r t




  10    FEB      ’ 99      £ : 08                                                                               01712422511                 PAGE.017
10/02 '99 WED 02:08 FAX 01712422511                                       JOHN GOLDRING QC                                                        @018




         th e m f in a n c ia lly in d e f e n d in g th e p r iv a t e p ro s e c u tio n . T h e y n e e d to k n o w as
         s o o n a s e v e r p o s s i b l e w h e t h e r t h e y c a n c o n t i n u e to r e c e i v e f i n a n c i a l a s s is t a n c e
         f r o m th e R e s p o n d e n t, o r w h e t h e r th e y w i l l h a v e to tr y to f in d fu n d s f r o m
         e ls e w h e re .


                                                                                                                L O U IS E V A R T Y




#




    10   FEB     ’ 99        2:08                                                                           0 1 7 1 2 4 £ £ 51 1       PAGE.01S
