           Pdlice Constable 1^?8

           Vfoodseata Police Station,
           Sheffield.Tel 500200,

           D Group.


           At 8.*t5am on Saturday the 15th of April 1989,1 commenced duty at Woodseats Police
Station in order to perform duties at Hillsborough Football ground regarding the F.A.Cup
Semi Final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.At this time I was in full Police Umforn
           Shortly after my arrival at Wbodseats I was conveyed together with numerous other
Officers to the ground by a South Yorks Passenger transport bus arriving there approximately

9 .30am the same date.
           Once at the ground I made my way to the North Stand in preparation for a briefing
by senior Officers.At this time I was with my designated serial number 9 which was supervise
bv Inspector Booth and P.S.Jessop both of Woodseats Police Station.
•          At 9.45am the briefing took place and various speeches were made by Senior Officer*

including Chief Superintendent ttickenfield.
           We were informed that all Officers were expected to be in their various positions
by 11.15am in order to cimmence duties as oultined in the Operational Order*
            All serials were provided with a packed meal and approximately 11.00a.m.our serial
made it's way to the Spion Kop where we received a further briefing from Supt. Green wood.
            During this breifing Mr.Greenwood advised us on our duties for the day and also
outlined the various locations where trouble between rival fans were expected.We were told
that should any Liverpool fans stray into the Kop area allocated to Nottingham Forest
supporters they should be ushered to a taped off area to one side of the kop near to the

North Stand where they would be Policed accordingly.
            All Officers present then received a briefing from .Inspector Booth who oultined
1 0 actual duties we were to carry out i.e.Phase 1 - Penistone Road Turnstiles to be Policec
outside the g r o u n d . All/majority of fans to be searched prior to entry to the ground and any
prohibited articles e.g.Banners,Bottles and alcohol were to be seized.
            Phase 2 -During the match serial 9 were to Police entrance Z to the Spion Kop.Mr.
Booth pointed out the fact that the majority of the fans would be in good spirits and that
should any problems arrive we were to Police the area as a serial not as individuals and ce

protect the safety of Officers at all times.
            Phase 3 - After the match had finished we were to make our way into Fenxstone m a d
and assist in boarding Nottingham Forest fans onto Football Special buses bound for the city

 centre.
            At 11.15am I commenced my phase 1 duties in company with P.C.i^Sy Sutcliffe at
 turnstile bB/bS in Penistone Road.The turnstiles in question did not open to the public
until 12.00 midday by which time there was a steady flow of Nottingham Forest fans arriving

 the ground.
            Throughout the next     hours or so P.C.Sutcliffe and myself Policed the turnstile
        and during that tire searched nu^roue Nottingham Forest supporter* for prohibited

articles.We both took possession of numerous items including cans of Soft
air horns.sticks which had         been attached to various banners and a large quantity of
crates that fans had brought to        stand on during the match.'H.ese items .ere placed in a
s.,11 store within the ground as previously arranged and mentioned during the briefings.
         Whilst Policing the turnstiles I became aware of a person selling programmes throng
an open concertina gate situated some 5 - 10 yards away from where I was stood.The person
in question was stood inside the ground and selling the programmes to persons in Penistone

load through the gate which was opened 2 feet or so.                             .
       This practice was pointed out to my Supervisory Officers and Mr .Booth advise             e

programme seller accordingly and the gate was closed*
       On several occasion whilst stood in Penistone road a large crowd of supporters
 arrived at our turnstile and on each of these occasions I could smell intoxicants in the a
 which suggested to me the the supporters had been drinking.Ihe majority of these people w,


# S r C h e L r t l y before the   kick off approx 2.<.5p» I noticed that P.C.Sutcliffe -as held in
 conversation with two men         near to the turnstile.On   approaching them I could see that one
 of the men was under the influence of alcohol showing the usual signs of a drunken man
 his eyes were glased.he was unsteady on his feet andhe was having difficulty m          peaking.
 The man in his company had also been drinking but was more composed in his actions.
          I would describe the drunken man as i White male approx bO yrs old,5' 8” tall,
 medium build with dark collar length hair and a dark moustache.Be was wearing a jumper an.
  jeans.His friend was a white male approx 35 yrs old with sandy coloured hair and moustac u
          The two men were advised that they were not about to gain entry to the groun         an
  if they made attempts to do so they would be arrested,Both men became arguementative and
  abusive towards us and told us of their intentions to make a formal complaint about us.
           I told the men it was their right to complain if they so wished and furnished them

% t h   our collar numbers which I wrote down on a piece of paper*
           Both men decided to stand at the side of us near to the turnstile where they debat,

  on what to do.
         At this time I noticed a white male who I would describe as 20 - 25 yrs o
  5 '8" tall medium build wearing denim jeans and a brown leather bomber jacket.He had light
  brown hair cut in a 'bob' style and was wearing black framed sunglasses.As he walked to.a
  me along Penistone Boad fro. the direction of the city centre he approached a large crowd
  of supporters that had congregated nearby.He was immediately surrounded by these people
  and I saw pieces of paper change hands including money. I formed the opinion that this man
  was selling tickets and this was confirned when I heard one of the group shout,"Have you
  got any more tickets.''lhe seller w       Ked off in the same direction he had come towards         e
   South Stands.X saw this man from a distance on two further occasion, and each time he was

   surrounded by youths.
          At 3.00pm I heard a roar from the crowd and assumed that the game had commenced. I

   remained where I was as I had been made aware that the turnstiles on Penistone road
          were to be left open until half time so that late coiners could gain entry.Ihis
information was passed to me by the ticket collector on the turnstile®
          Approximately 3,05pm I was stood near to P.S.Jessop when I heard traffic on his
personal radio to suggest.that something was happening in the ground.1 could not make out

what was said as I was not in possession of a radio myself.
          Minutes later I heard a message over the tannoy system in the ground requesting
Liverpool fans to clear the pitch.At this point we were instructed by P.S.Jeesop that we
were required inside the ground.P.C.Sutcliffe immediately ran through the nearby concertin.
gate and into the groundton doing so I shouted to the turnstile operator to close the

turnstile doors.Biis they did without question.
          Once in the ground we made our way through various passage ways to entrance Z on
the kop,From there I made my way along the front of the kop and through a gate which lead

us onto the pitch.
          As I ran onto the pitch I immediately noticed that there were no players or officii
R e s e n t . I looked down towards the Leppings lane stand and could see numerous spectators
on the pitch itself. I could see a commotion taking place including Police Officers and
at this point though that there was a fight taking place between fans.
          The majority of the people on the pitch were near to the goal mouth and I could
 see numerous fans actually climbing over the perimeter fence from the stands.
           I ran the full length of the pitch and came face to face with what I can only
 describe as shear horror.l approached the Lepping lane end slightly to the left of the
 goal mouth near to gate number 3 on the stands.I ran up to the perimeter fence and froze
 with shock at what I saw.My first views were that of a young girl approximately 20 yrs old
 with long dark permed hair.Her face and body were pressed hard against the perimeter fence.
 Her eyes were open and staring into space her mouth was open and she had a look of       shear

 shock.
          My eyes made their way along the front of the fehcing.The next person I saw was a
% e y   haired man in his 60's.He was blue in the face his eyes were closed and mouth open hi:
 body was lifeless,he was obviously dead.At the side of him was a young man approx 20 yrs o
 with the same appearance he was covered in vomit.Bodies were entwined throughout the lengti
 of the fencing and piled on top of each other some four or five high.My mind was blocked
 out of hearing anything I was not aware of what was being said or shouted around me.
          People were climbing over bodies to get over the fence others were struggling to ge
 free from the crush. There were numerous young people crushed against      the front of the
 fence and were obviously fighting for breath. I realised that people were     dying in front of
 me but 1 couldn't do anything for them,I couldn’t get to them,I couldn't move the fence.
          There was obvioulsy utter chaos taking place all around me but I wasn’t aware of th
 at the time.I remember seeing my brother in law another serving Police Officer(Insp.Harvey
 who looked at me and ssid words to the effect ‘Their dying in there."
          These initial sights and shocks took a few seconds to sink in    and after hearing
 Inspector Harvey's statement my instincts took over.I climbed on to the top of the
r
        perimeter fence and began to pull people to safety.I carried them on to the pitch
      and placed them on the floor where other Officers were administering first aid.I recall
      carrying two men to safety who were conscious but fighting    for air.Ishouted   at them

      to breath deeply to get oxygen into their lungs*
        I went back to the fence and it was at this point I became aware of a roan in the
      middle of the crush.He was a Negro male approx 25 yrs old     in a leather bomber   jacket.
        He was up to his waist in bodies and people and literally taking hold of people and
      throwing them over the fence where myself and other Officers carried them to the safety

     of the pitch.
        At one point I saw him give one person the kiss of    lifebefore lifting   him to safety.
      If there were any heros on that day he was one.He had total disregard for his own safety

     and must have saved numerous lives on the day®
         As 1 helped to get people over the fence the pile of people and bodies grew smaller.
      1 stood on the perimeter fence leaning over into the compound.1 held on with my hips and
     legs and reached down to a youth who was trapped at the waist.l managed to get told
    ^fais finger tips as did another Officer beside me.He looked at us with desperation on his
      face.I couldn’t get a good enough grip on him to pull him to safety.His body was trapped,
      1 could see that he was able to breath alright and after a few seconds had to make th®
      decision to leave him until I was in a position to get him out to safety.I knew 1 couldn’
      remain there holding his hand forever whilst other people needed assistance.! still don't

      know what happened to this youth®
         After 1 had let go of his hand 1 noticed that gate    number 3 nearby was open®I could
      see numerous bodies trapped in the entrance.The situation was similar to an egg timer
      that was blocked.There were hundreds of grains of sand trying to get through a small

      opening but due to the shear quantity the exit was blocked.
         There were numerous Police Officers in the vipcinity of the gate including Chief
      Superintendent Nesbit.He was at the entrance to the gate and eventually people were
      dragged to safety through the gate.I assisted in this operation and formed part of two
    • ^ i n e s of Officers at the exit gate that were passing people and bodies onto the pitch
      where emergency serfices were waiting to give first aid®
         I recall dragging a man from the gate onto the pitch,he was heavily built and must
      have weighed in excess of 20 stone.I dragged him onto the pitch with the assistance of
      another Officer and placed him on the grass to the left of the goal mouth near to the
      South Stand.As we placed him on the ground I felt objects hitting my body.At first I
      couldn't comprehend what was happening but then realised that some one from the Leppings
      Lane endlStand)was throwing coins at us.I couldn't believe this but shrugged it off and

      returned to gate 3.                                                        t  +
         tfhen all of the people had been removed from the compound 1 assisted in carrying the
      dead and injured to the gym area on the bill boards that had been pulled down from the

      edge of the pitch.
         I returned to the Leppings Lane end by which time the disaster had run it's course «nc
       1 there joined fellow Officers and Liverpool supporters who were stood in disbelief at
      what had happended.People were coming round with drinks of wbter for everyone but no m tl
how much you drank your mouth remained dry.     When the incident was all over I recall looking
at my w'atc’h and saw that the time was 4.45 pm, ironically the time the match would have
finished.
I made tracks to find the rest of my serial and eventually we all congregated on the halfway
line.     I have never seen so many bobbies crying or so deeply shocked by what had happened
that afternoon and hope that I will not have to experience such an incident again in my
life.
My serial was eventually deployed into Penistone Road to board the remaining fans on the
buses.     I couldn't help with these duties, it didn't seem important anymore.        My mind was
full of pictures of what I had experienced.     I just sat on the front of a car until we were
stood down by ground control.     The pictures will be in my mind for a long time to come.
We were eventually conveyed back to Woodseats Police Station by bus and finished duty at
6.45 pm that date.
My general observations on the day in relation to the fans and policing of the event are as
follows:
I        mainly involved with the policing of the turnstiles open to Nottingham Forest fans
prior to the match.     I found them to be well behaved on the whole and in good spirits, if
anything, I would say that they were quiet for such an occasion.      It seemed to be a nice
family day out for many who attended.
There were no problems at the Penistone Road end of the ground and everything appeared to
run smoothly and according to plan.
My observations at the scene of the disaster are that I found the safe Liverpool fans to be
totally unco-operative throughout the incident.     Officers were continuously requesting fans
to move back from the fencing but were met with abuse and total disregard for what was
happening.
Fans that had made their way onto the pitch also hampered the rescue attempts by officers
trying to get the dead and injured onto the pitch.     They also refused to move out of the way
when requested and continuously shouted     abuse at the emergency services present.      As Ihave
a l W outlined I was hit by    coins thrown from the Leppings Lane Stand.
I found that in spite of the totally unexpected incident and impossible circumstances all
officers present carried out their duties to the best of their abilities.           Mr Nesbit took
command of the situation at gate number three and officers worked together to rescue the
people from the stand and administer first aid.     The situation at the Leppings Lane end
dictated the number of officers that were able to assist at what transpired to be a confined
area.     Too many officers at that location would have only hampered the situation.
I discovered at the end of     the incident that the negro in the Stand   sub   outlined earlier was
in fact an off duty Police     Officer from the Metropolitan Police Force, and deserves
recognition for his brave efforts.



                                                                                                     *
