                                                                                                  MIR.15
               j    Sheffield Archives Ref: f c t

OTHEr'pOCN IM F N T F O R M                             D ate anrl tim e raised   ^   | $ 3   ^                  Num ber
                                                                                                  n m "7-S fcj
T it.. C o P U l                                i o         C fto L        f o
           1\ _ J
(Include source and any document number if relevant)                                                                           i/ v / w £ j& £ £ £ .


Receiver's instructions - urgent action -^Ye^/No                            +&V o                                                  Receiver
t(s t~              tf-     /vr-^c—________
                                                                                                                                 3 n>3 2 >
Document registered/irtdex od-as indicated          f                                                                            /< S T
                                                                                                                               <S/bQ>
No(s) of actions raised           I^
                                                                                                                               Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions
                                                                                                                               Ssd-i
                                                                                                                                     Indexer
Indexed as indicated
                                                                                                                                  % 1l ?
No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                               O/M         SIO
Examined - further action to be taken



                                                                                                           E     l
                                                                                                                                     Indexer
Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                                                                                           1
                                                                  Wavertree,
                                                                  Liverpool
                                                      f\

                                       cL                         Ifith April, 1989




 Dear Sir,

 I am writing to you regarding the disaster at Sheffield’s Hillsborough stadium
 which I witnessed yesterday.

After arriving at the ground at approximately 2.20 p.m. we walked down towards
 the Nor In bt*nd ^ t r a n c e .   As we approached this entrance it soon became apparent
that: there      a large amount of people all trying to gain entrance to different
parti, ol the ground through one main gate.          There was no organised queue for any
one ol the turnstiles.          1'he only way to gain entrance was to join the back of the
group ol lane and to wait until people" in front of you managed to get through into
ground.    Inevitably, there was considerable crushing at this point with the
organisation and policing of the turnstiles nowhere near as good as last year when
we were ail able to get in comfortably and safely. As we finally reached the
 uurnstile, I was pushed into the police officer manning this particular turnstile.
At, this point, he turned to his colleague at the next pp.te and asked if he knew
where the Sergeant was.           It was as if the police on th* gates already knew that
ail was not as it should have been. M o t h e r problem seem.’d to be that actually
getting through the turnstiles seemed to take longer than usual which had the                   *
effect of increasing the number of people waiting to get In.

On taking our seats in the North Stand,    I glanced over towards the Leppings Lane
end where the Liverpool supporters were    gathering. -It was immediately apparent
that the centre section behind the goal    was extremely full whereas the two ends
pi the enclosure, at either side of trw    goal, seemed to be comparatively empty.,-'''' ■*"”
Xn fact, 1 can remember pointing out to    the people I was with how empty the sides •••'•
seemed.                                                     .

At 3.00 p.m. the game started.   Some five minutes into the game, the play was in
the Liverpool half c t the pitch and we could see supporters beginning to spill out
of the terracing. At first we thought it was the type of spillage which often
happens at big football matches.   Soon though, supporters started running onto the
pitch to tell the players what was happening and that was when a police officer
ran onto the pitch to ask the referee i.o take the players off. Even then, we all
thought that it would be a temporary stoppage.   Indeed, certain sections of the
Nottingham forest supporters began singing and chanting, not realising what was
happening.  It seemed to take a long time before supporters were able to escape
from tae affected areas.   This, in retrospect, would seem to be due to the slow
opening of the gates in front of the enclosure and the apparent lack of understanding
of the situation by the authorities.                                                "<■
    1
t




        Alter five to ten minutes, about thirty to forty police reinforcements arrived
        and inexplicably took up positions in front of the North Stand.     Even after a
        day has patiutid since this tragedy I , and many other supporters who were in the
        North M:and, am unable to understand the reason behind this positioning.     Behind
        them, Liverpool supporters were ripping, up the advertising, hoardings to use as
        stretchers to carry out the dead and injured Liverpool supporters. Still the_______
        police stood there not helping. People around me in the stand were screaming at
        the police to help and yet they would not.

        Another     apparent problem during this time was the lack of public announcements
        to to a 1   the crowd what was happening.    This could b o easily have caused more
        trouble     art fans became more and, more Impatient.  In fact, it is to the credit
        of both     sets of supporters that there was no trouble at all.

        It wilt, probably be a while before the cause of this tragedy is known, but one
        suggestion that must be thought of is a re-think of the way the fans were "penned
        m " and the way that the so-called "security" fence could not be removed therefore
        trapping people and inevitably killing, them.

        In closing t^.s setter I would just like to thank the people, shops and businesses
        of She f field ’Tor allowing supporters such as itself to use their telephones to let
        our loved ones bfg-k home knew we were safe.

        1 cannot comment on the opening of the exit gate which apparently contributed to
        this disaster as I did not personally see the incident.  All the events I have
        recounted in this letter are incidents I personally witnessed.

        Nothing ixke this must ever be allowed to happen again.  In this country it always
        seems that we only ever learn from disasters. The enquiry must be used to establish
        what went wrong and why, and any recommendations must be implemented immediately.

        I hope that this letter may in some way be used to help piece together the events
        of that terrible day.

        Yours sincerely,
