 Other Docunrant Form                   Date and time raised   II Oa-
                                                                                                  Number



 Title.           V\ \ v j j s >                 .      k -fep rrt S .
 ffnctuda som a and any document number if n/w apff


 Receivers instructions urgent action Yes/No _
                                                                                                              Receiver



Document registered/jgggyftpas indicated

 No(s) of actions raised

Statement readers instructions                                                                                Statement
                                                                                                              Reader


Indexed as indicated
                                                                                                                  Indexer

No(s) of actions raised


Examined - further action to be taken
                                                                                                           0 /M             SIO




Further action no(s)                                                                                              Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document M u te r Number Form

MIR IS
                                                                         2 June 1989




THE WTLLSBQRQUGH INQUIRY - UPDATE III




The Inquiry is about to complete its third week and the South Yorkshire Police
have been giving evidence for eight days now.    The police witnesses to date
have been those senior officers who had,    for the most part, an overview of the
full sequence of events   that occurred at Hillsborough cn 15 April 1989, or
those who took critical   decisions during that afternoon. It is fair to say
that their evidence has   beer, scrutinised in great detail and vigorously cross-
examined.  It is anticipated, however, that future witnesses will not be
challenged to the same degree.   Those officers still to give evidence simply
have a piece to add to the emerging jigsaw.

It is difficult to determine who will and who will not be called to give ^
evider.ce. The list of officers which was appended to Update I, and circulated
22 Mav 1989, remains the "best guess” in terms of likely witnesses, although
some Constables in those serials represented by Sergeants cn the list will also
be called by the Inquiry.  The procedure of calling is as follows:

Treasurv Solicitors (who act as "Clerks of Court") have now considered many
statements made by South Yorkshire Police officers.   Daily they distribute
copies of several such statements to all parties represented at the Inquiry -
that is the first indication that an officer is "on notice” for future calling.
As soon as that first indication is given then the relevant officers will b£
contacted bv a member of the South Yorkshire Police Inquiry Liaison Team and
furnished with all necessary' information and assistance.

Subsequently we are warned, sometimes with only 18 hours notice, that an
officer is likely to be called on a particular day.  Obviously the officer will
be notified of this fact as soon as possible and, at this time, arrangements
will be made for transport to and from the Inquiry by staff car.

I hope that these arrangements are clear, but if any officer has a       or
perceived difficulty then he or she Is invited to contact the Liaison Team at
Force Headquarters, extension 3457.




The evidence thus far presented to the Inquiry has been extensive in both
quantity and scope.      Each day the Inquiry generates a transcript of evidence
w h i c h runs, on average, to 130 pagei.  Confronted by this volume of “ f e r i a l
the media have clearly been overwhelmed.      They are unable to report everything
and, sadly, have often opted for the simple and sensational.      For example,
"Liverpool goalkeeper saved my life" has been the sort of headline preferred by
certain news editors to the 101 other headlines that may have been run as a
 result of a particular days evidence.

 Whilst it is a fact that the Inquiry is not being conducted by the media and
 thus any headlines should be treated accordingly, it is proper ^ h i g h l i g h t
 just one newspaper item that accurately records a part of the evidence from day
                                     -       2   -




12 of the Inquiry.  This item, taken from the "Sheffield Star' dated 1 June
1989, is attached for the information of all officers: the sentiments expressed
in this particular article have been echoed by other senior officers who h a v ®
given evidence to the Inquiry.  The sentiments are precisely those with which I
would wish to be associated.




Chief Coiys t ^ Ie




D istribution:

All Chief Superintendents
Superintendent Parker, Communications & Computers
PC Middup, Police Federation
Mr Stothard, Special Constabulary Commandant
Mr Richardson, Principal Personnel Officer

(Please ensure wide circulation for the information of all officers)




                                         (
    omcers
    praised
  Supt R oger G reen­
  wood, the police chief
  who began the rescue
  bid during the Hills­
  borough Stadium disas­
  ter, th is a f te rn o o n
  passionately defended
  his o f f i c e r s a g a i n s t
  criticism.               . —
     Mr Greenwood tele the
  public inquiry into the
  tragedy that his officers
  had been "heroic"1.   __
     He said that shortly after
  kick off he realised there
  was a p ro b le m a t th e
  Leppings Lane end.
     M r G reenw ood, who
  w as th e “ g r o u n d
  c o m m a n d e r" fo r th e
  match, said he looked over
  the perimeter fence and
  realised the first three or
  four rows o f fans were
  being squashed against the
  fence. _
       • Frustration
. “ In mv view almost two-
I thirds o f that crowd were
( w a t c h i n g th e m a tc h .
I unaware o f what was going
I on at the front."
     He had sto p p ed the
I match by running on to the
f pitch to contact the referee.
| Ambulances were called . ..
    He d es c r i b e d the
 “frustration" of poiice who
 co u ld n o t rescue fans
 quickly because the gate in ■
 the perimeter fence was so .
 narrow, and “jam m ed’" '
 with the injured.
    M r Greenwood made '■
 oiear his resentm ent o f *
 criticism that some officers •
 had stood around doing '■
 nothing.                 . ■ j
        Admiration
    “ I have turned it over in •
 my mind a thousand times
 since, what could we have
 done? What more could we 1
 have done?                    j
    •’It's difficult to talk j
 about it in this room here,
 extremely difficult.’*
   “The police officers that |
 worked by the fence — I J
 have the greatest respect j
and admiration for them. •
  £ T h e heroics that they     J
performed — I have been .
told by people who were *
unconnected with either
N o ttin g h am F orest or
Li v e r p o o l t ha t t hey
deserved a medal.” • - -
   M r G reenw o od said •
some o fficers had o n ly '
