POLICE CONSTABLE DAVID CARL TRANTER 492.          ATTERCLIFFE SUB DIVISION 'B' GROUP.

On Satruday 15 April 1989 I was on duty from 8 am and due to finish at around

8pm.   I came on duty at Attercliffe Police Station at 8am and attended a

briefing at West Bar Police Station regarding the football match that day

between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.

At 10am I attended at Midland Train Station in Sheffield in company with

PoliceConstable 1790 Craighill.         We were supervising fans alighting from the

football   specials   and    service     trains,    they     were     then   being    taken    to

Hillsborough by double decked buses.             Police Constable Craighill and myself

travelled on one of these buses to Hillsborough at around 1.30pm.                            After

arriving   at   Hillsborough    our    serial    lead   by   Police    Sergeant      840    Wright

assembled near to the police room.              We were to be a reserve serial at the

ground.

At about   2.50pm we were directed by Police Sergeant Wright to go to the

Leppings Lane End of the ground as they was seme kind of trouble.                          We went

along the back of the North Stand and into the area behind the turnstiles at

the Leppings Lane End, there I saw an Inspector I do not know who he was.                     He

was looking through the glass in the sliding metal gates to the right of the

turnstiles as viewed frcm the back.         He seemed to be contemplating opening the

gates, this appeared to be as there was a large crowd gathered outside and

people that were ccming through the turnstiles were saying things                     like     Its

murder out there, someone will get killed."             I took that to mean that people

were getting crushed.       I looked through the glass in the doors and I could see

that there was a large crowd of people behind the gates, someone mentioned that

if the gates were opened we would get trampled in the rush.                     The Inspector

iseemed to have decided against opening the gates.

I then went to the turnstiles at the left hand end and above those turnstiles I

could see seme youths climbing over the railings and onto the roof of the

turnstiles.     These were being helped over by a            police Inspector who was also

on the roof.     I helped a few youths down frcm the roof and then my attention

was drawn to a man on the outside of one of the turnstiles.                  He was bent over
the turnstiles and asked for help.      He was obviously being pressed against the

turnstile by the      crowd outside.   The turnstile would not turn because of the

pressure on it and I kicked the turnstile back after telling the man what I was

going to do.     The turnstile turned and the man fell towards me.   I ascertained

that he was uninjured.      I took him to one side and told him to take it steady

until he got his wind back.

I continued helping people through the turnstiles who were having the same

problem and I could see that a lot of people were simply holding their tickets

in the air in the rush they were not having their tickets taken frcm them.         At

this time there were two or three other PC's around me, but who I do not know

who they were.

As   the   pressure   from the crowd eased and the turnstiles began operating

properly I moved back from the turnstiles.      I then became aware that there was

a lot of people stood in the area behind the turnstiles and around the caravan

type trailer frcm which programmes were being sold.        Someone mentioned to me

that a gate to my left was now clear if I wanted to eject anyone.       I think it

was a steward who said this to me.

I then became aware of Police Sergeant Wright and others from my serial running
                                            GtO
towards the South Stand, I was beckoned to*with them and I followed as they

appeared to be attending something important.       We went around the side of the

stand and onto the perimeter of the pitch.        This was only possible by going

through a locked gate which we were stood at for around 45 seconds to one

minute.     It was eventually opened by a steward.     I went around the perimeter

track to face the barriers behind the goal mouth at the Lappings Lane End.          I

could see a small gate in the barriers, I think it was open at the time.            I

was going to go through this gate which goes into the left hand pen as viewed

frcm the pitch.       I was unable to do this at first due to fans crowding to see

what was happening in the centre pen.       Sane of the crowd were brought out onto

the pitch and others moved back to allow us in.      When I got in I went to the
dividing fence between the left hand pen and the centre pen.     This fence was

about 6 feet high with spikes on the top.   I saw at the other side of the fence

people pressed very close to it.    I struggled to help several people over the

fence sane of these were injured and others appeared to be just 'winded'.      I

can remember one white haired man who was about 60-70 years old he looked very

bad.   It took some time to get him over the fence and when we had I took him to

one side, loosened his clothing and sat him down.        After taking sane deep

breaths he appeared to cone round slightly.    I told him to keep sat down for a

while and he said he was feeling better.

Sane of the fans were a great help but I can remember being spat at and being

verbally abused several times.     I can also remember being either kicked or

thumped in the back on a couple of occasions.      After helping several people

over I would say about 10 to 15 people I became aware of a large pile of people

about 4 to 5 feet deep at the other side of the fence.   Quite a number of these

were passed over the fence by police officers and civilians.      I can remember

checking for the pulse on a few of them whilst we were carrying them.      I was

aware of other police officers around me doing the same thing that I was and

helping people over and carrying them away.     I tried to administer mouth to

mouth resuscitation onto sane of them that we were carrying away but it was

awkward whilst trying to carry them as well.

Most of the injured and bodies that I helped carry were taken to the small gate

that I had come through.    I can remember a Sergeant who was wearing a yellow

anorak and was not from the South Yorkshire Police, he appeared to be handling

a lot of the injured and the bodies that we passed through the small gate.     I

think he was taking them onto the pitch somewhere.    I think I helped to remove

around 10 or 12 bodies and when it appeared that they had all gone or were

being attended to I came back out of the pitch.      I cannot describe very well

any of the bodies that I was involved with, but I think that almost all of them

were male.   Some of them being very heavily built with ages varying fran around
16 years to around 50 years.

When I had returned onto the pitch I began to generally help moving people and

trying to assist the doctors and ambulance men.   I cannot remember much of what

happened when I was back out on the pitch.

The next thing I can remember is going with the rest of our serial out of the

ground and walking up Penistone Road to a spot where the buses were parked to

take the fans back to the Midland Station. Not many people used these buses and

we eventually went back into the ground and to the North Stand where a de-brief

was due to take place.

When I was in the area behind the turnstiles I was aware of quite a few youths

either entering the ground with cans of alcohol or smelling of drink but due to

the situation these were not ejected frcm the ground.   I was not aware that any

gate or doorway into the ground had been opened until after the incident had

finished.




               ?         2_,
