                     SOUTH         YORKSHIRE      POI/ICH



         // ?
Roger'PEARSON       D.C. 903



I am a Detective Constable in the South Yorkshire Police at present stationed
at Main Street Police Office, Rotherham.




At 8,30 am   011   Saturday 15th April 19”9i I cotuiaenwuu dulj- at 2-Ulii S ' U P o l i c e
Office. At this time I war. in Full Police uniform and was subsequently transported
to the Hillsborough football ground by coach arriving there approximately
9•15ara that date# I there stayed for the pre match briefing and left the ground
about 10,55am. Being a member of seriel ^0 under the immediate supervision of
Sgt Cloke and the overall supervision of Detective Inspector MEEK, I had duties
parking and supervising the unloading of Liverpool supporters coaches on
Halifax Eoad/Penistone Road North.




On leaving the ground, I walked with Detective Constable DAVIS and other officers
of seriel ^0 to the top of Halifax Road where, on our arrival at approximately
11.15am, I saw that one coach was already parked at the end of the dual
carriageway. From then on, throughout the morning, coaches arrived in -..os wrd two
They were each parked immediately behind the preceding coach and this way we
worked our way back down Halifax Road towards Hillsborough. As loaded coaches arri’
one of our seriel would board the coach, advice the fauu ad t
banners and the talcing of alcohol into the ground and also to which gate they
should enter the ground. It soon became apparent that a large number of coaches
were arriving empty of fans, having first unloaded near to the ground before
arriving on Halifax Road to park. A number of coaches also arrived bearing
stickers on the windscreen showing that they had been searched              prxox- ou eiiC,erxiig
City limits.




At approximately 3»00pm that date we were instructed by Detective Inspector MEEK
to make our way to Claywheels lane fora meal. We were by this time, on Penistone R<
outside the GATE INN, and the crowds had gone. For about one half hour prior
to this , large crowds had been making their way towards the ground. Most had
been in good spirits and obviously in anticipation of having a good time,
although quite a number were carrying cans of beer and larger and had to be remindc
of the ban on alcohol inside the ground.
                                                                                  So°\
                        -    2   -




On entering Claywheels Lane we were joined by other seriels who were also
making their w a y for a meal. At this time A message was received by
Detective Inspector CHARLES to the effect that all unemployed officers were to
make their way to the Leppings Lane Gate# This uv did and on arriving at the
junction of Vere Road and Leppings Lane we were lined up in seriels. At this tin’
I saw that Sgt Cloke was not present, neither was Dol. Meek, but it wan stated
that D.I.Meek had gone on ahead to see wliat the trouble was. V/e w ere then
sent to the Leppings Lane gate where we v/ere again lined up in seriels. A few
moments later, we were ordered into the ground, thinking that some sort of crowd
trouble was talcing place. On entering the ground I saw a crowd of fans 'milling'
about round the entrance to the tunnel leading to the playing area. On entering
crowd I saw two bodies lying on the ground. They were obviously dead. We formed
a ring and dispursed the crowd from around the bodies and at this time, a
Police Constable emerged from the tunnel and shouted for assistance. I went up
the tunnel   aware that other officers were following me# There were quite a numl
of people in the tunnel, shouting abuse and in an agresnive demeanour. On
leaving the tunnel I could not see any sign of crowd disturbance but was
directed by 'Fans' towards the front of the crowd. I forced my way through,
passing a number of people who v/ere obviously distresed, and saw a number of
injured people. I was at this time still looking for fighting and crowd
trouble. On nearing the front of the crov/'! I saw wnat couldoniy oe described as
a heap of bodies piled up, against the front fence. Some of the people v/ere stil
moving but the majority were obviously dead.        I started to dis entangle the bodi
and as I managed to get one free, I passed        it over to other officers and
members of the public       to transport towards the rear. All this time I was aware
of the hostility of the fans in the upper tier. Because of the slow progress
of getting the bodies       away, I assisted two other officers in ripping away the
perimeter fence. Once       this was done, v/e v/ere able to convey the dead and injured
onto the flaying area. I am not aware how many dead and injured I moved, but
I recall a young man and at least two female victims. I stayed there until the
last 'body' was moved and then stayed in the compound. At this time, still
fearing that the 'Fans' in the upper tier would overspill into the compound
that I was in, I was ordered by someone, to form a line, and face tH^ttrowU
This I did. When someone ordered us to link arms and face the crowd, I had
had enough. I turned my back to the crov/d and leaned on a barrier. We v/ere
later told to filter back onto the playing area, which I did, By this time
the crov/d in the upper tier was dispursing# I went onto the playing ;-m;&
ard attempted te give assistence where T ror7Id.               g^onnd wan emptied
I wali'.nd alone back towards Claywheels lane#
