* DAVID ANTHONY CUTLER
 POLICE CONSTABLE 127^
    years b|         |
 STATIONED AT Hq CCLO (ext.3362)



 On Saturday 15 April 1 989 , I was on duty in full uniform for the F.A. Semi Final
 Nottingham Forest V Liverpool. I commenced duty at 8am that date parading at
 West Bar Police Station.


 I was assigned to SERIAL 1^ under the supervision of PS 690 Hall, our duties
 were outlined as 'busing' of fans from Midland Railway Station to the Hillsborough
 Football Ground. The briefing was held at 9am and the duties at Midland Railv^.y
 Station commenced at about 11am.


 PS Hall, SERIAL 1^, including myself were engaged on the duties of placing the
 arriving fans from the trains on to buses to be taken straight to the ground and
 there were no incidents, the fans being in a good mood. Several of the serial
 accompanied the fans on the buses to the Football Ground and back, but I remained
 at the stationuntil we were instructed to leave at about 2.35p®»


 At 2.i+0pm that date along with other officers of the serial I boarded one of the
  buses and we were taken to Hillsborough Football Ground via Leppings Lane. As
 we passed the Leppings Lane entrance to the ground I could see clearly from the
  top deck of the bus, a large number of fans outside the Leppings Lane entrance
  trying to get into the ground. The crowd was squashed up against the inner wall
  to the ground and I saw a Policeman on horseback trying to get the oi-owa DaCK.
 The small number of officers on duty at this entrance were far outnumbered by the
 fans and had an impossible task in trying to control the numbers. The fans were
 climbing on walls and anything they could find in attempts to gain entrance to
  the ground. The fans were in a wedge stretching from the inner wall of the ground
 right out and into the Leppings Lane. The time of this sighting would have been aboi

 2 .5 0 pm.


 The bus we were on then went into Penistone Road, the main entrance to the ground,
 were there were only a handful of fans still outside the gates. We then went into tl
 ground by this entrance and went straight into the gymnasium which is situated unde]

  the North Stand.
                                                                  &fs^ r i *
                                                                            -   2-

D.A. CUTLER     continued:


Our serial was then on ntandbv in the gymnasium from about 3p»n onwards, the serial

was complete.


At ^.O^pm our serial was instructed by a senior officer to go to the Leppings Lane
end stand immediately and give assistance to other officers re the crowd.


We all left the gymnasium and walked infront of the North stand, along the walkway
at the side of the pitch, the game at this time was in progress. I could see at
a point half way along the North stand that a number of fans had climbed on to the
pitch infront of the Leppings Lane stand. I could see fans still clambering over
the stand barriers and on to the pitch all the time we were making our way towards
that end of the ground.


Myself and other officers cut across the pitch some ^0-50 yards from the Leppings Lan
stand and were met with hystwical fans of all ages screaming arw baying,        -hey a* s
dying in there', indicating the Leppings Lane stand. Myself and the rest of the seria
then made our way throught the fans on the pitch and up to the railings of that stand
At this time 1 was close to PC 2611 Parkin, but shortly after reaching the fence I

lost sight of PC Parkin.


At the fence I could see row upon row of fans pushing and being pushed foward into
the fence. Lots of fans were being squashed and trampled by other fans either up
against the fence or infront of it. I could see that many people up against the
fence were being squashed to death, their bodies pressed that tightly up against
the fencing that they could hot breathe. I climbed on to the small concrete wall
at the bottom of the fence and managed to pull several people over the barbed wire
of the high fencing on to the pitch. If they could not walk I took them well on
to the pitch and rendered first aid, then returning to the fence to repeat the
proceedure. Fans and Police Officers were doing the same as myself while some fans
were managing to climb over the fence themselves on to the pitch to safety.


The unconscious and semi conscious were rendered first aid and placed in the coma
position. I organised other partially injured fans along with some stewards to
continue the assistance to those left on the pitch whilst I returned each time to

the fencer


Sometime during thib I met up with PC Parkin again and he informed me that it
appeared that several people were dead inside the enclosure. I went with him up to
the fence at a point to the   left of the Leppings Lane goals, there I saw dozens
of people with'Their faces squashed up against the fencing, their faces grey, they
                                                                                     rig
                                                                            -   3-
1).A .   CUTLER   continued:


         unconscious but held upright by the pressure of the people behind them. It
was impossible to get to these people as the wire fencing was between us and there
was a barbed wire section of the fencing at the top bending over back into the stand
making it impossible to reach over.


I then lost sight of PC Parkin and engaged in the recovery of anyone I could reach
from behind the fencing. At this time there were no senior officers organising the
manpower, police and fans and stewards etc, at the scene, it was left to the
individual to effect escape for the fans. I can recall at least one male who was lifti
on to the pitch and he appeared dead, he was carried well into the pitch where his
breathing and pulse were checked, he was grey and cold, a man who stated he was a
doctor csune up to me and pronounced life extinct. I removed this male from the pitch
with the assistance of fans on an advertising board that had been ripped from nearby
to the gymnasium. I was instructed to remain with the body for a while while officers
on duty in the gyanauium, including DS McSloy and DS Buxton, acted as coroners
officers. I was instructed to write my name and rank on the hand of the deceased
and return to the ground which I did.


I returned to the fence of Leppings Lane and at some stage either before or after
going to the gymnasium organised fans to kick the wire fencing down at a point to
the right of the Leppings Lane goal, this was then used to recover people from the

stand.


I then joined other officers to form a line across the centre of the pitch.


I can state that initially when we passed the Leppings Lane entrance to the ground
I could see several fans obviously drunk, wandering about or stood with cans of
beer in their hands. Also I can state that a large number of those fans I came
into contact with, either unscathed, conscious or semi conscious smelt of alcohol
and some were drunk. Those that were drunk were causing problems for the people
effecting the rescues, by shouting swearing and even assaulting Police Officers.
I do distinguish between those that were drunk and those fans that were grief
stricken and overwhelmed by the events. On the whole the fans were tremendous in
their effort       to assist.


Also during the period I asaisted Trierido and relativea to find others xost         and
comforted those people who were suffering greatly to the point of collapse due
to tl                 rauma of the events.
                                                                                     rifc-
    D.A. CUTLER       continued:


    At some stage during the events of the afternoon I stayed a while near to the
    gymnasium under the rear of the North Stand to recover from the shock of the
    incidsnt


    At about 5pm when things were becoming a little more organised I was instructed to
    go into the North Stand with other officer where a short de briefing took place
    and I completed a statement of evidence which I have still retained, (completed
    at 5 .50 pra).


    7    '      ’ -    west Bar Police Station at 7p, that date and went off duty at 8pm.


/
I
