    '£?tertement of Gary James CGILVIB                              -(T/C. •         ^
        Police Constable 333                                                      "~~J

        C group Ecclesfield.                                             CPO ^ j 2- \

                           Evidence concerning events of Saturday 1$th April 1989        0   '   S




            On the day in question I paraded for duty at Scclesfield Police station
            at 0900 hours* I was then transported by Bus to Hillsborough, football
            ground where upon arrival X confirmed that I .was be part of serial ^9
            patrolling the Foxhill area of Sheffield in a Transit van, Tango 4.


            Myself and other members of this serial took our seats in the North Stand
            for the breifing by senior and intelligence officers before collecting our
            meals and cocencing patrol at approximately 10*50 hours*


            Our first port of      was Che Fox public house situated on Foxhill Hoad.
            This is a fairly large pub with a very large tarmacadam carpark and grassed
            area opening onto the above road. At about 11.05 bours myself and Inspector
            Robinson visited the Landlord in the Lounge Bar of the premises. He stated
            that he had five extra staff on duty and had retained the services of "a big
            lad" as doorman. He also said that he had extra beer and lager on and that he
            would be welcoming Liverpool supporters. At this time there were a few locals
            drinking in the pub and about two “families11 of Liverpool supporters with
            young children. These supporters were quietly minding their own business .
            The manager was advised that we would be patrolling the area and calling by
            regularly and that we should be contacted in the event of any need for assistance.


          - We then resumed patrol , checking'-visually other pubs in the area. Host were
(   #       either quiet o f cloaed. However during this time many supporters began to flood
            into the side streets' in this area and park their private cars and vans.


            At 31.30 hrs we again checked The Fox public house. It was starring to fill up
            with crowds of LFC fans standing outside drinking in the sunshine. The surrounding
            streets in Foxhill and uptowards Grenoside were now very busy with the vehicles
            of arriving fans ; to the extent that it made maneuvering of our shortwheelbase
             transit van very difficult. We then observed that traffic   flowing freely down
            Halifax Road from the North with many supporter*,   arriving in private cars, vans
            and hire minibuses. These vehicles were turning off into the Foxhill and Parson

            Cross estates; presumably to park.


            At 12.10 we again during our patrols checked The Fox pub. The car park vas now
                                                                                    cont/-


                                                           V T
                                                                                             I 2-1


       full to capacity with people standing very close to each other, sitting
      on cars and standing on the boundary wall 5 all drinking alcohol.


      At 12.30 we were directed by control to attend atWilcox Road, Foxhill
      where youths were reported to be acting disorderly manner and urinating
      in peoples front gardens* At the scene we liaised with PCs stationed at
      the bottom of the road who stated that   5 -6   liverpool fans had passed them
      being abusive and throwing down beer cans* Some of this team were observed
      to go up Wilcox Rd and urinate in gardens. We saw this group of youths
      walking up that road and stopped and spoke to them. All had been drinking
      heavily and were in a very boisterous mood. They were advised and pointed
      inthe direction of the ground. We followed them down the hill and near the
      bottom they all boarded a SYPTS bus bound for the        town centre*


      At 12,50 we again visually checked the Fox pubilchouse* By now the          car park
© •
      was bursting to capacity and fans stood drinking some distance up and down
      Foxhill Road on the Pavement on both sides drinking alcohol purchased from
      The Fox. I would estimate the number in the car park and walls alone to
      be in the region of ^bout 300 to 400. With a further 20CX standing on the
      pavement and pull''in on the opposite pavement.     Thdsre was in there number
      a large drunken, rowdy contingent who cat called as we passed and who
      continued to do so when we paused for observations*


      At 1300 hours we checked the White HOKSE public house on Halifax/Southey green
      Road. This, too, was full of £FC supporters and the scene was very similar to
      that at The Fox*


(•    At 13*05 hours we receive a message from control to attend at GT news, a
      newsagent,tobacconist and confectionary shop opposite the Fox pub* The
      manageress stated that six drunken LFC fans had cone into her shop and
      acted disorderly before stealing cigarettes and sweets* She followed them
      outside where they were very abusive and threatening and saw them drive off
      in a White 'Renault van registered number_________


      At “5.15 hrs I saw the van being driven on Halifax Road* We followed to the
      car park of The White Horse pub where it parked up. After a short conversation
      the six occupants of the van were arrested by me and placed in our police
      Tan. They were then transported to EPS arriving at 13        hours.
                                                                            crtnt/*
 The prisoners were all Liverpool supporters ranging in age from 18 yrs to
 37 years. They had all been drinking both in the van on the way over and
 at The Fox public house. They stated that they had arrived in plenty of
 time at about 12.15 hours. When booking the prisoners property in it was
 found that not all of thea had tickets for the match.


It was ascertained that all six had attended Sheffield for the match with only
TWO West stand ticket between them. They had managed to swap one of these
tickets for TWO Lepping lane terrace tickets; brining the total held to TEHEE
between SIX. The prisoners told me that they had heard that tickets would be
on sale from touts at the ground and that last year the officials at the ground
had let some in without checking tickets owing to the rush because of the
match starting. It .was farther noted when booking in property that there was
very little cash between them. And certainly some of those without match tickets
did not have sufficent funds -to purchase tickets at TOUTS prices; indeed thay
only had loose change.


This was noted at the time and subject of discussion between myself and the
custody officer* Obviously the full significance of this information did not
become apparent until later* but the custody records corroborating this
evidence re property are availible for examination at Ecclesfield .police station.
It appeared to me at the time that if these prisoners had insuficient funds     to
buy tickets and that they ■ere determined to get into see the match ( this was
jnore than apparen by the noise and complaints comming from the cells when they
were detained) then they were going to attempt to gain enrty by some means. This
is again corroborated by the fact that they had turned up on spec without money
but with the knowledge that people had some how gained enrty at the last minute last
year because of the rush.


The prisoners were all held whilst   I liaised with CID regarding their interview.
At about 15.15 hours I was in the CID office when PC 1242 Armitage called me
and told me that OPERATION SUPPORT was required at the ground. My transit had
departed earlier so I was driven in a police car to the ground in co PC 1242
Armitage, PS 2269 Strafford and Inspector Hudson.” We arrived at the Leppings
lane end at about 15.30 hours. We parked the car in a side street and all headed
towards the turnsiles. Fans were pouring out of the ground some confused, some
angry and others obviously distressed by something.
As I approached the gate in front of the turnstiles, a few paces behind
Inspector Hudson, I saw a LFC fan attack him and try to punch him.       Hudson
managed to restrain the youth     who was upset and crying,    I assisted   himand
pulled the youth off and took     him away from the scene. During the struggle
I received an injury to my right foot; it was not serious and the bruise
only lasted a few days.     I tried to calm him down but he kept shouting
"There is fucking dead bodies     in there".    I released the youth to the
custody of friends and returned to the main       gates.


I had NO personal radio so I was unaware of the circumstances of the
incident however I assumed there had been some sort of crush, perhaps a wall
collapse.    A mass of people were pouring out of the gates at Leppings Lane.
Most of them did not know what had happened either and seemed mostly
concerned with the fact that they had not gained entry or wished to know if
the match was abandoned.


However quite a few of their number informed me that some supporters had
been crushed because of a massive surge or that a gate had been opened by
the police or stewards.     I was on my own now so I tried to move fans out of
the path of oncoming emergency vehicles; the progress of which they were
hampering.    I sensed that something very disasterous had happened from the
mood and tears of fans.     I continued to try to clear the roadway but the
mood of some fans was very aggressive fuelled by the fact that they were
heavily under the influence of intoxicants.       I was jostled and abused by
these drunken fans and whilst attempting to move a large congregation from
the path of a fire engine, I was punched on the right shoulder by an unknown
assailant and jeered and insulted by the rest of the group.       Some still had
beer cans in their hands.


The situation had become potentially very violent with all the violence and
abuse apparently directed at the police.       I was still in the dark about the
incident or requirements as I was on my own without a personal radio.         After
the task of keeping fans off the road became fruitless and dangerous to my
personal safety, I looked further down Leppings Lane and saw my serial in
their transit van.   PS 2207 Shaw saw me and got me back into the van.
Crowds of LFC fans jeered and rocked the van as they passed.      Several police
motorcyclists parked across from us became very vulnerable to attack by fans
and after a few close ca’lls had to move on.     The fans shouted "Murderers" to
us and other officers as they walked by.


The Sgt in the van had a personal radio but the reception and communication
was very bad.   Inspector Robinson got out of the van to go to police control
 to find out what assistance we could render or if our vehicle xould be of
 any use.   We heard over a domestic pocket radio that fans had been killed.


 Inspector Robinson returned and stated that our van was needed as an
 ambulance and that we were needed to assist at the mortuary area, situated
 in the gym.   We left the driver with the van and walked through the extreme
 left hand gate at Leppings Lane and down along behind the North stand
 towards the gym.


I was detailed by the Inspector to go to the gym to ask if any more numbers
were needed inside.    Luckily a Sergeant on the door stated that there was
enough help but asked that we keep fans looking for lost family/friends as
well as sightseers away.    Our serial along with some men drafted in from
Barnsley formed a cordon along a line between the corner of the North Stand
and some outbuildings parallel to the stand.


We allowed only stretchers bearing the dead and injured through as well as
Police, nurses, doctors, ambulancemen and other officials.    Some fans
carrying IPs were allowed to take them through.    Ambulances reversed up to
our cordon and IPs were taken away.    Many fans approached our line in a very
distressed state inquiring after lost party members.    Many became aggressive
and violent at not being allowed to look through the dead and injured for
them.    Again many of the most aggressive and violent fans had been drinking
and still smelled heavily of intoxicants.    At one point I received a kick
from a fan being refused access, to the back of my left knee.      He was
removed after a struggle with sober friends and other officers.


Inspector Robinson and PS Shaw then asked members of our serial to assist
with a makeshift casualty desk.    I took details and descriptions of those
missing from fans and asked them to return to their transport in case the
missing person was looking for them.    Some were bussed down to Hammerton
Road Police Station to give info to the Casualty Bureau.


At about 1800 hours, serial 49 was asked to return to their van at
Claywheels Lane, pending further assignment.    Reunited with the van, we had
to attend several times at the Northern General Hospital to deal with fans
fighting with pressmen.    Other Officers were present at the scene and we
acted as back up.   We were eventually stood down at 2000 hours.    I had a
meal at Claywheels and went off duty at Ecclesfield Police Station at 2030
hours.                                                                      ____
                                  - 6-                                                 \Z^\
      *




      On return to Ecclesfield I learned that my six prisoners had all been released
      at about 18.15 hours with a warning but no further action to be taken against
      them*




                            Gary James Ogilvie
                            Police Constable 553*




C #
