                                                                           ~7 1
KENNETH FROST




Police Constable 2967        «■




On Saturday 15 April 1989, I commenced duty at Armthorpe at 8.15am and

then to Doncaster DHQ for 8.45am.     We were then transported to

Hillsborough, where a briefing was carried out.     I was on serial no 3,

with PS 2627 Ashton in charge.     Our duty was foot patrol around the

roundabout at the junction of Penistone Road, Leppings Lane and Herries

Road.   At this location we were to prevent any trouble between rival fans.

After briefing we had a packed meal at the ground and then at about

11.00am took up our position as directed.     I was actually situated at the

junction of Penistone Road and Herries Road.     At this location coaches

carrying Notts Forest fans were discharging their passengers on the

Herries Road Bus Garage.     Coaches carrying Liverpool fans were travelling

down Penistone Road from the Ml around the roundabout back on to Penistone

Road and on to Claywheels Lane where they discharged their passengers.

They were then to walk down Leppings Lane to enter the ground.

Even at 11.00am there was a steady stream of fans arriving by coach and

private cars.     While the majority seemed to be making their way directly

down Leppings Lane to the groun, it was also noticeable that a large

number of Liverpool fans were hanging around the area, especially in front

of the garage at the beginning of Leppings Lane.     There did not appear to

be any trouble among the fans or between the different factions.     The

majority of supporters I saw were the Liverpool fans walking down from

Penistone Road.    Although they were boisterous there did not appear to be

any trouble from them.     It was noticed though that a large number that

were just sitting around or walking about there were all in possession of




                                                                      \J
beer and that those arriving in the time leading up to kick off were

hastily trying to finish their cans before they reached the ground.

One incident that was reported to an officer in our vicinity was a young

lad reporting a theft.     Apparently he had arrived without a ticket, he was

offered one for sale but when he handed over the money, the seller ran off

with both ticket and money.     This young lad was taken to the Police Room

within the ground to make a complaint.       According to officers who attended

the semi-final last year, they expected the majority of the crowd to be in

the ground just after 2.00pm.     Last year evidently the streets were empty

after 2.15pm, but this did not appear to happen this year.         Although the

coaches seemed to stop arriving after about 2.00pm, it was noticed that

between about 2.15pm and 2.30pm large numbers of Liverpool supporters

started coming down Penistone Road in d r o v e s .   We did not know where they

were coming from but were walking down in their hundreds it seemed.          This

seemed to carry on until about 2.50pm.       There appeared to be no trouble

from them, but there was plenty of shouting and singing.

It was also during this time that all traffic was stopped from entering

Leppings L a n e , I assumed this was due to the number of supporters on the

road. It was also noticed that even up to about 2.45pm private cars with

Liverpool supporters were still arriving and expecting to find parking

places near the ground.     It was seen that     a large majority of the

occupants were drinkihg from cans of beer or lager.

One incident that happened was a private hire car dropping off 4 Liverpool

supporters at the roundabout.      It was obvious they had all been drinking

and one of them had to be supported by his friends.         He seemed incapable

of walking on his own.     They were all spoken to and advised re offences of

trying to enter the ground drunk.      Later that afternoon after     thetragedy

occurred, I again saw the one that had to        be assisted,   in the ground, near
                                     -   3   -




the gym, he was being helped to an ambulance with what appeared to be a

leg injury.     He had obviously got into the ground.
                           *
At about 2.45pm it was obvious from a message we heard on the radio that

there was problems at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.          The messages

were excited and everybody was speaking at once, but it seemed there was

difficulty in the crowd entering the ground at this location.          Even at

this time there were still large numbers of Liverpool supporters walking

down towards the Leppings Lane turnstiles.          It was during this period that

we heard on the radio repeated requests for the gates to be opened at the

Leppings Lane end, but we were not aware for what reason.

At 3•00pm our serial was planned to walk down Leppings Lane and there j oin

a Force Coach for standby duty before a meal.          In view of the radio

message, we made our way straight away at 3•00pm to the Leppings Lane

turnstiles.    While en route, I heard a message on the radio requesting

serials that were mealing at Claywheels to go immediately to Leppings Lane

end as there was fighting taking place.          On arrival at the Leppings Lane

turnstiles there was only a small number of supporters around the

entrance.     Our serial waited with others serials at this location for

further instructions.    At this point we were not sure what was happening.

A short time later, only a matter of minutes, a South Yorkshire Ambulance

arrived at the Lepping Lane end.     It was directed into the ground.         When

it was inside I saw one person being assisted to it with a leg injury.               It

was at this time that a stream of supporters started to leave the ground

at this location.     They were all saying that it was bedlam in there, that

the game had been stopped and people were injured.          We still did not know

what had happened, but then we were ordered into the Leppings Lane

terraces and on to the pitch, but I must admit I did not know for what

p urpose.                                                                                 [a 2f\XT\
When we went into the ground behind the West Stand, there was a steady

stream of people leaving.    At the back of the stand there was a small
                            *

number of people stood and laid about.     Some obviously in distress but

some laid on the ground quite still.     I along with other officers made my

way through the crowd in the West Stand and on to the pitch behind the

goal.   While going through the crowd, a large amount of verbal abuse was

being directed at u s .

As soon as I got on to the pitch, I could not believe what I saw.     There

was large sections of the crowd milling about and about twenty people laid

on the ground.   At this stage I saw a number of Police Officers giving

mouth to mouth resuscitation to people laid out on the ground.     It was

obvious at this stage that a large number of people had been injured.

I immediately assisted with some of the injured but it was obvious that a

large number of people laid out were dead.    One person I went to assist

was blue in the face and his mouth was stuck wide open.     It was also at

this time that I felt a huge hatred from a large number of the Liverpool

supporters towards the Police and the club stewards.    There was also

aggression towards Notts Forest fans at the far end, and a number of

supporters tried to race to the far end to confront them.

At this time there was utter confusion in the area between the goal and

the terracing, people were spilling out and could not help tripping over

people laid out on th6 grass.    It was then that the first member of the

Fire Service arrived with resuscitation equipment.     I directed one of them

to a person with breathing difficulties.

It was obvious that the casualties would have to be moved from this

location, although a large number were dead, but there was no direction as

to where to take them.    There did not appear to be any rank above Sergeant

on the pitch and the club stewards had no idea where to take them.       I was
                                    -   5   -




aware the first aid room was at the other end of the ground near the gym

and by this time supporters and Police Officers were carrying casualties

on makeshift stretchers in that direction.          I assisted with the carrying

of one person on a makeshift stretcher to the gym area.          It was obvious on

arrival at the gym that he was dead.

On arrival at the gym area I stayed there assisting with casualties that

were still alive.   A number were placed in the gym itself, but some had

also been brought and just left lying on the ground around the gym.             One

young boy aged about 12 years had been left lying on his back and had

difficulty breathing.    I assisted him and directed an ambulance team to

him.

By this time a large number of ambulances were arriving at the ground and

the injured were being loaded on.       I travelled with one ambulance to the

Hallamshire to assist with a badly injured person.         On my return to the

ground, all the injured had been removed to hospital and the dead to the

gym .


I must state that I was surprised how many of the Liverpool fans arrived

so late for the match.   It was obvious that there was no way they would

all get into the ground before 3.00pm.          I would never dream turning up so

late for a game with an obvious capacity ground.          It was also obvious that

a large number of those arriving after 2.00pm had been drinking.          You

could see the Liverpo&l supporters walking down trying to drink from their

cans as quickly as possible so they were not confiscated at the ground.               I

remember when we finally left Claywheels that evening, looking up

Penistone Road towards Wadsley Bridge and seeing the walls covered with

empty cans and bottles that had been left.

I would also state that although myself and other officers received a

torrent of verbal abuse and threats from a large number of Liverpool^____


                                                                                      (cX\0
supporters while on the pitch, I never saw any actual violence offered to

the Police.   Later while in the area around the gym, I saw a Liverpool

supporter go up to two clut) stewards and spit in their faces and threaten

them.   This person was then forcibly ejected from the ground by myself and

another Police Officer.

I have attended a number of large matches at Hillsborough and have been on

duty at various locations inside and outside the ground.
