I
              H I L L S B O R O U G H     D I S A S T E R



              Report of MARTIN EUGENE WHEATLEY    P.C 779




I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police stationed
at Bentley Police Station.

At 8am Saturday 15th April 1989 I paraded for duty at Bentley Police
Station in order to perform duties at the Hillsborough Football,',ground
for the F.A Cup semi - final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.

I was attached to serial number       P.S Sherratt was the officer in
charge.

At 10am this date I attended a briefing in the grounds North Stand area.

At 11am our serial was briefed by Inspector Townend.

At 11.15am I took up    my position on      Claywheels Lane, at this time I wasin
company with Pc 2718    Ward. Our duty      was to meet coaches arriving from
Liverpool, board them   and inform the supporters as to the conditions of
entry into the ground   in relation to tickets and alcohol.

The coachfes contained a wide cross section of ages and the fans seemed
good humoured. A number of the fans smelt of intoxicants.

It was also apparent that a large number of fans arriving on these coaches
did not have tickets for the match. I saw a number of fans, mainly from
the younger end approaching coaches as they arrived asking for any unsold
tickets.

At 2.25pm this date we were deployed at the junction of Claywheels Lane
with Penistone Road North outside the GATE public house. We were instructed
to form a filter line across the pavement and to ensure.that noone carried
alcohol any further. A continuous stream of Liverpool supporters approached
us from -the Halifax Road end. The supporters were mainly in the younger
age bracket and a very large number had clearly consumed alcohol.

As the fans approached us many of them were drinking from cans and bottles
of beer etc and when informed that they must leave their drink some of them
insisted on consuming the sometimes almost full contents of their cans
before continuing. These supporters caused no public order problem at that
time.

Approximately fifteen minutes before the kick off there were still hundreds
of supporters streaming down towards Hillsborough in no apparent rush.

At about 2.55pm in company with other officers I attended at the GATE public
house after receiving a report of trouble inside. I made my way to the
fire door at the side of the premises. A group of men some with bloodstained
faces were stood outside.
P.C 779 MARTIN EUGENE WHEATLEY

PAGE 2


The men were protesting about being ejected from the premises and it was
clear from their accents that the men were from Liverpool. Entry to the
premises was eventually effected and the house was cleared and closed.

At about 3•20pm I attended at the Hillsborough football ground. At this
time I was in company with P.c 106 Goss. On entering the ground two bodies
were carried towards us. The y were layed at the side of an ambulance and
attempts were made to screen the bodies from the view of the supporters.
However the mood of the supporters was becomong more aggressive towards
us with taunts that the Police were to blame for the deaths. I then helped
to carry the two bodies to the gymnasium complex at the ground.

We lay the bodies at the far end of the gymnasium and attempted to screen
them from general view. At that time I believed that this was the total
of dead. In a very short time bodies were brought into the gymnasium in
a constant flow. They were carried in mainly by other supporters who simply
laid them on the floor and left.

The first bodies brought in all seemed to be young people of between 11*
and 18 years of age. The bodies were still warm and initially I attempted
'L.> recussitation but this became impossible due to the scale of the incident.
It became a matter of simply laying the bodies in some semblance of order.

I remained at the gymnasium until 2am the following morning when I returned
to Doncaster and retired from duty.
