                                                                                          M IR .15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                            Date and tim e                                        Num ber



T itle
(Include source and any document number i f relevantj


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                   Receiver




D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated
                                                                                                               Isfln   Indexer


No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                               Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                       Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised

Examined - fu rth e r action to be taken                                                                         |/M         SIO




                                                                                                                       Indexer
F urther action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master Num ber Form
           Macclesfield, Cheshire         Tel
                                         April 20th 1989



The Editor
The Independent
40 City Road
London EClY 2DB




Dear Sir

I hope that the matter of crowd mechanics and the design of
football ground structures will be covered in Lord Justice
Taylor's inquiry. From what one has seen of the disaster it is
not clear that these issues have been understood.

The consulting engineer to the ground in defending the
adequacy of the fence on TV made it clear that it was tested
regularly to make sure it would withstand 400 pounds per foot
run. For most structures an engineer designs into it
sufficient strength with a margin of safety to make sure the
structure will not collapse. Where the only force on the
structure is going to be the pressure of a crowd this could
result in ensuring that in such an event there is sufficient
strength in the structure to fatally crush members of the
crowd before the structure collapses. The test should perhaps
have been to make sure the fence collapsed at 400 pounds per
foot run.

A crowd standing shoulder to shoulder on level ground is not
able in normal circumstances to exert a crushing horizontal
force.

If one stands in a vertical position close to a wall for
example so that ones shoulders are against the wall, it is
impossible to exert any horizontal force. A group of such
people standing shoulder to shoulder in such a manner cannot
accumulate a crushing force. If at the end of such a line the
last individual pushes in a determined manner the only force
transmitted through the crowd is his own horizontal push which
is not sufficient to crush the individual who is against the
wall.

A daily illustration of the above takes place in the Tokyo
rush hour where trains are deliberately packed tight with
people by professional pushers on the platform.

All the above applies to horizontal ground. On a sloping
terrace the situation is dangerously different. Here in a
shoulder to shoulder situation a component of force can be
generated from the total weight of the crowd on the slope and
as we have seen this is enough to crush those at the
restraining barrier.

I know it is easy to be wise after the event but a crowd
situation outside the ground provided it is on horizontal
ground can probably be tolerated. It is the situation on a
sloping terrace which is dangerous.

Those who have the responsibility for managing crowds should
understand which situations and parts of the ground are
dangerous.

It would also be sensible to give some guidance to everybody
about sensible behaviour in a crowd. Nobody should move so
that they have bodily contact with the individual in front in
any circumstances. Your push can be some one elses crush, and
this message should be brought home by TV advertising.

Oxford Street underground in the rush hour for example is an
accident waiting to happen. The danger will be the slope of
escalators or stairs where a crushing force from the weight of
the crowd can be generated.
                                              April 21st 1989




Lord Justice Taylor
Hillsborough Inquiry
Care of South Yorkshire Police HQ
Snig Hill
Sheffield S3 8LY


Dear Lord Justice Taylor

Enclosed is a letter I sent to The Independent which may or
may not be published. It may be judged as being too technical
but it serves as an introduction to some of the design issues
which I believe your inquiry should cover.

Watching the interview with the consulting engineer to the
Hillsborough ground, raised serious doubts on my part whether
any other design objective had been set for the perimeter
fence other than the requirement to prevent a pitch invasion.

Other issues which I did not raise in my letter concern also
the design of relief gates. In a situation where a dangerous
pressure on the perimeter fence has occurred there is no
prospect whatever that opening a gate further along from the
point where the dangerous pressure has occurred will produce
any relief in a time scale which will prevent injury.

In the television account in which the consulting engineer
spoke, they also showed a continental design of perimeter
fence which opened along its whole length. This is a design
which could clearly produce the pressure relief where it is
needed and so prevent injury.

I think your inquiry should cover these issues and I would
suggest that some experimental work could be carried out in a
short enough time scale to produce answers in relation to how
sufficient force comes to be generated to crush individuals.

The experimental programme could cover the following:


    1) The construction of a length of retaining wall in which
    crowd pressure could be monitored.


   2) Using the above, an experiment with a crowd would be
   conducted on level ground to see whether as the depth of
   crowd is increased there is any danger of a crushing
   pressure being reached.
                                     -   4   -




        3) The above experiment is repeated either on sloping
        ground similar to the Hillsborough terrace or it is
        carried out on the Hillsborough terrace itself.


        It would not be necessary to injure people it would be
        sufficient to monitor how the pressure on the fence
        increases with increasing depth of crowd. This would be
        sufficient to see how at greater depths of crowd crushing
        forces could be generated.


        4) In addition to the above, at an appropriate but safe
        level of pressure a relief gate could be opened over part
        of the length of the wall to test whether this produces
        any relief of pressure at other parts further along the


•
        wall from the opened gate.


        5 A n t i c i p a t i n g that the level ground experiment will show
        no danger in a situation where the crowd has an open
        boundary on the side of the crowd away from the test wall.
        A test should be carried out to emulate the situation of a
        crowd in a confined space between two walls. It is
        possible to see in such a situation how modest crowd
        pressure along the length of travel of such a crowd could
        generate dangerous side ways pressures. This could be
        aggravated where such a route is tapered inwards.


    I believe such work would add a necessary thoroughness to your
    inquiry in that it can show in a measured fashion exactly how
    the forces necessary to produce crushing injuries have
    occurred. It can also form the basis on which specific
    recommendations for the future can be made.

    I am a consulting engineer associated with
                   I was until recently their Technical Director.

    I believe          would volunteer the engineering effort to
    project manage the necessary experiments. We would enlist the
    help of the Royal Engineers for some of the experimental
    construction work. We would ask the MOD to provide the
    manpower for the crowd experiments from the armed services.

    From authorisation to proceed, I believe it would take one
    month only to build and test an experimental length of wall
    with the necessary pressure monitoring equipment, and one
    further month to carry out the necessary experimental work and
    give you a report on the results together with an
    interpretation of their significance.

    If you are interested in proceeding, I would like to check the
    above statements in relation to timescales and also check that
                            -   5   -




the cooperation from the other parties that I have anticipated
would be given. I do not think publicity would be helpful
during such a programme of work but we would accept your
guidance.


Yours sincerely
J MERVYN JONES MSc                                                   FURNIVAL HOUSE
    ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                        Furnival Gate
     H IL L S B O R O U G H IN Q U IR Y T E A M                      Sheffield S1 4QN
                                                                     Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 7 5 9 9
WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HO                                              SM ITHDOW N LANE POLICE STATION
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                               Liverpool L7 3PR
Colmore Circus Queensway                                             Telephone: 0 5 1 -7 0 9 7 1 7 5
Birmingham B4 6NQ
Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5                      Your Ref:
    NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
Fowler Street                                                        Our Ref:
                                                                                     JMJ/SJA
Birmingham B7 5DA
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2                                      Date:
                                                                                     23 July 1989




         Macclesfield
      Cheshire




      Dear

      I have received your letter dated 20 April 1989 from South Yorkshire Police
      concerning the tragic events at Hillsborough on Saturday 15 April 1989.

      The contents of your letter have been of great interest to my investigation
      team.

      If you have any further information please do not hesitate to contact my
      investigation team at Nechells Green Police Station. Alternatively you may
      write to the Secretary of the Inquiry as below:-

                              Mr R M Whalley
                              Secretary to the Inquiry
                              50 Queens Anne’s Gate
                              London SW1H 9AT

      Yours sincerely




      J M Jones
g     Assistant Chief Constable




       PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT                     NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
