Other Document Form                     Date and time raised .                     ^       ^       Number



Title         KefeAivOa. < i ^ < n i r n x i                Q    h   £L - -                     ________
(Includa source


Receivers instructions urgent action Yes/No




Document registered/indexed as indicated                                                                      Indexer

Ne(s) of actions raised

Statement readers instructions                                                                               Statement
                                                                                                             Reader


Indexed as indicated                                                                                          Indexer

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                       I/M         SIO




Further action no(s)                                                                                          indexer


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Mastar Number Form
                                                              Ac-    i(X* O 'h1#f<
                                                               />/

'     *                                SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                        Ref:
          From:     Superintendent Nettleship
                                                                       Station/Dept:
          To:       Chief Superintendent Wain                           Date:          2 May xyoy



                  SUBJECT: ;   MEETING WITH MR. A. CHARLESWORTH, ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE,
                               HUMBERSIDE, RE COMMITTEES OF ENQUIRY!


                     As you are aware, I visited Humberside Police Headquarters this afternoon,
                     where I spoke to Mr. A. Charlesworth, Assistant Chief Constable, Humberside
                     Police, and Chief Inspector M. Brown, West Yorkshire Metropolitan Police,
                     concerning their own experience following the Bradford fire, and the
                     subsequent Committee of Enquiry.

                     Mr. Charlesworth (formerly Chief Superintendent, Ops Division - West
                     Yorkshire) was the officer who assumed the role which you are performing
                     now, i.e. preparing a Proof of Evidence on behalf of the Chief Constable.
                     Obviously there are differences, the main one being that West Yorkshire
                     conducted their own investigation into the cause of the disaster, without
                     the involvement of an outside Force.

                     The following points were made during the meeting, most of which confirm
                     what we have already learned ourselves over the past few days:

                     (a)    The 'Salmon’ Letter

                            This in effect is the equivalent of an 'NIP' (Copy attached -
                            (1)) and is served on persons/organisations by the Treasury
                            solicitors in those cases where particular points may be
                            questioned closely by the tribunal or are likely to be the
                            subject of criticism. This document should normally be
                            served within 7 days of the Treasury solicitors receiving
                            statements from the appropriate individual/organisation.

                     (b)    Police/Tribunal Liaison

                            The experience of Bradford was that once the tribunal
                            began taking evidence, there was a constant stream of
                            requests for documents, etc. by tribunal members, which
                            were handled by a small liaison team, who kept a record
                            of all the documents which were communicated.   In addition,
                            there was ad hoc requests for stationery, etc., for which
                            a record was also required, to recover costs, etc. Mr.
                            Charlesworth considers that good liaison between the police
                            and the solicitors acting for the tribunal is probably one
                            of the most important aspects to be considered.

                     (c )   Conduct of the Tribunal

                            Despite the circumstances, the Bradford enquiry only
                            lasted for 7 days, and both Mr. Charlesworth and Chief
                            Inspector Brown emphasise that the manner in which tri­
                            bunals deal with evidence is entirely different to a
                            Court of Law. Once a witness is able to verify a
                            particular point, the enquiry then moves on to the next
                            subject, with a result that there is a "severe pruning"

                                  «
    Gen/2
                                                                                          continued
   *

4' r
             of witnesses in order to prevent duplicity and
             therefore save time. I think that we have probably
             already recognised this factor - as it would be
             clearly impossible for us to examine ALL the docu­
             ments available in the time available.

             The Bradford Tribunal was described as very much a
             "seat of the pants" affair - quite informal and (to
             repeat) the minimum number of witnesses required to
             verify a specific point.

             A copy of the "Ground Rules" agreed for the Bradford
             Tribunal is attached hereto.  (2)

       (d)   Response of the Force

             Mr. J. Domaille, formerly Assistant Chief Constable
             Operations (now retired) presented the submission on
             behalf of the Force.  Basically the stance which the
             Force adopted was as follows:

                (i)   Identify the cause of the fire.

               (ii)   Analyse all the events in order to
                      identify any shortcomings in the
                      police organisation/operation.

              (iii)   Take immediate steps to rectify the
                      police deficiencies identified.

               (iv)   Include in their submission the fact
                      that such measures had been taken
                      (also making appropriate recommen­
                      dations for any changes considered
                      nationally).

             It was considered that by"pre-empting" the critisism
             which was likely to be made by the tribunal, this would
             effectively "difuse" the situation by demonstrating that
             the Force had identified points (in the light of experience)
             where improvements could be made and had acted in advance of
             any formal recommendation.

              Attached hereto is a copy of the statement submitted by
             Mr. Domaille and a transcript of the proceedings in respect
             of his examination at the tribunal.  (3)




       Superintendent
             THE TREASURY SOLICITOR                                       Appendix ‘R
             Queen A n n e’s Chambers
             28 Broadway London S W 1H 9JS
                             Telephones Direct Line 01-273
                                      Switchboard 01 -273 3000
                             Telex 917564      GTN 273

    The Chief Constable,
     West Yorkshire Metropolitan Police,                 Pleasequote
            ? - Q -’                                      Yourreference
     WAKEFIELD.
                                                         Date    3rd June 1 9 8 5




    Dear Chief Constable,

    I am directed to give you notice of questions which m a y be
    raised at the forthcoming Inquiry into the fire at Bradford
    City Football Club and which m a y affect the police.   The Chairman
    has already indicated that the Inquiry is not intended to lay
    blame on any par tic ula r person or persons, but inevitably
    evidence m a y be given and questions m ay be asked which are
    critical of the police.     The object of this letter is to notify
    you so that you can notify the officers who m ay be most directly
    concerned of what appear^ from the evidence so far available to be
    such matters of possible criticism.     The evidence from which the
    questions emerge is contained in the statements alrea.dy supplied.

    The questions are:-
         What steps (if any) were taken to follow-up and act upon
         the letter of 27th June 1 9 8 *1.
         Whether officers     on duty at the ground during matches were
         adequately or at     all briefed in the correct procedures if
         there was a need     to evacuate the ground and the main stand
         in particular in     case of emergency, especially fire.
         Whether officers were properly briefed to ensure that
         vehicles did not par k in the access roads.to the ground
         end and obstruct the access of emergency vehicles.

<   Should any further questions arise during the course of the
    Inquiry, you will be given notice of them as soon as they can
    be formulated.



    Yours faithfully,




    A. B e l l c h a m b e r s ,
    For the Tre asu ry Solicitor.
   OPENING OF JUDGES ENQUIRY. BRADFORD       - ____________
                                                     $

Mr. Justice Popp1ewe11      with
Mr. Alan Goodson   (Chief Constable, Leicestershire)
Hr. Martin KiHoran   (retired Chief Fire Officer of Greater Manchester)

(lasted from 10.30 am to 11am).
They all saw the video ('unofficially').


Opening

Enquiry would be into Bradford Fire and events at Birmingham
-v- Leeds United match on 11 May.

Crowd safety and crowd control at football matches was his
broad remit.

Enquiry would be a fact-finding mission.

No-one was on trial - it was not a case where one party won and
another lost.

It was not litigation, not a witch-hunt, nor was it a whitewash.


Plan

In effect there would be 3 parts to enquiry:

   (a)       Bradford - a fact-finding mission.
   (b)       Birmingham - a fact-finding mission.
   (c)       London     - safety and crowd control   considerations.

Aiming to begin enquiry 5th June and last 10 days.

Daily sittings normally from 10 am to 12.45 pm and 2 pm to 5 pm.
(except Mondays, start at 11 am, and Fridays end at lunchtime),


Submissions

Indicated the only persons to be represented were those:
   (a)       who had a direct interest in the matter* or
   (b)       those whose involvement was likely to be called
             into question.

Submissions made by:
  - '\tT;    ' f ' x r t Ifem fxo e
  s '( b )   County Council'
   --(c)     Law Society (on behalf of claimants)
   '(d)      Police Federation (on behalf of members)
   "(e)      Chief Constable
    Aft)     Football Club
     (g)     City of Bradford Metropolitan District Council.
                                     - 2 -


     11.   Police submission was:-
             (a)   enquiry incomplete - more evidence to be given,
rf           (b)   many aspects of enquiry which may affect police actions.
             (c)   could provide further information of relevance to
                   particular issues.

     12.   Initially REJECTED need for police service and Federation to be
            represented and said (a) and (b) should be combined.

     13.   Eventually agreed to Chief Constable and Federation being
            represented.


           Procedure

     14.   Judges counsel would lead.

     15.   Would hear submissions
             (a)   Public
             (b)   Police Service
             (c)   Fire Service
             (d)   Local Authority
             (e)   Football Club

     16.   Short opening address by counsel for each in order.

     17.   No power to compel witnesses nor force them to answer questions.

     18.   Rules of evidence would not be strictly complied with.

     19.   Hearsay would be acceptable to summarise evidence and save time.

     20.   No immunity from prosecution as   a result of anything said.

     21.   A person called to give evidence about any allegation would be
           put on notice he would be asked about it.

     22.   Some cross-examination would be allowed.

     23.   Copy statements of those called would be given to legal representatives
            of all parties but for use ONLY for enquiry purposes.

     24.   Representatives would have access to all statements.

     25.   Final speeches would be invited in reverse order to submissions
            (see para 15) with claimants last.

     26.   Judge's counsel would summarise at end.

     27.   Costs on a common funds basis would be considered at the end
            (would ordinarily be granted UNLESS he considered any party had
           wasted his time).

     28.   Ex-gratia payment would be made to witnesses.
                                       - 3-
V
            Matters arising for consideration

    29*     A daily transcript would be made available for inspection
            - do we want a copy?

    30.     A scene-setting verbal' statement from a senior Police Officer
            would be required as an introduction - ACC Mr. Domaille?

            NB:   draft in course of preparation.

    31.     Presence throughout hearing - suggest Chief Inspector Brown
            and Superintendent Heseltine as available?

    32.     Will C.C. need to be present at any stage - perhaps at opening
            only?

    33.     Representation necessary throughout - suggest senior counsel
             for leading speech, police evidence, evidence of football
             club and final submissions?

    34.     Meeting with legal representative and/or counsel necessary?




    ALAN CHARLESWORTH,
    Chief Superintendent,
    Operations,
    OPS/AC/LQ
    22 May 1985
                                                        WEST YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN POLICE

 ' , • ' 5
                        STATEMENT OF: .               .^X.Q^A.EL. .'JQHPI                                  ..................................................... ...............
                        AGE/Date of B irth:.. .O v e r. 2 1 , . , OCCUPATION:                                   A s s is ta n t? C h i e f C o n s ta b le

                        AD DRESS:..................W est. Y o r k s h ir e .M e t r o p o l i t a n                    P o l i c e ........................................

                                                      .P..0.SQ>c. .9........... ....
                                                      .Wakefield...West;.Yorkshire.


                              T h is sta te m e n t (c o n s is tin g o f       17                  p a g e s s ig n e d by m e) is tru e , to th e be st o f m y
                              kn o w le d g e an d b e lie f a n d I m ake it k n o w in g th a t, if it is te n d e re d in e vid e n ce , I s h a ll be lia b le to
                              p ro s e c u tio n if I have w ilfu lly s ta te d in it a n y th in g w h ic h I k n o w to be fa lse o r d o n o t b e lie ve to be
                              tru e .

•ATEMENT OF                    Dated th e     10th        day o t          June                      ,19 85                     M J Domaille
fTNESS
J . Act, 1967, s 9,
C. Act, 1980, s 102,
C. Rules, 1981, r 70}
                               I am the Assistant Chief Constable (Operations) of the West

                              Yorkshire Metropolitan Police, with responsibility for all

                              day-to-day operational matters occurring in the Force area.

                               I have a total of 30 years police experience in Devon and

                               Cornwall Constabulary, the former West Yorkshire Police,

                               and my present Force.                             Throughout my career I have been

                               concerned with policing operations at several different

                               football grounds, including those at Exeter, Torquay,

                               Barnsley, Bradford, Halifax, Huddersfield and Leeds.




 '*'r:                         The events of Saturday 11 May 1985

                               I and tny senior officers have perused the statements, video

                               film, photographs and other materials so far collated by the

                               officers conducting the investigation into the fire and its

                               causes and consequences -at Bradford City Football Club.                                                                             To

                               date, pending the findings of this Inquiry, our views are

                               necessarily tentative, however, I ar: able to say: —



                               a)        With respect to cause, we presently favour an accidental

atement taken by                         setting fire to combustible material apparently

                                         accumulated beneath the floorboards of the Main Stand

                                         over a number of years, presumably by the dropping of

                                                                                                                                K J Domaille
                  WEST YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN HUUUc


                                                  Sheet No.:...?........................




STATEMENT OF:.. MICHAEL .JOHN ..P.OMAJ.LLE........................
     Continued:


     some means, of ignition.      Certainly- no evidence

     warranting: a criminal prosecution has been- revealed:

     by our- investigation, ana in particular no immediately

     material incident: of crowd misbehaviour has come to

     our attention.



b)   With respect to consequences, our enquiries so far

     have led us to be satisfied with the efforts of the

      142 police officers present to save life-             Indeed,

      we consider the efforts made to rescue those at risk

      were- outstanding having particular regard to the locus

      concerned and to the suddenness and speed with which

      disabling smoke,, heat and then: flame- developed and

      spread.      We have been-unable to discern any obvious

      ways- of saving more lives which may have been overlooked;

      by the officers- present given the limited facilities

      available to them.      I hasten to add that many of those

      officers readily acknowledge the heroic and effective

      help given to them by other* persons; present including

      many members of the general public as soon as the true

      significance of the fire became apparent.



c)    r da wish to mention the following:



      i.)   The police officers present received no. specific

            briefing respecting fire and evacuation procedures.

                                             M J D o n a ille
                  WEST YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN POLICE


                                                  Sheet No.:.



„TmieilTrte    MICHAEL JOHN DOMAILLE
STATEMENT OF:........................
     Continued:


           I am proposing to refer to this later- in my proof ,

          but, without prejudice to those: later1comments- there”

           may be doubt as to-, whether any evacuation procedures;

           which may have' been briefed, to them would have been

           any more satisfactory than those actually applied,

           having■regard' especially to the speed with which

           the fire took hold in the stand..



     ii) Arrangements, were made- to ensure there- was no

           vehicular obstruction in the recognised access

           routes to the- football ground.      Police 'No Waiting*

           cones were placed in. surrounding roads as

           specified in the attached 'Operational Order'

           which relates to police arrangements for the

           football match (Appendix 1).       It will be seen

           that Burlington Street in which it is acknowledged

           that parking of vehicles occurred was not a

           recognised access route.



d)   During the course of our- enquiries, our attention has

     focused upon events prior' to the match to identify in

     what,. i£ any, ways police procedures could, with or

     without hindsight, have been materially more effective

     to avoid or- mitigate the consequences of'this disaster,

     and any other like occurrence.


                                           M <T Domaill&
                  WEST YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN POLICE


                                                  Sheet No.:......4.............................




STATEMENTOF:............... “ “ “ H .......................
     Continued:


Events preceding Saturday 11 May 1985

A review- of our' policies; and procedures has led to the

following tentative analysis:



a)   Policies          As policemen our primary concern in

      connection with the policing, of football matches

      is in pursuing our "traditional role of maintaining-

      the peace and upholding the law.        Those are the

      thoughts uppermost, in our minds in approaching our

      responsibilities since we are aware through personal

      and reported experiences that a high risk of injury

      to limh and a lower but potential risk of injury to

      life exists owing to persistent public disorder before,

      during and after football matches.        Indeed,- recent

      experiences at football grounds throughout the

      British Isles and in Europe has identified the

      existence of a hooligan element and underlined the

      pressing need for effective control of crowd behaviour.

      Oust acute awareness of those risks* coupled' with our

      duties to protect life and property and maintain law

      and order, has served to concentrate our efforts in

      respect of football matches upon the segregation,

      containment and supervision of crowds' in the interest.

      of public safety.       In so doing we have nought to take

      advantage of means for- physical containment (eg. fences,

      walls, closed doors) available at any particular ground

      to supplement the efforts of our officers-
                                                                                        i t J
                                          K JT Domaille
                  W fcL i   Y U H K o n l n f c iVic J n v j r v u i min • ^ u i o w



                                                                                  Sheet No.:...?.......



STATEMENT OF'                                                        ................— ....*
     Continued:


b)   Fire Procedures                      As. policemen, we could conceivably

     have identified: fire occurring at a ground during, a.

     match: asi a potential- further risk to safety oxT the

     public: and our officers.                         There are, for example,

     references to fire risk at paragraph 2.4 of. an HMSO

     publication'entitled 'Guide to Saiety at Sports:

     Grounds (Football)' copies of which were available to

     us.    However, our collective practical experience of

     many years did not give rise to apprehension of a

     risk of fire, and in my own case I can say no other

      fix*e has. occurred in the course of a match at any of

      the grounds with which X have been; associated during,

      the whole of my career, and to my knowledge there has

      never been, a fire at Valley Parade throughout the past

      80 years.         We have relied upon the expertise of the

      Fire Service to provide advice to the County Council

      a«g- the body responsible for the issue of a Safety

      Certificate, with regard to the construction and

      management of grounds they have inspected, and

      concentrated our attention,                            upon crowd control

      policies and procedures, leaving the County Council

      as: the issuing authority to resolve any conflict

      between the measures suggested.-


                                                                     M «T Domaille
                  WEST YORKSHIRE. METROPOLITAN POLICE


                                                    Sheet No.:..... .?.




STATEMENT 0F:....MICHAEL.. JOHN.. DOMAILM.
     Continued:


c)    Safety Certificate Procedures             Within West. Yorkshire

      there* are two grounds, which are designated, for the

      purposes of the Safety- at Sports Ground Act. 1975,

      namely those- of Leeds United: and Huddersfield Town.

      The ground of Bradford City Football Club is of

      course-: due- to be so designated following; the" Club.' s.

      promotion to Division 2 of the- Football League.                    One

      of the designated grounds has acquired a General

      Safety Certificate pursuant to the Actr and I produce

      and refer to a copy of that issued by the County Council

      to Leeds. United Football Club (Appendix 2)-              The

      remaining; designated ground at Huddersfield is still

      in negotiation with the County Council over its

      Safety Certificate and I' produce and refer to a copy

      of a draft document issued to Huddersfield Town Football

      Club (Appendix 3).       The terms and conditions of the

      Certificate as required by the West -Yorkshire

      Metropolitan County Council plainly seek to obviate

      risks: arising: both from crowd disorder and from fire?

      such terms and- conditions following, upon consultation

      the Council has had with, as regards crowd control,,

      the Club- and. the police; and-, as regards fire

      precautions, the Club representatives of the Fire

      Service and building, experts,         r. refer to- the statement

      of Superintendent Calligan. (Appendix 4) as to the scope

      of the police involvement with regard to the Huddersfield

      Town Football Club Certificate.
                                              M J Domaille
                   WEST YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN PU U U c                      _


                                                     Sheet N o.:....Z...........




STATEMENT OF-       MX CH AE L jJOHN^ DOMAXLLS^.....................
     Continued:


d)   Procedures applied at: 3radford City Football Club

     The. relevant factors- known- to-, me are:-



     i)           Prior to- the 11 May 1985 this/ was, not: a'

                  designated sports stadium pursuant to the

                  Safety at Sports- Grounds. Act 1975.



     ii)          The Main Stand was of principally wooden

                  fabrication,, which prima facie was not so

                  constructed to satisfy the criteria specified

                  in the publication fGuide to Safety at Sports

                  Grounds (Football)1.



      iii)        The occupiers,. Bradford City (1983) Limited

                  are a comparatively recently formed club-

                  It seems that in August 1983 upon formation

                  they were conducting: a Club within severe

                  financial limitations- (their predecessors

                  had gone into- li quidation) and with no obvious

                  prospects* for promotion to Division 2. of the

                  Football. League and thus- for designation

                  pursuant to the 1975‘ Act.     tn the event and

                  during:, the 1984/5 season the Club's, playing

                  performance did in fact raise, first, prospects?

                  for such promotion, and finally promotion itself.

                                          ff J Domaille
                  WEST YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN POLICE


                                                    Sheet No.:..................................




STATEMENT OF:     MICHAEL_JOHN __DOMAX LLE ......................
    Continued:


                 The average attendance (excluding- the match of

                 the II May ) accordingly rose during, that season:

                 front 5246' per home match, during: the first half ,

                 to. 6450: during, the second: half .. The overall

                 average attendance for the season was 6017,

                 with, an average occupancy of the Main Stand

                 of 1333 persons per match.



      Civ)       So far as was apparent to the Police, the

                 financial, limitations remained throughout.

                 Firstly it was allegedly difficult enough
                                                            *•
                 for the Club, to meet the hire charges of just

                 5. police officers for special duty, at each

             ' match, that is, L officer per 1000 spectators-

                 Second, significant, ground improvement could

                 apparently only be financed by the. Football

                 Ground Trust,, and then with the willing and;

                 responsible co-operation of the Police, see

                 the letter- o f the 2T June 1984: front Superintendent:

                 Briggs and events preceding, and subsequent ta it

                 as- set out: in his statement.    Third,, the Club

                 were seemingly unable to institute an effective

                 system for stewardship, being apparently wholly-

                 reliant upon volunteers irrespective of age and

                 ability*   I should add that throughout the Club

                 were ready to co-operate with the Police.


                                        M JT Domaille
                   WEST YORKSHIRE. METROPOLITAN POLICE

                                                                    9
                                                       Sheet No.:




statement   0F;                           .........................
    Continued:


     (v)          There was- no Police Control Room- provided: at

                  the* ground for the- exclusive or specific* use*

                  of the police, such as. the* facilities- provided::

                  at both the* Leeds United and. Huddersfield- Town

                  grounds.   In consequence,, control of the police

                  operation was* exercised remotely by relaying;

                  messages through a radio control situation at

                  The Tyrls in Bradford: Town Centre.           Given these

                  circumstances the police radio controller operated

                  without the benefit of a direct view of events

                  occurring at the ground and had to rely totally

                  upon updates provided from* the ground-           Any

                  message transmitted in these circumstances fronr

                  the ground were‘received by all those in possession

                  o f radios because of the permanent *Talk—through.’

                  state of the radio network.       The police had no-

                  access to the public address system: at the

                  ground and a system had evolved of relying

                  upon the known position o f Club officials- in the

                  ground: in the event o f at-, requirement to make

                  contact with them to deal, with emergencies..



     (vi)         In so far as: the West Yorkshire County Council

                  sought- to influence the Club1s policy, in

                  anticipation of future designation, through

                  letters of the 3 August 1982, the 11 July 1984

                  and the*18 July 1984, coupled with their
                                            If J D o m a ille
                  WEST YORKSHIRE METROPOUiAN PU L lut


                                                      Sheet N o .:...f°....................




STATEMENTOF:.MIC^EL;.Jp.HN..DpMI.LLE................... ......
    Continued:


                 engineer ‘s inspection of the 4 July 1984,. the-
          i•
                 Club* s1 reaction is- not known: to me--        L should

                 add there- is; no- record of the- police- being;

                 appraised of such correspondence and/or

                 inspection, and there is nothing to suggest the

                 police were represented during: the inspection-

                 itself*

     (vii)       The Bradford City Football ground was situated

                 in- the Manningham Sub-Division of the West

                 Yorkshire Metropolitan Police until. 1 April

                 1985 when internal-boundary changes- occurred

                 within the Force area and the- general policing,

                 o f the ground and surrounding area: became the

                 responsibility o f the Bradford Central Sub-

                 Division.   However, for the specific purpose

                 of controlling football matches, it was. decided

                 that particular responsibility would be retained

                 by the officers of the Manningham Sub-Division

                 in the interests; of continuity.



     (viii) lit accordance with Force policy the immediate

                 responsibility for policing arrangements and

                 crowd control, at this ground had been vested

                 in Superintendent Paul Briggs of .Manningham

                 Sub-Division since his appointment to the Sub-

                 Division in August 1983.



                                          M   D o m a ille                              1
                   WEST YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN. POLICE


                                                                   Sheet No.:..............t:...................




STATEMENT OF:                             ..................................................................
     Continued:


      (ix)        Mr 3riggs and I have- engaged in regular dialogue

                  about, the- policing of Bradford City Football

                  Ground since his- appointment and I have visited

                  the ground on several occasions.                         The- officers

                  under his direct control have made suitable

                  arrangements to police the ground; in accordance

                  with Force policy, which may be summarised as

                  follows



                  _. -fco; exercise tolerance and understanding towards

                    unruly* elements of the crowd, having, regard ta

                    the interests of those genuine supporters who

                    wish to enjoy the intertainment provided on

                    the day;



                  —■ to ensure the safety of local residents and

                    other members of the public and to facilitate .

                    the free flow of traffic in the area;



                  — ta- combine an approach of maximum tolerance

                    with reasonable firmness in so far as crowd

                    control is concerned;



                  — to ensure officers making arrests- exercise-

                    individual judgement in specific circumstances-

                    and that there is no 'blanket' approach applied

                    towards the taking of prisoners;
                                        M J Domai lle                                                          it   }
                                                      Sheet No.:........I ? -




STATEMENT OF:.
     Continued:


                  — to ensure- that- ejection of football, supporters-

                    is not practised: at the* ground, asi it is* a;,

                    measure- considered to, be- counter-productive

                    to- effective- crowd control-



                  Our discussions, have also extended; to the-
      (x )

                  employment o f police officers, at. football,

                  matches, particularly with regard to additional

                  manpower required for crowd control and traffic

                   regulation in the interests of public safety,

                   based upon intelligence gained about the numbers-

                   and mood of visiting; supporters as. well as

                   experience: of both perceived and potential

                   problems.   To date we have had to supply manpower

                   on the: basis of sufficiency for the maintenance

                   of law* and order without regard for the capacity

                   of the Club to pay appropriate hire charges*

                   Such manpower has inevitably increased with

                   the, growing 'gate'.    It has always seemed likely

                    that: such a situation would continue- indefinitely

                    for- surplus front increased receipts: would

                    presumably be required for some time to come

                    for- ground improvement-




         (x i)
                    My most recent discussion with Mr Briggs,

                    shortly before the fire, concerned Bradford's

                    promotion to the Second Division of the Football
                                                                                M-

                                                    If J D o m a ille
                   WEST YORKSHIRE. METROPOLITAN - POLICE


                                                                    Sheet No.:...1 3




STATEMENT OF:                              ..................................................................
     Continued:


                  Leaguev and the- particular point, of a- meeting:

                  ta be arranged., with Club officials, to discuss;

                  with. them-, the- direct consequences- their

                  anticipated designation under the Safety- at.

                  Sports Ground Act would have.



       (xii)      As regards the experience of police officers

                  present at the ground, most of them have been

                  regularly called upon to perform duty at football-

                  matches within the Force area.                       Many of them- will

                  have gained relevant experience at more than one

                  ground: by means of temporarily providing, ad hoc

                  assistance to another Sub-Division, or by means

                  of permanent transfer from one Sub-Division to;

                  another* or- by attachment to a specialised group

                  concerned amongjather things with public order

                  duties known as the Task Force (a team from

                  which were present on duty at Bradford City

                  Football Club on. the day o f the disaster).

                  While it is true to say they will not have

                  received any specific training in fire and

                  evacuation procedures specifically front football

                  grounds It is equally relevant to point out that

                   in recognition of the original authority under-

                   which a; police officer carries out his duties

                   he is trained to assess situations and react

                  . as: an individual.in any emergency.                             Equally
                                          M J" Doma in®
                   WEST YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN POLICE


                                                     S h eet No.:..............................



                                          ........................
     Continued:


                  he is= encouraged to user initiative and, apply

                  common sense; to- a- particular set; of circumstances,

                  until he- receives; lawful orders' from- someone* of

                  higher rank.



My Submission

I respectfully submit that the following considerations,

amongst others, arise from this disaster:



a)    It would be helpful to have a designated officer in the.

      Force responsible for visits to all sports grounds on a.

      regular basis to examine the problem^ of public safety

      which they present and discuss their resolution by

      reference to the ‘Guide to Safety at Sports- Grounds

      (Football)’ publication, especially at those grounds

      which are not currently subject to the Safety at Sports.

      Ground legislation.         Irr_fact, in so far as the West

      Yorkshire Metropolitan Police is- concerned, this

      r e s p o n s i b i l i t y has already been allocated by the Chief

      Constable in recognition, of its importance-



b)    When a sports- stadium is not designated and the club

      is able to achieve only minimal control of its own

      premises owing to lack of resources, the police find

      themselves on the' horns of a dilemma;, in coping with

      the resultant situation through their duty to the

      public they inevitably appear to assume some of the
                                     M. J Domaille
                   WEST YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN POLICE


                                                                     Sheet: No.:...?:?.......



STATEMENT O P      • MICHAE3^_     DOMAIjLLE..............................................   .
     Continued:


     management: responsibility for the- ground, thereby

     effectively seeming- to relieve the Club of its; proper

     duty-        Such a- consequence is not. only1inappropriate

     and.: undesirable-,, but. at positive disincentive to- the

     Club to remedy the situation as speedily as; possible^

      It may appropriately be prevented by giving, powers to;

      the police to compel Clubs to employ specific numbers

      of stewards.



c)   The Home'Secretary has decreed that all Football

      League Grounds will be subject to Safety at Sports

      Ground Act.       This should ensure that all grounds are

      improved to a common minimum standard which it. is-

      intended will improve spectator safety,, thereby

      substantially reducing: among other things, the
                                          *
      possibility of this sort o f fire occurring in the

      future.       It would also b e helpful if Safety

      Certificates granted under the terms of the legislation

      were to5 contain recommended minimum- levels of police

      officers- to be hired and stewards supplied, to. different

      categories of matches agreed with the Club; with

      corresponding: powers given to the police' to prevent ^

      matches continuing if the recommended levels were not

      achieved on any particular occasion.


                                          M J~ D o m a i l l e
                  WEST YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN POLiCc


                                                  Sheet No.;    ............




STATEMENT OF:....................................... ......
     Continued:


d)   The area surrounding football grounds should, with, the

     exception, of off street: car parking,,, be kept clear of

     parked;: vehicles:, with, particular emphasis, being, paid

     to the ease of access; to- fire hydrants-         Pre-arranged:

     access routed to grounds to be used, in the event of

     any emergency should-, b e designated by the* police* in.

     consultation with the other emergency services.

     The routes so designated should be given greater

     prominence than is the case at present and should be

      known to- club officials and stewards as well as the

      emergency services.



e)    It would be beneficial to have a Police Control Room

      at each ground, sited ideally so as to provide a view

      of the whole spectator area; equipped with closed
                                          * *
      circuit; television and playback facilities used for

      monitoring, and recording, crowd behaviour? with

      facilities for instant access to the grounds public

      address- systems; and permitting: the installation and

      operation of an adequate police radio network, to the

      controller' of which would be in' a position to

      exercise speedy-and positive control over events

      taking; place in the ground within his- immediate view.




                                            M <T Domaille
                  W e il   Tl^nisanine iV ic m w r v u m n I


                                                                 Sheet No.:............................




STATEMENT OF:....MICHAEL;.JOHN.. DOMAI LI*?........................
     Continued:


Conclusion

I would' r e s p e c t f u l l y wish:' to- conclude by asserting:, that- my

Force wishes; to? take? every reasonable* precautions- within1
                                                             ,the

ambit of. its; powers and duties in: order to avoid any

repetition of these tragic events.                    My Chief Constable i&

committed to identifying, the- relevant issues and remedying:

any apparent shortcomings,, and with this in mind we have*

sought to anticipate areas for concern-                        We accept there

may well be other matters of relevance not so far discussed

and I am empowered to say that my Force would be glad to

consider and comment upon any of them as a means of enabling

the Inquiry to fulfil its purpose.

                                                                                              j

                                                  M. J* Domaille
                         SIXTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                        WEDNESDAY    12th J UN E    19S5


      MR  HOLLAND:  Sir.fmyin ex t- wi tn es s: istMr. pDniaillB>            I
think he perhaps ought to be sworn in.


          ASST. CHIEF. CONST. M I CH AE L JOHN DOMfllLLE Sworn /

                         Examined by MR.      H O L L A N D :I

You r full name is Michael J ohn D o m a i l l e ?
Yes sir.

You are the Assistant Ch ie f C o n s t a b l e    (Operations)      of the West
Yor kshire Metropolita n Police?
Yes sir.

Mr. Domaille, for the purpo se s of this Inquiry have you prep ar ed
and do you submit a statement toge th er with various appendices
setting out your approach to this p a r t i c u l a r matter?
Yes sir.

I say "your approach", but do you come here essentially to speak
on behalf of your Force?
Yes sir.                                               _

No w with the Chairman's leave, I only propose, Mr. Domaille, to
look at certain aspects of this, altho ug h no doubt you are in
a p osition to answer questions any of my learned friends may care
to put about other aspects upon wh ich I don't touch?
Yes sir.

Mr. Domaille, can I start with S h e e t k in your statement.     Mr.
Domaille, regularly your Force is sending large n u mb e rs of P o l i c e ­
men into football grounds.  For what essential purpose?
Basically that is to control crowd d is or der and hooliganism.       All
recent experience in this country and in Europe goes to show
that where there is a football m a tc h there is likely to be a
large crowd disturbance and the Pol ic e will be requ ir ed to control
it, so it is the hooliganism and d i so r d e r that our mi nds are
directed towards and that is our duty.

Is that the yardstick first of all by which the n u mb ers of P o l i c e ­
men that are sent to the ground are selected?
Yes sir.

Having regard to the use of that yardstick, are you in any way
concerned for practical purposes with the financial contribution
the club can in the event m a k e to the cost of polic in g?
No, we police the ground to keep p u b l ic law and order and that
is irrespective of'the capability or percei ve d capability of what
a Club could afford.

Just again to illuminate this starting point:                    you yourself,
                                                                            M. J . DOMAILLE



                            Mr. Domaille, ue heard from the last witness, have been in the
                            c o u T s e of duty to Bra df or d City Footb all Ground?
                         A. I have.

                         Q. I think on more than one occasion?
                         A. Yes B i r .
                         □. When you, Mr. Domaille, go in the course of your duty to Bradford
                            City Football Ground, what is your concern at your rank7
                 B       A. Well my main concern is that ue are c o n tr o ll i ng disorder; that
                            ue are controlling br ea ch es of the peace, and that the public
                            qet to the ground safely and to see that there are sufficient
                            Police Officers available to bring that about.         Als°  °        ____
                            that there is a liaison between my local Offi cer s and the Officers
                              of a Club.
                         Q. Ue have heard, Mr. Domaille, about you going to B rad fo rd City.
                            May I take it that you attend the other football grounds covered
                            by the area of your P ol i ce Force?
                            Yes s i r .
                              N ouj can I just move - you have m en t i o n e d the r el ati on sh ip between
                             the Police and the Club - may I move more directly to that parti-
                             cular point.   How far, if at all, Mr. Do m ai ll e  should your
                             Policemen be concerned with either the physical state
                             club that they have to attend, or its ma na ge me nt ?
                           . Ulell basically the club is a priv at e en te rprise that is putting
                             on a football match on p ri va te property.    It has club members
                             and other people are its customers;     T he managem en t of the club
                             and the looking after the peo pl e as they come is a m at t er for
                             the stewards provided by the Club, in the same way really as
                             ush erettes act in a cinema.              t

                          . Are there times - even in the particular ambit of the Police
                             concern - are there times when a Po li ce Force can have a point
                           . to make about the state of a ground?
                         A. Oh yes, clearly there are.

                         0.    I think we have heard already about complaints from time to time
                              about barriers or about walls which may respond adversely to
                              crowd pressure.    Is that the sort of thing that you would expect
                              your Officers to pick up?      '
                              Yes, I would expect my Offic er s to draw the attention of the
                              Club to whatever they thought was wise to draw the attention
                              of the Club towards. If then nothing happened, then I would have
                              tho ught that if it was in respect of fire we would talk to the
                              Fire Brigade, and if it was’ in respect of something structural
                              and nothing was being done about it, weshould contact the County
                              Council if we were very concerned about it.




                    H                                          Q. Mr. Domaille,...

 l_ N M n U M , IT S .
MallMMIMOT
• m cffm ls   s i so x
SR/B1 '
                                                                 M. J. DOMAILLE



                        Q. Mr.. Domaille, from your approach to the problem, what
                           importance do you attach to the employment, instruction and
                           training of stewards?
                        A. The training of stewards at a football ground is a matter for
                           the Club. Obviously there is a need for the Police to liaise
                           with the Club with regard to that.
                        Q. How important do you think it is for a Club to apply its mind
                B          seriously to the problem of stewards?
                        A. Well, it is important because they have the responsibility
                           of the care of the people to see them in and away from the
                           ground in a proper manner. Stewards should have their minds
                           directed to a particular section of the ground which is their
                           responsibility, whereas, of course, Policemen are used
                           flexibly throughout the whole ground to deal with whatever
                           might occur.

     f                  Q. If I can just take you up on that last point which was made,
                           Mr. Domaille. It is something which might occur to others.
                         • As you have gathered, at the time this fire occurred, there
                           happened to be three Police Officers at the back of G block.
                        A. Yes, sir.
                        Q. But if immediately prior to that there had been some crowd
                           disorder at the Midland Road stand, might there have been three
                           Police Officers or any Police. Officers particularly round
                           G block?
                        A. The Police would react to what occurred in the ground m line
                           with their basic training to act in emergencies and at the
                           direction of the senior Officer taking charge of whatever the
                           problem was.
                        Q. By the same token, assuming crowd disorder in the Midland
                           Road stand, should G block stewards still be at G block?
                        A. Yes.
                        Q. What are your views in this context about Policemen having
                           keys to gates or doors of a ground?
                        A. Well, my view is that the Police should not be responsible for
                           keys at all, but sometimes, on some grounds, the Police are
                           in possession of keys, particularly where there may be a
                           perimeter fence, because it is necessary sometimes to get
                           through a particular penning system to make an arrest or get
                           to the crowd. But, wherever this should occur, the Police
                           should never have the key; they should always have keys in
                           addition to those of stewards. They should not undertake the
                           responsibility of the stewards. They may appear - and this
                           is the danger - to undertake the responsibility of stewards.
                        Q. Having set up the matters so far, can I move then to emergencies
                           such as a fire. Can the public rely upon your Officers making
                           a contribution in the event of an emergency at a ground at
                           which they are attending for the purposes of crowd control?
                        A. The public can always rely upon the Police to. react in any
                           emergency situation to give all the assistance possible. In
                           this particular case, I think the television videos we have
                 H         seen have shown that that happened here.
L . H M N iM , IT S .
MIMIMVillm
m o r u si a n
     •
 SR/B2 ♦                                                                                    4.
                                                                   M. J. DOMAILLE
   ‘



                A        Q. As we are all aware, Mr. Domaille, we are dealing here with
                            a ground that had not yet achieved designation. It was about
                            to he designated.
                         A. Yes, sir.
                         Q. Within your Force area there are. two grounds which have been
                            designated. That is Leeds United at Elland Road and
                            Huddersfield Town.
                B        A. Huddersfield Town has been designated but it hasn*t actually
                            got its Certificate yet.
                         Q. With respect to those two grounds, the procedure in one event
                            has led to a Safety Certificate and in the other has led to
                            the draft Certificate, and the Police have played a part in
                            the procedure which led up to it?
                         A. Tes, the Police have an input with regard to the grant of the
                C           Safety Certificate and they give advice with regard to our
                            expertise, which is the control of public disorder, and the
       j                    other people present are, of course, the Fire Brigade with
                            regard to their responsibilities and the engineers from the
                            County Council with regard to their structural responsibilities.
                            The County Council co-ordinate the whole thing.
                         Q. Do you see your role as being any more than simply putting in,
                 D          as an input, your particular expertise into the whole?
                         A. We act in a consultancy capacity with regard to crowd
                            disorder and hooliganism and the control of this at the ground.
                            We, in fact, are giving advice with regard to our expertise.
                         Q. Is there any room, as it were, in your view, for the Police
                            to.act independently of these other authorities, the Pire
                            Authorities, the Local Authority?     i
                 E       A, Well, we don*t have the training and expertise to do so.
                         Q.  In that regard, I think you yourself were aware before this of
                            the Green Code?
                         A, Yes, sir.
                         Q. Your view about the Green Code was what? What place did it
                            have in your Force’s thinking?
                 F       A. The situation is that the Green Code is a guide to people
                            T u n n i n g football clubs, irrespective of whether they are
                            designated or not. The situation was that the Green Code
                            came out at a time when the Safety of Sports Grounds Act was
                            produced and advice is always given as to how to make a new
                            Act workable. It was taken by most people involved that the
                            Green- Code- was a guide as to how to make the Safety of Sports
                            Grounds Act work. Therefore, many of the recommendations
                 G          were thought of by people as being of significance when a
                            club was to be designated. If one looks closely at the Guide,
                            you find that some of the advice is not practical as one comes
                            down the line of clubs in their financial capability. What
                            is practical at a club that is playing European football - I
                            suppose I should say when we were allowed to play European
                            football - but what is practical at that sort of club is not
                 H          practical at some of the Third and Fourth Division clubs. It
                            will have to be now that they are designated, but it is not
L N M H U H , LTO
ciat Satarthand Wrttan
IHtFfiaO Si SOX
  SR/B3*
                                                                       M. J. DOMAILLE



                   A           totally practical at some of the rugby league ground?, some
                               of the cricket grounds and some of the tennis grounds in the
                               country. One always, I felt, had to look at a ground in the
                               light of what is reasonable here. With regard to this ground,
                               we were dealing with a Club that had not long been in
                               liquidation, and there is no doubt in my mind that the Club
                               was doing what it could to make a good Football Club, and I
                               think that is evidenced by their promotion and other things
                    B          that they did,              .
                             Q. Can I just lead then to the first major matter, and it is the
                                matter of briefing. You, in the light of what you have been
                                saying, were, plainly, supplying to these grounds substantial
                                numbers of men in uniform, disciplined and, as we have seen,
                                with initiative in plenty.
                             A« Yes.
                             Q. Those men, we understand, Mr. Domaille, from everbody, were
                                not briefed as to emergency procedures.
                             A. That is so.
                             Q. First of all, in your experience, which you set out at the
                                beginning of your proof, going back over 30 years, embracing
                                not only this Force but the Devon and Cornwall Constabulary,
                     D          have you ever known Policemen going to football grounds being
                                briefed as to emergency procedures?
                             A. No, I have not.
                             Q. Second though, in the light of what has happened, have you
                                anxiously been applying your mind over the intervening
                                period as to whether that briefing should.be modified in the
 I                              future, whether it should include anything to deal with this?
                     E       A. Yes, I have, and the situation really is that the Police,
                                from Constable to Chief Constable, have not been trained with
                                regard to evacuation or indeed with regard to fire procedures.
                                It is not a matter within our training. We are trained, of
                                course, in a general way to react to all emergencies. Now,
                                the situation at a ground - I believe the point was made by
                                one of the earlier Officers called - is that one needs to be
                                flexible in the Police response to what occurs at a ground.
                     F          It depends upon what type of emergency it is that occurs with
                                regard to what you might do. There is a need for Police
                                flexibility to react with regard to what occurs.
                                    The other thing that comes to my mind is that if we are
                               to be responsible for evacuation procedures from a football
                               ground, do we not ought to be responsible for evacuation
                               procedures from many other forms of private premises? I think
                     G         this presents difficulties and perhaps Police Authorities
                               might wish to have some input with regard to the costing
                               situation if we have to take aboard the problems that proper
                               evacuation procedures might present us. I do make the point
                               that we are not experts in this field at all. There are other
                               people who know far more about it than we do.

                     H                                           /Q. Just to help...

 l_ N 4 M M M , LTO
total St M TthMd W r t t m
■M c m ELD SI tax
         DB/C1
                   v.



                                                                            M.J. DOMAILLE

                             Q. Just to help the Chairman, I think the reference that
                                you made to the earlier O ffi cer 's evidence was that of
                                Mr. Mawson and it is at page 93 in Day 1 at letter F.

                             Q.      THE CHAIRMAN:   Who are the other authorities,
                                Mr. Domaille, who offer more expertise in this field?
                             A. Well, the situation with regard to the structural ---

                        B    Q. No, I meant evacuation,    If you get a bomb hoax, which is
                                the most obvious reason for 'an evacuation, who is going to
                                deal with that?
                             A. We would deal with that because we are the people there,
                                and the way ’in which we wou ld deal with a bomb hoax would
                                be, I would suggest, pe rhaps d if fe re nt than the way we
                                might deal with a fire or crowd diso rd er problems or
                                whatever.    We have had bomb hoaxes in the Force area
                                and what we have done i n that situat io n has been to move
                                the crowd on to the pit ch which, of course, we would have
                                done presumably at this ground.       That was the easy thing
                                to do at this ground bu t one must make the point that that
                                is not an easy thing to do at many grounds because of the
                                perimeter fencing, and I would suggest, sir, that the Fire
                                Brigade have much more expertise with regard to evacuation,
                                and the way to do it th an we have.       They would be able to
                                take aboard the directi on and  speed    of travel of a fire
                        D       if there should be one  in a  particular    building and
                                advise us on that.

                             Q.        MR. HOLLAND:   May I then, in the light of what you
                                  have been saying, Mr. Domaille, invite you to turn to the
                                  submissions you made at the end of your proof and I would
                                  particularly invite you, first of qll, to turn to page 14
                                  and submissions (b) and (c), upon wh ic h you have already,
                                  I think, touched.   Perhaps  I could just read the beginning
                                  of submission (b):

                                      "When a sports stadium is not de s ig n at ed and
                                       the Club is able to achieve only minimal control
                                       of its own premises owing to lack of resources^
                                       the police find themselves on the horns of a
                                       dilemma; in coping with the re su lt an t situation through
                                       fheir      duty to the public   they inevitably
                                       appear to assume some of the m a n a g e m e n t respons­
                                       ibility for the ground thereby ef fe ct i ve l y seeming
                                       to relieve the Club of its duty"

                                and you go on to submit that that c o ns e q u e n c e is inappropriate
                                undesirable and a p o s i t i v e •disin ce nt iv e to the Club to remedy
                                the situation as speedily as possible.               Is that, I think,
                                the dilemma that you have already t o uch ed upon, particularly
                                in regard to the situation at Bradford City?
                             A. That is so, sir.

                             Q. But in (c) do you sort of go and i n d i c at e one possible
                                approach to dealing with that problem and that, of course,
                                has already been set in train and that is the wider ambit of
                        H
t . L . M A K PH A M . LTO
■ d a l IkwHiHd Wtllm
,• SHEFFIELD S I *DX
         DB/C2                                                                                   7.


                                                                        M.J. DOMAILLE

                              designation, totake it from its p r e v i ou s limits to cover
                              this and other football grounds.
                           A. That is so, sir.

                           Q. And you, I think, emphasise in (c) what you look for at
                              that particular stage, and that is some proper relationship
                              between the level of police officers brought to the ground
                              and the level of stewards provided by the Club.
                           A. Yes, that is so.
                     B
                           Q.   Is there any observation you would like to make t 0 this
                                Tribunal about the limits which have p re vi ou s ly a pplied,
                                first of all in terms of 10,000 sp ec ta t or s ?
                           A.   Yes.    With regard to the figure of 10,000 specta tors
                                I think that any limit that is talked about with regard
                                to the whole of-the ground could be unhelpful,         1 think
                                that it is much more important that limits on the number
                                of spectators are kept to partic ul ar stands or bl ocks of
       9                        stands.    After all, problems arise in particular sections
                                of the crowd and whilst, if we said a ground had a capacity
                                of 40,000 it may be sensible to limit the stand t o a part ic ul ar
                                number of people and to limit the other areas of ground
                                to that which was thought to be safe, rather than to talk
                                about the total number of people a l lo we d into the ground. '

                           Q.       THE CHAIRMAN:     But that already happens under the
                              certificate, does it not, that once you have got something
                              over 10,000 there is power to limit the number of people
                              in a particular stand.;     the rest of the ground may be all
                              right?
                           A. That is so, but I feel for the purposes of the Inquiry in
                              general that the greatest danger is to those clubs that
                              are outside the designated area, and it is what will
                              happen in future with regard to the Clubs that are missed
                              by designation and what form of e n fo rc em en t procedures
                              will we or anyone else have - what practical enforcement
                              procedures will we have — because I unders ta nd that there
                              is s. 10 which has been talked about here, but what really
                              practical d a y — to—day when the match is before you form of
                              control are we going to be able to have?         Will we have a
                              right, perhaps, to say, well, there must be X number of
                              stewards and there must be X number of police officers
                              paid for by the Club here before this match can take place,
                              having regard to the whole situation, the condition of the
                              ground, the financial situation of the Club and the whole
                              thing, sir.

                           Q.      MR. HOLLAND:   I apprehend, Mr. Domaille, that with
                              your statement you have appended, amongst the appendices,
                              the Safety Certificate granted to Elland Road.
                           A. Yes, sir.

                           Q. The purpose of that being to show the clear provisions
                              in that about the stewards.
                           A. Yes, s i r .

                      H    Q.   The numbers,   the duties, es se nt ia ll y the role carefully

L. M A R P H A M .   LTD
rial Umllw id Writ*
MCn>IELO St MX
            0B/C3                                                                                       8



                                                                          M.J. DOMAILLE
                              laid down ---
                           A. - t of the stewards,

                           Q. — within the body of that particular c e r t if ic a te which,
                              as we know, was arri ve d at after the c o n s u l t a t i o n with
                              all the bodies invdLved.
                           A. Yes, sir.

                           Q. Just moving on to your submission (a), in s u b m i ss i on (a) which
                 B            I think follows now logically from what you have been saying,
                              you say this:

                                     "It would be helpful to have a de si gn at ed offi cer
                                      in the Force r e sp onsi bl e for visits to all sports
                                      grounds on a reg ul ar basis to examine the prob le ms
                                      of public safety which they present and discuss
                                      their resolutio n by reference to the 'Guide to
                                      Safety at Sports Grounds' especially at those
                                      grounds which are not currently subject to the
                                      Safety at Sports Grounds legislation.         In fact,
                                      in so far as the West Yorkshire M et r op o li ta n Police
                                      is concerned, this responsibility has already been
                                      allocated by the Chief Constable in r e c o gn it i on of
                                      its importance."

                  D            Can I ask this, are we envisaging,
                               senior officer at Wa ke fi el d?
                                                                        first of all,    a relatively

                           A . Yes, sir.

                           Q. But are we, having regard to his new role, first of all,
                              in any way faking away the essential r es p ons ib il it y which
                              hitherto has been at Sub Divisional level?
                           A. No, we would still have a very strong input at Sub Divisional
                              level because that is at the level of ftr. Briggs, where
                              there is a personal k no wl ed ge of the ground, the people,
                              the involvement of the people of the town in which the stadium
                              is, and that sort of thing.       What we have in mind is someone
                              at police headquarter s to know in some detail the details of
                              every sports ground within the Force area and also to talk
                              to dl the other agenc ies that are involved.        It seems to
                              me, having heard what has come out in this Inquiry, that
                              there is an extreme need to co-ordinate the in fo rm at ion
                              that is available.    I would like to say that we are going
                              to do that but to this date I am not clear that that was a
                              Police responsibility.     Indeed, I feel that it was not
                              but I feel that it is something that must be done by someone
                              and we will do that until we get some other form of
                              instruction or, indeed, if you, sir, from this Inquiry
                              direct a different li'ne of action.

                           Q.        THE CHAIRMAN:   It needs to be co-ordinated with the
                                fire authorities and other disciplines.       You cannot have
                                the Health and Safety Ex ec utive going one day and the
                                fire authority the next day, and the Police the next day,
                                all reporting separately to themselves and not to each
                                other.
                                That is so, and we recognise that and that is why we will
                   H            provide an Officer to co- or din at e those duties, but if one
!.L. NMtMUOfe.. LTD
BK iat Shorthand Writer*
 SMCFnCLO SI 2DX
    DB/C4

•   a
                                                M.J. DOMAILLE

            looks at the advice so far, it would seem that that
            really is the duty of the County Council, and I do not
            really wish to comment further.




        B




        C




        D




                                                /All I wish to say
                                  M.J. DOMAILLE



All I do wish to say is that we shall co-ordinate that and
see that is done until some other form of directive or until
the way forward is made clear.
     MR. HOLLAND:   I think you do emphasise in that submission
all sports grounds, not just football, but we are going to
rugby league, cricket?
All sports grounds. I know I have already said this, but I
do feel it is the sports grounds that get left outside the
main line of initial advice that are in danger. We can give
all sorts of advice and we might talk about rugby league
grounds and whatever, but we shall find that our greatest
danger comes from some auite well run rugby league club
such as Wakefield who have a very small stand, but if they
are left outside the advice that vis given they are the ones
who are in danger.
     THE CHAIRMAN:   Again it is a matter of practicality
whether the resources are available to the Police Authority,
the Fire Authority and the Local Authority to carry out
sufficient inspections to cover all potential hazards at
grounds?                                        ,    ,  _
Agreed. The other point I feel I must say, it depends also
on the resources of a club to react.

Yes.
I feel I need to say that from my visits to this ground I
thought that this was very responsible management trying
to do the very best they could under extreme difficulties,
and all sorts has been said about this club, but that was
my impression. I went there particularly to see that my
Officers had good liaison with the officers of this club,
and there is no coubt in my mind1 that they did.
     MR. HOLLAND:  Could I invite you then to look at (e)
on sheet 16. What essentially you are concerned with there
is radio control?
Yes, sir.
Do you have views about radio control?
Yes, I do, sir. The situation with regard to radio control
at the ground I believe has been outlined to you before, but
basically the control was not at the ground. It was at our
Police Headauarters which is within a mile of the ground.
That Police "Headquarters has sophisticated communications
eauipment. There were certain advantages in having the
control room there rather than anywhere else in that there
was electronic logging available, there was tape recording
eauipment to record everything that was said which I believe
you heard, sir, and also a lot of problems with regard to any
football ground are not at the ground but in the public getting
there, ’and this control being where it was could cope well
with that.      .
     Also it has been said that the radio Jammed at the time
of the fire. I must make a point that whatever system of
radio we had and wherever it was, and in a moment I will give
HD.D2                                                                               ~     11
                                                              M.J. DOMAILLE



                          my opinion as to what I think we should have or the best we
                          could have, but to me whatever system of radio you had or
                          however many radio networks you had, once that fire went it
                          was natural the Police Officers who each.had a radio - not
                          every Officer had a radio, but a lot of them had a radio -
                          it w a s inevitable it would jam. There was no way that we
                          can get around that as I see with whatever form of eauipment
                          we have or whatever arrangements we make. We do brief our
                B         Officers and we do train them with regard to radio discipline,
                          but I am quite sure you can understand at the time of the
                          fire it is going that fast.
                               What I would really like to see is where the finance
                          was available that the Police control room should have a site
                          which overlooks the ground so that Officers can see what is
                          going on, and also so that these places are equipped with
                          close-circuit televsion with zoom capability which would help
                          us identify people misbehaving in the ground and that sort
                          of thing, and of course a dedicated radio network which goes
                          without saying.
                        Q. So it is a question of pros and cons on each side, but on
                           balance you favour bringing the control room to the ground?
                        A. I do.
                        Q. Your final submission I do not think I need expand upon, (d)
                           at page 16, simply deals with the areas around this particular
                           ground. I think it is there to be read.               _
                        A. Yes, sir.
                        Q. Sheet 17 you conclude in the way I started the submissions
                           of the Chief Constable right on Day 1, by asserting his
                           essential approach to the- problems that were raised by this
                           particular fire and his desire to learn lessons if lessons
                           there are to be learned?
                        A. Yes, sir.
                                        Cross-Examined by MR. LEVINE:
                        Q. Mr. Domaille, would you take the view wherever you get a lot
                           of people in a very confined space whether it be a theatre
                           or cinema or for that matter' a football ground, if it is
                           constructed wholly or largely of wood and smoking is permitted
                           there must be some element of fire risk?
                        A. Yes, sir.
                        Q. So far as this ground is concerned did the Police thinking
                           either disregard or perhaps not think of there being a fire
                           risk, or did it secondly take the view whatever risk there was'
                           was too remote because there had never been a fire either
                           there or probably any other ground before, or thirdly, did it
                           take the view that insofar as there was any risk it was really
                           for the Fire Brigade?
                        A. No, I think that it took the middle course, the point you put
                           to me.

                 H      Q. There was some risk, but it was too remote?
. L . M IH M W , LTD.
•ctolStarttMtf WrttM
w v ra u       wax
HD.D3                                                                          12.

                                                   M.J. DOMAILLE



             A. Of course there was a fire risk, but for 80 years that stand
                had been there, and there had been no fire, and we do not
                as far as I know have experience of a fire at a football
                ground whilst the game was in progress.
             Q. Of course, if there was to be a fire it is far more likely
                to happen when there were people about smoking and that sort
                of thing rather than by some entirely accidental combustion
        B       when nobody is there?
             A. That is not borne out by experience. There have been far more
                fires in football stands when they have been empty at night or
                after a match than there have whilst the football game has
                been in progress. I repeat, I have no knowledge of a fire
                at a football ground when the game was going on, but I do have
                knowledge of grounds catching fire at other times.
             Q. Insofar as you said the question of evacuation is a matter on
                which the Fire Brigade are more expert than the Police, was
                there ever any liaison with the Fire Brigade to get advice,
                on how this should be done?
             A. No , sir, not as far as I am aware.
             Q. When it came to the matter of briefing the Officers who were
                 on duty, perhaps we can look at it now with' hindsight, had
                 there been a briefing on evacuation would it, do you think,
        **      have assisted possibly in saving lives if directions were
                 given by the Police to the public to make their way to the
                 front and get over on to the pitch rather than try to get out
                 through the door?
             A. Well, I think that assumes that you had envisaged exactly
                what did happen. It is quite obvious to me that what you
                have just said was the right thing to do, to get on to the
                pitch, but I doubt whether we briefed - in fact, I feel quite
                 sure if. we briefed with regard to this we might have briefed
                 in a different way. We might have said something else. We
                might have briefed with regard to everyone towards the exits
                 or whatever.
             Q. Had there been going to be a fire, and let us now look forward
                from the back to the front, so to speak, there are three sides
                of the ground where there might have been a fire. Not obviously
                on the Spion Kop, but the other three sides where there were
                stands. Had it been at the Midland Road stand where they
                are standing only four or five deep, getting over on to the
                pitch would be the obvious way of avoiding the fire, and
                likewise the Bradford end?
             A. I suppose it is fair to say that where there is a sports ground
                and there is no perimeter fencing, one would expect people to
                evacuate on to the pitch in the course of emergency, but it
                would depend upon the sort of emergency, because if it was
                there had been a bomb planted or bombs planted you would not
                put people in greater danger by driving them towards the
                possible position, or if an aircraft crashed on the ground.
                These things are quite remote, but they are not much more
                remote than the fire situation, because I have said within my
                experience there has not been a fire at a football ground with
                the game in progress.
 HD.D4                                                                               13,
                                                         M.J. DOMAILLE



                   Q. Dp you really regard it as remote- as the chance of an aircraft
                      crash on the ground?
                   A. No, probably not.
                   Q. The question of evacuation of the ground is, of course, not
                      just one of emergency? It comes at the end of the match
                      where you have a very large number of people leaving by
                      narrow exits so that the question of crowd control comes, very
            B         much within the ambit of Police activity?
                   A. Well, as I said before, the club have a responsibility with
                      regard to their stewards to run their premises in the same
                      way as people who run a cinema have a responsibility to run
                      their premises. Now, if we had seen previously that there
                      was some difficulty with regard to getting them out of that
                      ground then we would have drawn attention to it. My attention
                      was never drawn to any problems in that area. When I went to
                      this ground it seemed to me that people got away from it
                      satisfactorily. I must say one of the things I do is to stay
                      behind at the end of a game to see what happens, and it seemed
                      to me that people did get away reasonably well.
                   Q. In this case as we know tragically many of the people who
                      lost their lives were simply unable to get through the doors
                      because the doors were locked. Would you think certainly
                      with hindsight any briefing should include that Officers should
             D        make themselves aware of who had keys and where they were
                      to be found?
                   A. I think that the situation should be such ideally that none
                      of these outside doors should be locked. I think they should
                      be bolted and they should all open outwards. That would force
                      the club to put a steward by each door because they would not
                      want people already inside early in the match to open the door
                      and let their friends in.. I know there are other practical
                      difficulties with this. I believe at this ground the stewards
                      have on occasion been assaulted and made to open the door by
                      people and people come in. So there are certain difficulties
                      with that, but it is my view that perimeter doors should be
                      bolted but not locked, and they should open outwards, and then
                      that would take away the need for what you put to me.
                   Q. Did you ever communicate that view to the club?
                   A. No, sir.
                                   Cross-Examined by MR. BROWN:
                   Q. Mr. Domaille, you were asked at the outset about Police numbers
                      at this ground. I think we can see from one of the schedules
                      that numbers were either side of the 100 for most games.
                      Bearing in mind the other grounds in this area does that place
                      considerable strain on Police resources and manpower?
                   A. Yes, sir.
                   Q. And the fact that those Officers are not being paid for by the
                      clubs places further strain on the Police budget, and many of
                      those men are either taken from other duties or paid overtime?
                   A. Yes, sir.
             H
L . NAMMUM, LTD.
                                                          /Q. Is that a matter....
tWI
                                                     M.3. DOMAILLE



Is that a matter upon which you have any p a r t i c u l a r views,

I ^ a v e suggested we should have the po we r to m ak e the J ^ b
say how many Police they are going to pay for and we jhouid he
totally happy that that is sufficient, p er ha ps to control it,
but when I say that I wonder whether that is p ra ct ic al .

      THE CHAIRMAN:  Well I am not sure this jB-wllJhln the
scope of our Inquiry who is going to pay for the Police,
it?
      MR. BROUN:  I am me re ly conce rn ed that the situation
could arise that Poli c e Au th orities may find            f;1?
difficulty in putting forward enough men to fulfil the duty
which clearly at Brad f o r d they were jhouin
and perhaps the publi c it y that this Inquiry will give the
events will clearly cause those questions to be asked in
right places.
Mav I move on, Mr. Domaille, you were asked about stewards in
particular.  Do I take it it is your view, as you
already, it is undes ir a bl e and i mp oss ib le indeed for the Police
to take over the run ni ng of a ground inside the ground?
I do not think that is our job, sir.

 Does the fact that the action takes p la ce on p r i v a t e premises
 pose difficulties for your members, Mr. Domaille, for your.

 ? f doCnSt7 knou. that it poses difficulties,                but It changes the
 situation, doesn't it?

 Well In particular I n ot e frnm part of your 8 t a t e m e n ,!;
 is not your policy to eject as a 'matter of course.           Does that
 arise because you are on private p r e m i se s  in part7
 No  not in my mind, sir.    Th e reason for     not ejecting people
 from the ground is that if you eject them from the 9 ^ound they
 become unruly outside it and cause annoyance to the l ° cal
 rlsiSInts which gives the Police an even fi«t he r pr
 causes unnecessary annoyance to the people! in the lociad];f^ _
 who in some cases have sufficient to put up with with diffi
 culties arising from football matches.

, Are you aware in some Clubs' Safety C e r t i f i c a t e it is
  a condition of entry, or may be a condi ti on of e n t *V»
  Officers should have the power to search.         I have in mind
  Shis was not caused by a smoke cannister, but do you have any
  difficulties in rela ti on to searc hi ng at football grounds for
 S ^ r i t% c UnSteSt h i : f ' e Ch n
                                     a ^ 8 anyra7d i f f i c u l t i ea =t present,   but   •

 I
 t o ththekP I
             o u S e e anSaS?i: ; n a i y rua?rceB R c “ ; 9
                                                           t °iil Y e ’neceaaary for
 the Police to record the circ um sta nc es in which a search takes
 p l a c e and  to serve that notice on the person.                T J l s could mesn
 that it will take a co ns iderable time, or it could ta
 Offi*cer longer because he has to re co rd certain                      ,+_iinn
 could cause us difficulties.                T h a t could
                                             inax. uuuxu     cause irritation
                                                                         +ho n rHntto
 the Club leading to unruly behaviour, but I think the poi
                                                                                                                       15.
                                                                                     M.3 . DOMAILLE




                             that is made to me is that it could' be m ede a c o n d i t i o n of
                             entry to the ground th at anybody wanting- to go t he re s ho u ld
                             submit to a Police s e a r ch if that is required.

                           . Two other matters only, Mr. Domaille.        You have r e f e r r e d to
                             having a designated O f f i c e r within the Force r e s p o n s i b l e for
                             all sportsgrounds wi th i n his area.     Do I take it t ha t you
                             still regard the role of the Club Liaison Officer as being a
                 B           useful role?
                           . Oh yes.  The Club L i a i s o n Officer is a totally d i f f e r e n t role
                             from the Officer that I have now talked about.          W o u l d you wish
                             me to expand on that or is it obvious?

                        . I think it is perhaps o bv io us to the Inquiry, Mr. D o mai ll e.
                          Again a matter that was raised with Police C on s t a b l e Riley,
                          would you regard it as app ro pr ia te for that Officer, and those
                          above him, to give c o n s i d e r a t i o n to his travelling to away
                          games.  Do you think that is a useful role?
                       A. Yes, I do.

                       Q. Ju st finally, Mr. Do ma i ll e.        You have referred in I think it
                           is the third of your su bm is s io ns to the p o ssi bi li ty of the
                           Pol ic e having power e f fe c t i v e l y to ban a game if they were
                           not satisfied in these p ar ti c ul a r circumstances with the
                  D        stewardship of games.      T h a t is a power that the P o l i c e have
                           in relation to matter s such as d em on strations at p r e s e nt . .Do
                           you envisage there being a role for a wider power of ba nn in g
                           relating to the cond iti on s of grounds and/or the h is t or y of
                           crowd disorder Act g rou nd s?
                         . You have git me thinking about the banning of m a rc h es and quite
                           frankly the banning of m ar c h e s is sometimes quite complicated,
                           as I am sure everyone is aware, and I would not want the same
                           to apply.to the banning of a football match.             I doubt w h et he r
                           we would actually get to a banning situation, but if the Club
                           knew that we could stop a ma tc h from taking place, and I am
                           talking about non-de s i g n a t e d grounds now, whatever game there
                           mig ht be being played on a n o n- d es ig n at ed ground, if the Club
                           knew that we had some po we r with regard to the s it ua ti on I
                           think that might help in the long run.

                       Q. A less dramatic effect, relating to crowd control,                              ia for the
                          Police to have a power to alter timings of games?
                       A. Ye s sir.

                                    MR. BROUN:     Tha nk   you very much, Mr. Domaille.

                                    MR.GODDARD:      I have no questions,                sir.


                                                    C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by- MR. S L A S G O U :

                       q   . Mr. Domaille, I hope that you and others will forgive me for
                             making one or two ap par en t ly obvious points, but it may be the
                             case- that we get so s o p h i s t i c a t e d that the more obvious points
                             sometimes get overlooked.
                   H
£.L- H U M M , in.
MdlMrtMMan
S N t m C L O Si V I
                                             M.3. DOMAILLE



       Co u l d I direct your attention, please, to the fourth
pag e of your statement and the first point you make about
policies.

       Y o u m a k e the point, which you have repeated orally this
morning, a b o u t your awareness in the bottom section of that
page, of the risks and theduties that you have, p a r t i c u l a r l y
at football ma tc hes with regard to segregation, co nt ai nm en t
and s u p e r v i s i o n of crouds.

       It is inevitably the reality that segregation and con­
tainment are incompatible with freedom of movement?
Y es sir.

T h e r e is r e a l l y nothing that can be done about that basic
in c om pa ti bil ity , is there?
Well only structurally.           If one has a perimeter fence there are
me tho ds of being able to open that fence to allow a croud
through.

I entirely accept that, but uhat ue are really talking about is
compro mis es to mitigate against the uorst excesses of those
tuo opposites, aren't ue?
Yes.

B ut as concepts, confinement, contai nm ent and segregation       are
fu n da me nt al l y inconsistent uith freedom of movement?
I agree.

You have suggested, as others have ue accept, the desirability
of having doors manned and to the med ia and others that has
seemed a very simple solution and up and doun the country it
is being uid el y said: " W h y didn't anybody think of that. Wh at
a ludicr ous situation to lock all those people in."

      Yo u have kindly reminded us of the difficulties, to use
a neutral phrase, that can present an ordinary steuard. uho
is in charge of a door for the pu r po se of letting people out
in an emerge ncy and you knou, I think, probably reported to
you, I do not think you uere there yourself, but you knou of
the personal experiences that steu ar ds at this club have had?
I have been told.

And it uould be fair to say that those experiences have manifestei
the mselves at a Club that is noted for its good behaviour?
Y e s sir.

Is ttrfire a practical solution to that? Having accepted that
that is a problem, may I ask you bluntly, is there anything that
ue as the Club can do about that?
I am not sure that I absolutely und erstand uhat you are asking
me.   Are you saying is there anything that you can do about the
steuards being assaulted?

Can*I put the problem to you bluntly:   if ue lock the doors and
don't have an immediate means of op ening them, there is aluays
a risk.  Agreed?
                                                                            17.
                                                 M.3. DOMAILLE



A. Yes; sir.

Q. If me leave the doors un lo ck e d or me have crash barriers on
   them, me know that it is in evitable that those doors mill be
   crashed, in the crude sense of the word, they mill be abused
   by people being let in?
A. I mould rather say that they could be rather than they will
   be.

Q. But at this ground they have        been?
A. I accept that.

Q. And it is not juBt a qu es ti on of we being mean and not wanting
   people to get in wit ho ut paying, it is the question of segregatior
   that we are back to sir, isn't it?              It is the unruly element or
   the p o t e n t i a l l y ’unruly element coming out of the standing ground
   behind the stand and being let in to the, may I call it the
   more "family" seating.             Do youunderstand?
A. Yes, I do, but I may be able to help on that.               It is not unusual
   for grounds to be locked up until some time in the second h a l f ,
   or perhaps they might be opened for a time at half-time but
   locked again, it is not unusual.             W he n I was talking about having
   the perimeter doors that can be bolted but nut locked, I am
   talking about a situat ion that I would think would be the best
   situation.          I did say earlier on that one has got to look at each
   club in totality with rega rd to the sort of ground they have got
   and that sort of thing.             It is not unusual for people to Be in
   the position that you have explained with regard to the Bra dfo rd
   Gate situation.

Q. It was an enquiry, as you appreciate, and certainly not a
   criticism, but we would like to know if possible from you at this
   stage, or we will wait f o r the Inquiry, what more can be done,
   because when people are put on the doors they are assaulted;
   when the doors are left unlocked people get in and that is a
   source of danger?
A. Yes, I am bound to say that it is in that situation the steward
   needs to be there with the key.

Q. The solution hitherto has been that the steward that we have
   been calling the "gateman", the steward with specific res p on ­
   sibility for keys has, as I think you know, remained in physical
   contact standing beside the Senior Officer on the ground?
A. Yes.

q. it is also fair to say that until the day of this tragedy that
   has worked admirably?
A. Yes sir.

Q. Clearly it cannot go on on that basis and we have got to think
   of something better?
A. That is so, sir.

Q. Could I now come right to the end of your very helpful statement
   on the fourteenth page, the second of your submissions.   Before
   asking you one question about it, may I just say that the
   Directors of the Club agree precisely with the point that you
                                             M.3. DOMAILLE



have made.  They accept that they have a re sp on sib il ity and
that they always have had.

            H a vi ng prefaced it in that m a y , can. me deal with the
re ali ty of the situation in which 100 uniformed Poli ce Officers
are ph ys ica lly on private land with sophi st ica ted radio c o mm un ­
ica tion with one another, but not in immediate contact with the
m a n a g e m e n t of the club.

        Is it not inevitable in that situation that those men
mill in an emergency take charge and be seen by the public to
be in charge?
I think that is a fair comment, but I must make the point that
me are thereby, in my view, appear to be taking, I make the
po i nt here, me are appearing to be taking a re sp on sib il ity which
is not ours but the Club's.

But in accepting the reality of that, as me do, that it is our
r e sp on si bi li t y that you are taking, to use your own words,
n o bo dy is trying to wriggle out of anything, it is just that
that is an inevitable reality of 100 men in uniform particularly
when they are Policemen, isn't it?
Yes.                                                -

The. only point sir that I don't understand, the distinction that
you draw, I think you draw between a fire, a bomb hoax or Bod
f o rbi d a bomb, why are they different from the way in whidh
Po li ce Officers will react, or the way in which the public will
see th os e Police Officers taking dharge.     LJhat is the difference
I think the point was made with regard to briefing.        What I was
ex p la in in g was to do a briefing with regard to all eventuality
was not an easy thing to do, and to do a briefing with regard
to evacuation, the po int that I have made is that we are not
tra in ed f ro m Constable to Chief Constable I said, in methods of
evacuation.
                                       M. J. DOMAILLE



Can we look at a practical example? If the stewards at a
Club - may I put the thing neutrally now and momentarily
divert attention from my clients - are admirably trained,
professional men, who are told of a laid down procedure that
they should carry into effect in the event of a disaster
occurring of a particular type in a particular area of the
ground and that eventuality does arise, their stewardship
of the crowd will be wholly ineffective and will indeed be
counterproductive unless there is complete agreement with
the Police Officers about that procedure?
I think that is fair, depending on the sort of ground and how
many Policemen there are. One can have quite large crowds
when the number of Police are minimal. I believe in the
situation that we are talking about that we had more Policemen
at Bradford than the Police elsewhere had at the Brussels
match.         -
Yes.
Showing how seriously we were taking the whole situation. The
point I am really making is that we could have large crowds
in a ground with quite few Policemen and then it is seen, as
I believe it really is, as a matter for the stewards, because
it is their responsibility and the responsibility of the Club.
We .know that. We accept it and I don't shrink from it. But,
to be practical, let*s look at G- block. Let us assume that
there had been an instruction from the Chairman of the Club
to his steward that day that if a fire breaks out in G block
Mr. X and Mr. Y will be responsible for ushering the crowd
in that section out of doors X and R. But, when the fire
broke out, there happened to be three Police Officers doing
their duty -on the stand and they, acting as they_jnust,
courageously and on their initiative, decide that the right
thing to' do is to usher the same crowd onto the field, because
their experience of training for emergencies is that that is
likely to be the safer place to get them to. It would be
unthinkable that there should be that difference of herding,
and the only answer is that there should be closer liaison, is
it not?
Yes, sir.
As the senior Officer to give evidence before this Inquiry,
Mr. Domaille, may I publicly thank you on behalf of the Club
and its Directors for the invaluable support and encouragement
that you have given them and express on their behalf and
for myself personally our boundless admiration for the courage
of your men.
Thank you, sir.
              Cross-Examined by MR. HARTLEY:
Mr. Domaille, very briefly, I think what is being suggested to
you in very simple terms is not that the Police should divine
their own evacuation procedures but that they should seek to
identify and brief their men upon any established evacuation
procedure there already is and that will serve two purposes:
first of all, avoid the risk of confusion that my learned
  SR/F2»                                                                                    29
                                                                   M. J. DOMAILLE



                            friend Mr. Glasgow was putting to you, and secondly, and
                            perhaps more importantly, bring to the minds of the Club the
                            need for evacuation procedures if there are not any in force.
                            Would you agree that that may be a rather better solution
                            than you divining your own evacuation procedures?
                         A. Yes, really I feel you are putting to me that did not the
                            liaison between the Police and the Club ought to be complete
                            so that everyone knows exactly who is doing what and who is
                    B       responsible for what.
                         Q. That is putting it very generally, but evacuation is a matter
                            which may affect Police duty and policing of the ground very
                            much, may it not?
                         A. Yes. My feeling with regard to evacuation is that the right
                            way to go about the evacuation procedures is to involve all
                            those people that it is suggested should be involved when
                            the ground becomes designated and that the County Council
                            should co-ordinate the comments of the Club, its engineers,
                            the Pire Service and the Police to arrange a proper evacuation
                            procedure. That is my answer to you, sir.
                         Q. Yes, Mr. Domaille, but that covers, of course, those sports
                            grounds that are to be designated.
                         A. That is at present, but surely a matter for this Inquiry may
                    D       be.to look at that to see whether that needs to be extended
                            to other grounds which are not designated at present, because
                            I have already made the point, and I would like to make the
                            point most strongly, that it is those grounds which are not
                            designated, it is those grounds that lie outside the area of
                            enforcement, sir, that I feel will provide the greatest risk
                            in future.
                         Q. Leaving aside the question of designation and assuming things
                            continue as at present, is there not a case for you briefing
                            your Officers on evacuation procedures which have been laid
                            down by the Club,' or their absence if there is an absence of
                            them?
                         A. I take the point that it is obviously one that needs to be
                            considered in some depth, but I am in difficulty to give you
                            a straight "Yes” to your question, sir, and that is because
                            it appears that the Police could get themselves into the
                            situation where we can be involved in evacuation procedures
                            with regard to everywhere that we are, with regard to cinemas,
                            with regard to theatres and whatever. I think there is a
                            danger in that and I think that the Police resource, which is
                            severely stretched to uphold all its responsibilities at the
                            moment, needs to be careful as to our responsibilities on
                            what after all is private property.
                         Q. Thank you Mr. Domaille.
                                                By THE CHAIRMAN:
                         Q. Mr. Domaille, there is a problem about locking doors which
                            has ‘been highlighted in this Inquiry, but what happens at
                            a place like Elland Road, which is a custom built, grade A, if
                    H       I may put it that way, football ground, specifically designed
. l_ N M IM tM , LTB.
KpfelStoanhmrfM m
■m c f f m u d s i mat
 S£/P3                                                                                 21
                                                              M. J. DOMAILLE



                       tq cope with problems of crowd control? Do they have their
                       doors locked during the course of the game?
                    A, The. doors at Elland Road, the ones that I have looked at,
                       because I cannot say I have inspected them all, but they
                       are what I was referring to, sir, they are indeed bolted and
                       open outwards and manned by a steward. Of course, the fact
                       that one could go to that ground and open the door and let
                       one’s friends in makes it very much in the interests of the
            B          Club to see that that door is stewarded. But, I did make the
                       point that at Bradford we had the situation that I have been
                       told of where stewards have been assaulted. Now, if they do
                       get assaulted, then that clearly is a Police responsibility
                       to see that that does not occur.
                    Q. Because there is always the human element that a steward will
                       decide at an exciting moment of the game that hewants to
                       go and watch the game or go and have a cup of tea and talk
                       to his friends and he simply won’t be on the gate when he is
                       wanted.                                              _
                    A. That is the purpose of the door being bolted but not locked,
                       sir.
                    Q. Tes. Well now, about responsibility. We have come across
                       situations where hundreds if not thousands of supporters
                       arrive at a ground, away supporters, some of whom have had
             D         too much to drink, and the Club don’t want them in the ground
                       for obvious reasons and the Police don’t want them wandering
                       round the city for obvious reasons and so they get let into
                       the ground where they can be controlled by the Police more
                       easily but, of course, cause terrible trouble on the terraces.
                       Now, have you had that experience?
                    A. Well, we have had difficulty from people who have been
                       drinking, but I don’t think that control of drink...
                    Q. I am not dealing with drink, it is really the question of
                       letting loose a number of potentially violent people on a city
                       where they can’t be controlled as opposed to letting them
                       into the ground where they behave as hooligans and are called
                       football hooligans. Have you had this situation of having to
                       make the decision either to let them in or keep them out?
                    A. Not personally, but let me assume that I have. I am confronted
                       with the fact that if I let these people who have been drinking
                       into the football ground, and I have got my doubts really as
                       to whether that is totally down to me, but, from a Policeman’s
                       point of view, I would rather have them in the football ground
                       where I have got a number of Policemen because we police the
                       grounds in West Yorkshire with sufficient men to cope, in my
                       opinion, with any crowd disorder that we are likely to meet.
                       It is known that we have policed difficult crowds of Club
                       supporters, but at home, in this County, we don’t really get
                       a lot of trouble with them, and that is because we put a lot
                       of Officers there. Prom a Policeman’s point of view, I would
                       rather have these people in the ground where I have a lot
                       of Policemen than I would in the town centre.
                    Q. Yes, but when the Club says, "We don’t want them inside" and
                H      the Police say, "We would rather have them inside", what then
          «. LTD
(M tm M s i a n
                                                                      M. J. DOMAILLE




     ¥ell^ni?did say that I have not experienced this situation, sir,

l!   The area I feel that is put at football very much, it is
     assumed by people that hooligans and people who cause trouble
     at football matches belong to a club.

l! But*it is patently clear that they do not belong to a Club,
   but the problem is at whose door do we lay the responsibility
   of doing something about it? It seems to me that it has been
   laid at the door of the FA or the Clubs to control that
   situation. Can I just say this, that on behalf of clubs> I
   Sust take it aboard, as a Police Officer, if we have a group
   of people that are very drunk and likely to be going to cause
   trouble on a ground, we should not let them into the ground
   to then become the responsibility of the Football Club, we
    should arrest them before. That is what we ought to do. I
   have already admitted that the inclination - you see the
    situation is this: people have only had a drink. How drunk
    are they? Are they sufficiently drunk to lock up or are they
    just happy, merry people? It is a decision,, an operational
    decision at the time.
Q. 'Thank you very much.
          MR. HOLLAND:   Thank you Mr. Domaille. That is the
     evidence I would seek to adduce oh behalf of the Chief
     Constable.
             THE CHAIRMAN:              Thank you.          i
          MR.’ HARTLEY:  Sir, the next witness is Chief Inspector
     Boocock, whose statement is at bundle D32.
             rpirE CHAIRMAN:            Thank you.
                       CHIEF INSPECTOR ANTHONY BOOCOCK Sworn
                                 'Rygnnined by MR. HARTLEY:

Q. Could we have your full name and station?
A. Anthony Boocock, and I am the Communications Officer of the
   West Yorkshire Police.
Q     I -hvi-i^ir you served an apprenticeship in telecommunications,
Q * 1O ^ y e a r s w i t h t h e R o y a l E l e c t r i c a l a n d M e c h a n i c a l E n g i n e e r ^
    c o m p l e t i n g y o u r s e r v i c e as a s e n i o r n o n - c o m m i s s i o n e d O f f i c e r i
A. That is correct.
Q. You are now responsible for a staff of 20 civilians and
   have been involved in Police communications for some 20 years.
A. 13 years, more like.
0     I am sorry, it is my arithmetic. You have a number of people
      and^axe responsible in particular for providing communications
