Qotz 90
         GARY VINCENT   ROCES    PC 58k OVER 21.
         Hammerton Road Police Station., Uniform 'D' Group
                                                                     q>oR9o
  I

 I am a Police Constable serving with South Yorkshire Police presently
 stationed at Hamnerton Road.
 At 9.30am on Saturday 15th April 1989 I attended at Hillsborough Football ground
 Sheffield for public order duties at the football match there between Liverpool
 footbal club and Nottingham Forest football club, this being an F.A. Cup Semi-
 Final » I paraded for duty in the North Stand section of the ground at 9»^5am
 when briefing was commenced by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield of *F' Division
 and other senior officers*
 I was assigned to Serial 12 headdd by Ps McCall with duties to perform in the
 North Stand for the duration of the game. In overall command of this area of the
 grovxd was Inspectof Woodward.
 After serial briefing by Ps McCall I was paired with Pc 588 Sheerien with
 designated duties to cover the area of the North Stand along the lower walkway
 and to pay particular attention to the refreshment area's. Other officers on
 my serial that I can recall were Pc's 3292 Griffiths and 2683 Nield.
 At 10.15am I commenced foot patrol of my area with Pc Sheerien. All was quiet and
  first arrivals appeared to be about 12.3Qpm - 1.00pm. On occasions I spoke with
  stewards on the North Stand lower gangways and looked out onto the oitch and other
  area’s of the ground. I saw that the covered cop area and South Stand were filling
  up quickly and smoothly as time passed. At 2.10pm I discussed with stewards the
^novecent of fans in and around the cop and South Stand and the lack of activity in
Vnie North Stand and Leppings Lane terracing. The latter two area's were extremely
  quiet.
  At 2.3Qpm there were signs of increased activity in the North Stand lower walkway.
  Myself and Pc Sheerien were bynow constantly walking from one end to the other
  paying particular attention tothe refreshment bars. We noticed that there were signs
  of damp patches at the Leppings Lane end of the Stand walkway which appeared to be
  consistent with urine. Between this time and about 2.5Qpm myself and Pc Sheerien
  witnessed further signs of persons having urinated against walls at the end of the walkway
  and then suddenly we saw dozens of men having entered through the Leppings lane end of
  the stand standing facing the two opposing walls of the walkway urinating.
  Whilst they did so others were joining them so that even as we walked towards them
  there was a constant flow of urine running down the walkway on both sides with men
 rushing up to the walls and replacing those others that had just urinated. There were
 by now so many of them that itwas impossible or impracticle for us to do effectively
 prevent these men or others from joining them.
 As well as these men there were others who were shouting criticism towards us about
 the situation at the leppings Lane end of the stand and the police control of that
 and organisation in general. Although not all of these appeared to have been consuming
^pLcohol,, a lot of them did.
 About this time, 2.50pm, I heard the loud sound of banging on the large blue metal
 gate at the Leppings Lane end of the walkway. Although busy with the men urinating,
 I looked towards that end and saw the movement of the gate and it was obvious that people
 were battering it. I then saw Ps 1055 Dowson come running by me with a serial of men.
 We greeted one another briefly and then parted with him running onwards to the gate.
 I didnt see him again.
 Suddenyl I saw a policeman’s helmet thrown into the air a few feet from me. Myself
 and Pc 688 ran towards this disturbance and I saw Pc Nield and Pc Griffiths.
 I discovered that two officers had arrested a man and were surrounded by an angry
 crowd of other men. For a few momments the sxene was frightening and I feared the
 worst but I think that I heard the roar of the crowd inside the ground and most of the
 men near us ran towards the stand seating area. The two officers, which I cannot
 identify, walked away from us with the arrested man.
 Suddenly I heard a shouted cry from one of the policemen around me a message to the
 effect that we were required on the pitch. I didnt at that time know or understand
 why.
 I ran up to the gangway *A’ and looked onto the pitch. I saw that there were a number
 of spectators and policemen around the rear and side (south side) of the Leppings Lane
 end goal area. It appeared that all officers were making their way onto the pitch and I
 followed.
            GARY VINCENT ROCHE    PC 3&f                                       PAGE 2


As I entered the pitch over the stand wall I treid to remain with those officers
of my serial. At some stage I joined other officers in effecting a full cordon across     |
the pitch just outside the 18 yard box. I remained there for a while and was then         j-
instructed by a Sergeant to go to an access gate in front of the Leppings Lane        ^   j
terraces next to the North Stand. This was an access gate from the terraces onto the pitch,
and was the size of a door inside the perimeter fencing.              ^        ^           *
There were a lot of people, spectators, on the pitch by this time. My instructions as     J
I recall were to prevent people from leaving that area of the terracing to gain entry
onto the pitch.
This section was probably less than half full. There were huge areas of empty spaces.
I was here for some considerable time. There was a tannoy announcement to the effect that
the match was over and this was soon followed by the exodus of Liverpool fans from the
Leppings Lane end. At this I joined others oi the pitch. I spoke with Inspector
Woodward and Ps McCall and some time later I returned to the seating area of the
North stand where I awaited further instructions.

At 6.V?pm I was told to go off duty.




Police Constable   38^
