MARTIN McLOUGHLIN

POLICE CONSTABLE 1412

El SUB-DIVISION - HACKENTHORPE POLICE STATION



I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police, presently stationed

at Hackenthorpe Police Statical in Sheffield.

On Saturday 15th April 1989,       I was on duty at the Sheffield Wednesday

Hillsborough football ground for the FA Cup Semi-Final, Notts Forest v

Liverpool PC.

I went cxi duty at 8.30 am that date, at Hackenthorpe Police station.         I

ascertained that    I would be     in Serial No   4 under Police   Sergeant 266

Jacques.   Shortly after my arrival at Hackenthorpe our Serial travelled to

Hillsborough in a Ford Transit Police Personnel Carrier, arriving at the

ground about 9.00 am.

On arrival at the ground we obtained a cup of coffee etc and made cur way

into the North Stand for briefing which took place, to my recollection

between about   9.45 am and 10.30 am.         The briefing was held by Chief

Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Marshall and in view of the

match being a semi-final tie it was quite lengthy.      As I remember the main

topics were info on crowd control, evacuation procedures and mention was

made of travelling Liverpool pick-pocket teams.      I had vrorked the identical

 semi-final the year before and in my opinion the briefing was no different

 from that given at any other semi-final cup tie.

About 10.30 am my Serial deployed to it's position.        Basically our duties

were around the car park and turnstiles for the Scuth Stand which was

 allocated to Notts Forest fans.

 By 12 noon large numbers of fans were caning into the ground and I noted

 that sore of then were Liverpool fans, who were directed to the parts of the

 ground allocated to their team.      As time vent on the crawls caning to the

 ground became very heavy, as was expected.
•the overall » o d of the crowd was very good, they were good natured and

there was a general 'carnival' atmcsjiiere.              On about 4 or 5 occasions I and

other officers fran my serial stopped fans <*o «ere drinking afcxtal and

made than pour it out onto the ground prior to entering the stadim proper,

as no alcohol was allowed inside.                This was done by the fans without any

complaints or trouble.              I do not recall seeing any person drunk.

My exact position outside the South Stand              w a s   by the main gate leading onto

the car park off Penistone Road.                 I was with Police Sergeant 266 Jacques,

M i c e Constable 2621 Wood, Police Constable 2679 Astin and Police Constable

 1200 Woodward.          Other officers froa our serial were at the turnstiles for

 the South Stand.
 Leading up to kick-off tdras about 3.00 pn, I was made aware that ticket

 touts were    o p e r a t i n g   sarewhere in the vicinity of Penistcne Road.     1 W >   fans

 fran Notts FOrest who had purchased tickets fran a tout asked me if they

 were genuine.          I could give no answer as by that time we were piled oat

 overseeing the crowd.               It becama difficult to move through the cro»d and in

 any case by that time we were in grcuj* of about 2-3 officers among hundreds

  of people.
  Between 2.00 pn and 3.00 pn large numbers (say about 25 to 35 people) either

  asked me personally where they could buy a ticket fran or alternatively I

  heard them shouting out, asking if anyone had a ticket to sell.                    I did in

  fact note at the tine that the majority of these people enquiring about

  tickets were fran Liverpool, this was made obvious by their accents.

  About 2.40 pn I was stood with Police Segreant 266 Jacques, who had a

  personal radio and I could overhear transmissions caning fran officers on

  Leppings Lane who were clearly having problems with crowd control.                        As it

   seemed that these officer were experiencing sane kind of trouble, I then

   stayed next to Police Sergeant Jacques to listen in.

   On the approach to 3.00 pn I could hear increased radio traffic.

   Either at or very shortly prior to 3.00 pn, I heard radio trananissions




                                    KJ
saying that people were being killed and seriously injured at lappings l&ne

turnstiles and I heard an officer asking for a gate to be opened.

I then distinctly heard someone shout on the radio,       "10/99,   10/99".    I

recognised this call as the South Yorkshire code for disaster.      I then heard

a command being given to open a gate.

For sone while then I was engaged dealing with the crowds still entering the

ground through our position, and although I was aware that something unusual

was taking place at Leppings' Lane I do not think any of us knew exactly what

it was.

About 3.20 pn I was informed by Police Sergeant Jacques that it appeared

sane kind of pitch invasion had took place by the Liverpool fans and that

the match had still not kicked off, or had been started and abandoned.

Notts Forest fans were still trying to enter the ground at this time,

through our position, and I noted that anall groups of Liverpool fans kept

 caning round trying to buy tickets.    By this time our position had virtually

 cleared and the fans we saw had obviously been drinking though none of them

 were outright drunk.

 About 3.40 pm we were made aware that sane people had been killed inside the

 ground.   We had been due to take cur meal at 3.00 pn but obviously this went

 by the board as circumstances developed.

 We then received info stating that the match was abandoned as a disaster had

 taken place, there being about 15 to 25 people dead.      We were directed out

 onto Penistone Road to assist ambulances, the Fire Brigade and off-duty

 nurses, doctors etc into caning into the ground.

 Fran about   4.00 pm onwards, people began to leave the ground and this

 presented problems getting emergency vehicles in.       As time went on this

 became thousands of people leaving the ground,       streaming onto Penistone

 Road, which was full of ambulances etc.       It was apparent that many Notts

 Forest fans were not aware of what had taken place as many came up to me

 asking a) if the match was abandoned, and b) how they could go about getting
refunds

About 4.30 pn I noticed sane Liverpool fans on Penistone Road who appeared

to be trying to start fights with the Notts Forest fans.                      Apparently sane

Notts Forest fans had been cheering when the disaster occurred, not knowing

the full extent of what had happened.              Other officers and myself broke up

two   small    fights,    moved    on   the    Liverpool     fans    and   continued   to   see

ambulances in and out.          Under the extreme circumstances I myself decided not

to arrest anyone but to try and calm them down.

We stayed in Penistone Road till about 5.30 pn, at which time the majority

of the crowd had cleared.           We were then recalled inside the ground, to sit

again in the North Stand.               At this time we heard that there were 84

confirmed dead.

We sat in the North Stand for about an hour and after a while we were given

a de-brief by a senior officer.               By that time we were fully aware of what

had taken place and it was obvious that sane officers had gone though an

extreme     ordeal,      sane    were   weeping     openly     and    their    uniforms     were

dishevelled.

About 7.00 pm we were stood dcwn and walked to the Traffic Division at

 Claywheels Lane where we had a bite to eat and recovered our Personnel

 Carrier.     We then returned to Hackenthorpe and went off duty and 8.00 pn.
