                                                     WE/KH/3911




Eric England Esq.,                                   4 January 19 8J
Secretary,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC,
Hillsborough,
Sheffield,
S6 1SW.



Dear Eric,
     I have pleasure in enclosing our fee accounts for the
year 1982, for testing crush barriers, and for design and
supervisory duties in connection with various minor works
and acting in connection with the ground safety certificate.
     With all good wishes for 1983.


                            Yours sincerely,
                                                      WE/JAS/KH/3911




Sheffield Wednesday Football Club P.L.C.,             19 November 1982
Hillsborough,
Sheffield,
S6 1SW.                        “




                     Ground Safety Work 1982
                   Repairs to Crush Barriers


        We certify that Bless Vale (Fabrications) Ltd., are
due the sum of £
plus V.A.T.
                                                 W E /JA S /P M /3 91 1




Bless Vale (Fabrications) Ltd.,                   18 November 1982
Steelway Works,
Sheffield Road,
Sheffield. S9 2FY


For the attention of Mr.




Dear Sirs,
         Sheffield Wednesday Football Club P.L.C.
               Ground Safety Work 1982
     We have pleasure in enclosing a copy of our Certificate
for the stun of £          + V.A.T.   This should be presented
with a single itemised statement for the same amount to
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club P.L.C.
     Of the certified sum, i           is for the strengthening
of the six stanchions adjacent to gate 'tt' on Penistone Road
and Sj        is for the renewal of clips and rails on the
crush barriers.
     A breakddown of the agreed sum of i             is attached.




                                 Yours faithfully,
               Jppv tWJ/s        c^2r

               ^tyv        c uJ^vAxvj:                1r L_a     ^ t u u x o

                                                         WE/JAS/PM/3911
               ^      ■
                                                  ,v-,

                                L iL ,
,p|j0 Spcrotftry                                      18 November 1982
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club P.L.C.
Hillsborough,
Sheffield. S6 1SW



Dear Eric,                                        *
             Ground Safety Work 1982
     Thank you for forwarding the invoice from
Bless Vale (Fabrications) Ltd.           It had of course been
sent to you by mistake.         The amount they were claiming
was also incorrect.
     We have now agreed all the outstanding suns with
Bless Vale for the various items of work they have
carried out at the ground over the last twelve months.
     Two certificates are enclosed.          One is for the
payment of £              which releases the retention on the
radial fences at Leppings Lane end and the gates.                The
final cost of this work is $               1 compared against the
total tender figure of £                 plus the agreed i
for the gates at the back of the West Stand.              Only
twenty pounds of the £|              (
                                     contingency in the original
tender has been used.         This was spent on grinding edges
smooth and trimming barriers which was requested by
S.Y.C.C. on 4 February.
     The other certificate, for the payment of £
is for the repair of the six stanchions adjacent to gate
*0* on Penistone Road and for new clips and rails on the
c»ush barriers.
     The six stanchions cost i         to repair which was the
figure given in the tender submitted by Bless Vale on
24 February.   There was no contingency sum included in their
tender but no additional costs were incurred.    The clips and
rails cost £       1to replace.   The original tender for
repairing the barriers tested last June was £         including
a contingency of £ |    |.   Following your letter dated
21 July we increased the work to include more clips and rails
on Spion Kop and some clips at Leppings Lane end.    On 27 July
we reported to you that, using the rates given by Bless Vale,
we estimated the likely cost of all the repairs to be £
which included a contingency of £
     Whilst carrying out the work we found that when some of
the old clips were removed the tube and angle frames under the
clip were badly corroded.    We reinforced some of these wi&h
plates and one tube was replaced completely.    Together with
additional clips at Leppings Lane end all but five pounds of
the £|   contingency has been used up.
     Copies of the certificates together with their statements
will be presented to you by Bless Vale (Fabrications) Ltd.




                       Yours sincerely,
                                                                        FILE
                           TELEPHONE MESSAGE

JOB No.         C>®\ W           PROJECT:
                                                    f .CL
DATE:       ID ( , \ j
                                                        V/ w W    X^ix
TO:

FROM:


        'D'o                                A   j

      C^~         oJX      WryyJ        lvW{<       °K            \j4l



                            1       ^       tia     3                          fc

        <A*

            k&t          Hwito                                   h'r
                                                                   vb

                   *■Y‘      .     <U
                                        TELEPHONE M ESSAGE

        JOB No.        ^ I»                  PROJECT:

        DATE:

        TO:          t.

        FROM:




                6^A.'ot'*uXjwt|                                                          4-t   ,5         i?r
                             °                                                                 '          1
                U ^ f to s i   \lt- % , »                l-C it.       ir J I ,



                    V"*~v               AUa-v                                                             ^     VW-*-v



                                  •i                 y-f           ^*-0 ^ •                          '|#r- b’«'¥X«^S



                       H*      Oiiuik      4lL ,i« J ^        * » tt. t,tt\k cv,i^,»,a   iai    C%,v<_i~*,..



                                                              1*4...         ijL
    •                *    I                                                                                     c>
                    0C&w'&w k               V*4-S»           'tVfW                t                 J.”

                   ’-Aw-                             ,             $y-.




'
 por -Mie Attsnt.ipn of Hr, Strange,

                                                               Steelway Works, Sheffield Road,
BLESS VALE (Fabrications) LTD.                                 Tinsley, Sheffield. S9 2FY
                                                               Telephone: (0742) 449357 and 449358

invoice
                                                                ■                        1 :         \
                                                   _ M ' A c l 1CW        invoice No.
 Sheffield 'Jprinssr'^y ''P;^tball Club     Our Ref    j ap               VAT Reg. No. 380-2350-85

                                            Your Ref

                                            Ybur Order No.




                          and 'barrier rails prion      cop,




                                             9 NOV W82
                                 Esc’




                                            By                                   Total


                                            Date                         +VAT -, k   %
                                                                              Invoice
                                            Signed                              Total


                  English Ca Reg. 1367330
                                                                        Steelway Works, Sheffield Road,
BLESS VALE (Fabrications) LTD.                                          Tinsley, Sheffield. S9 2FY
                                                                        Telephone: (0742) 449357 and 449358

invoice
Customer
                                              Date October 1982                    Invoice No.       935

 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club            Our Ref       JA¥,/EJW               VAT Reg. No. 380-2350-85

                                              Your Ref

                                                  Ybur Order No.

Quantity                                                                           Price             Amount




              Renew clips and barrier rail spion cap.




                               '■'a s f W o o d     »
                                                          CJ vf-,
                                                           Vrtj   1 *



                                             9 m m 2 nneZ3




Delivery Address
                                              By                                             Total


                                              Date                                 +VAT     lg   %
                                                                                           Invoice
                                              Signed                                         Total


                   English Ca Reg. 1367330
                                                           UE/JAS/KH/3911




                                                           8 September 1982

            Sheffield Wednesday Football Club P.L.C.


ANNUAL INSPECTION OF THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM AS REQUIRED BY THE
                  CERTIFICATE OF GROUND SAFETY


          On 16 August 1982, I made an inspection of the ground,
after having had approximately one fifth of the crush barriers
on Spion Kop tested by members of my staff under my control.
          At the end of June, crush barriers numbers 43, 44, 45,
46, 51, 52, 53, 54,      62,63, 63A, 65, 66, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 78,
79, 80, 86, 87, 88,      89,91, 92, 94, 95, 97,   98, 99, 100, 101, 103,
104, 105, 107, 108,    109and 110 were tested     in accordance with the
procedures laid down in the Guide to Safety       at Football Grounds.
All the barriers sustained the test load although in some instances
the clips retaining the horizontal tube deformed.         These clips have
been replaced.    At the same time, other clips and horizontal rails
showing signs of advanced corrosion were replaced.
          I am now able to certify ^that all 41 barriers have a
satisfactory strength.
          Two radial fences have been installed on the Leppings
Lane terrace to segregate spectators.
          Gates have been installed at various locations around
the ground to prevent intruders entering the stands.
          Repairs have been carried out to six stanchions
supporting sheeting along the boundary wall near gate 'O' on
Penistone Road.
          Sharp corners on the underside of the landing of
$he south exit at the front of the West stand have been
ground smooth.
          Various minor items of remedial work to concrete
and brickwork walls, steps, terracing and the like have
been completed as part of the maintenance programme.
          Certain other items of maintenance work which it
is suggested should be carried out at an appropriate time
have been recommended to the Club.   A list is attached.
       / I certify that in ray opinion the various structures
on the ground are in a satisfactory condition and appropriate
for the stadium to be used to the full capacity as laid down
in the Certificate of Ground Safety. /
                                                             5,s .                 jJLs
                              Cv^rvJj-i         ^■~'|{('   A~“                     «v^f       Ma ^ t^J,   Jj   55



                                                  flOA.
                                                                                                                    WE/JAS/KH/3911
                                                  W oI           $5




                                                                                                                    8 September 1982


                    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club


        Remedial work recommended to be done during the
                                  next maintenance period


T)          Filling of cracks and repairs to spalling concrete at
            ground floor level on the columns at the back of the
            South Stand with polyester based mortar.
2)          Making good and filling the cracks in the concrete beasts
            adjadent to entrances W and X in the South Stand and
            entrance R in the North Stand.— H<d                                                                ^ J
3)          Cleaning and protecting with a concrete haunch the
        i stanchion base at the north side gable of the West ■'
     - J             ti ( ■* i.*'   "* //             e>K * A*' •****-! -
                                                                        i
          Stand.   -                                 / v.L,x
4)        Making good spallftd concrete on the terracing and steps.
5)          Hacking away spalled concrete around corroding reinforce­
            ment, cleaning the exposed bars and making good with                                                                     ,jr^
            polyester based mortar at the rear of the concrete ramps
            and gable walls of the North Staftd.                                                     ' Uwt             <Lj.    H b** ^



     ,' ■                                         «Ar wc^                  ^       n. ^             ^     \ * j ' ■ ;

                •4.                 MU                              \M         ohu                feU‘0                 W -

               ^OV-JL |       f           4C-         /CrV^CLw.   j)J ,~                  ^                     w M


                          "               U?                          /.-u>    ^
                                                   WE/JAS/SEB/3911




Department of Planning & Design,                   6 September 1982
Town Hall,
Sheffield
SI 2HH


For the attention of Mr. D.


Dear Mr.            ,

               Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd
                        Barrier Testing 1982

        At the end of June, crush Barriers 43,44,45,46,51,52,
53,54,62,63,63A,65,66,72,73,74,75,76,78,79,80,86,87,88,89,
91,92,94,95,97,98,99,100,101,103,104,105,107,108,109 and
110 were tested in accordance with the procedure laid down
in the Guide to Safety at Football Grounds.     The barriers are
shown on the attached print of our drawing 1610/63B.
        Barriers 101 (span 2), 102, 106,111,112 and 113 could
not be tested because being towards the back of the terrace
a suitable reaction point is not available against which to
jack.
        In all cases the barriers sustained the test load
although in some instances the clips retaining the horizontal
tube deformed.     All the clips which in our opinion deformed
excessively or were showing signs Of advanced corrosion have
been replaaed with new.     These were on barriers 51,52,53,54,
62,63,75 and 86.
        The tubes on barriers 111,112,and 113 were found to be
corroded at the supports and have also been replaced with new.
          Visual inspection of the ^remaining barriers both on
Spion Kop and Leppings Lane terrace revealed some corroded
clips and tubes.   Although the barriers on Leppings Lane are
not due for testing until next year and those on Spion Kop,
on their second cycle of tests, until 1985 and 1986 it was
decided to replace the defective members this year.    This work
has now been completed.
          Enclosed are single copies of our record sheets showing
the results of the barrier tests.


                              Yours sincerely,
                                                WE/JAS/SEB/3911




The Secretary,                                   6 September 1982
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.
Hillsborough,
Sheffield
Sfc 1SW


Dear Eric,
                  Safety at Sports Ground Act

     Following the barrier tests, ray visit to the ground
on 16 August and the vibsit by the S.Y.C.C. Officer Working
Party on 24 August I have pleasure in enclosing my annual
certificate and accompanying list of remedial work.   A copy
has been sent to David Vaughan.


                                  Yours sincerely,
              TELEPHONE M ESSAG E




                     .VM , Y-   -c ' A r i - v W (

FROM
       T)-r
                                                    WE/JAS/SE3/3911




Bless Vale (Fabrications) Ltd.                      27 August 1982
Steelway Works,
Sheffield Road,
Tinsley,
Sheffield
S9 2SY


For the attention of Mr.


Dear Mr. Walker,
                   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.
                   New Clips and Ralls for Crush Barriers

     This afternoon I inspected work which you earlier
reported as being complete.
     Attached is an extract from our drawing 1610/63
showing the location of two clips which require further
attention.
     Please go round all the new bolts and clips and
ensure that they are properly painted.     Several bolts
have not been painted at all.     There are hoiite games on
7 and 11 September.

                                            Yours sincerely,
                             "r- t.=
                    ■''ihccLvACsi*tt%i<:f
; ■■                             : =y '


  -    ^   •: > 7      ~|
                    & \ _____________




                                                       WE/CW/3911




Chief Executive,                                       27 August, 1982
South Yorkshire County Council,
Department of Administration,
County Hall,
Barnsley.
S. Yorks.


For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan


Dear Mr. Vaughan,

             Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.
                 Minutes of Meeting held on 24 August

      Thank you for sending us a copy of your note of the
proceedings of the meeting.       My one comment   on these minaties
is that although the leakage of water between the north
west terrace and west stand was discussed, there was
no commitment to effect a repair.        This is not a matter
which in any way affects the ground safety at this moment.
As I explained, creating the perfect seal at a junction
of this kind which is subject to opening and closing with
change in temperature is extremely difficult and quite
expensive.   The polysulphide sealant which would need to
be used would itself cost not less than £200 to install
but we fear that unless a carefully shaped chase is cut
into both the concrete and the brickwork the sealant
will not work.     Thus an expenditure of quite a few hundred
pounds would be necessary and the Club is unlikely to
wish to spend this money on a matter which does not
present a hazard to spectators.         Nevertheless, we will
suggest that this be put on the list of items which might
be attended to during future maintenance by the Clubs own staff.
                                             Yours sincerely,
c.c. Eric England
 SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
           With the Compliments of

THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
To           > R • -W . E

               FOR INFORMATION




               FOR ACTION




               FOR COMMENT




Fro                             Date     ’Z S   - *b
Department    o t   Administration
County Hall
Barnsley       Tel. Barnsley86141 Ext.      K-iz
CR/ACE/001
                    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

           Note of a Meeting held at the Hillsborough Stadium
                      Sheffield on .24 August 1982


PRESENT:     Representing the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd

Dr W Eastwood (Messrs Eastwood & Partners)
E England (Club Secretary)
J A Strange (Messrs Eastwood & Partners)

            Representing the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)

            (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
Ms J Barker (South Yorkshire Police)
D Billington (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
C Calvert (South Yorkshire Police)
R Carnall (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
R Herold (South Yorkshire Police)
J T H Ray (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
          |(City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
T Stuart (South Yorkshire Police)
D I Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)
A Wright (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)

1______ Purpose of Meeting

The visit was the usual summer inspection carried out of all Football
League Clubs in South Yorkshire (originally referred to in the Chief
Executive's letter to the Club dated 10 January 1981).

       Ground Inspection                       Eastwood &
                                                         2                    7 AUG 1982
       West Stand                              Rec’d            ...........
■It was noted that there was light surface corrosion at the foot of the
 steel supporting pillar nearest to the North-West Terrace. As there was
no enclosing wing to the stand, the pillar was open to the elements.

The possibility of spectators climbing onto the roof of the store shed to
the rear of the stand and adjacent to the boundary wall was discussed.

IT WAS AGREED -

(i)    That the Club would arrange for the foot of the steel supporting
pillar to be cleaned and painted and possibly for the gusset plate to be
covered by a concrete haunch.

(ii)   That the Club would consider whether any useful purpose would be
served by retaining the store shed adjacent to the boundary wall.

(iii) T h at .the Club would investigate and make good the crack in the
concrete adjacent to stand entrances "W" and "X".

B      North West Terrace

It was noted that the cracks in the concrete underneath the Terrace had
been repaired and appeared satisfactory.  However, there was seepage of
water between the North West Terrace and the West Stand in heavy rain.

IT WAS AGREED - That the Club'would make good the bitumastic sealing
between the Terrace and the West Stand.

C     North Stand

A crack in the concrete at the expansion joint adjacent to Stand entrance
"R" was noted.

IT WAS AGREED - That the Club would investigate and make good the crack.

D     Spion Kop

The Building Authority suggested that at some future date the Club should
consider giving attention to the original steps at the rear of the Kop
(at the bottom of the new staircase) so as to remove the slight downward
tilt and ensure a common height of risers.

IT WAS AGREED - That, whilst there had been no reported incidents, the Club
would bear the suggestion in mind for attention at a future date.

E      South Stand

The Club reported that the gantry access to the Commentary Box on the top
of the Stand was not now used, except byground maintenance staff.

IT WAS AGREED - That the Club would replace the missing rings    in the chain
used as a handrail on the gantry.

F      Crush Barriers

The Club reported that the remaining third of the crush barriers on the
Spion Kop had now been tested. The only problem had been rusting of some
of the clips over the top tubes. These had been replaced or would be
replaced by the start of the Season on 28 August.

A visual inspection had also been carried out of the clips on the crush
barriers on the West and North-West Terraces, and similar action taken.

G      Police and First Aid Facilities

The new police and first aid facilities under the North Stand were well
on the way towards completion> and would be utilised at the opening match
on 28 August.

H      ■Penistone
        ‘     -....Road
                    i-inIyI■I■Side
                              ... .ii
It was noted that the steel girders a d j o ining the wall at the rear of the
Butcher's Shop had been satisfactorily attended to, and that the Folding
Exit Gates had had new tops and runners installed and the concrete made
good.

So far as the proposal to re-site an existing toilet block to the rear of
the Spion Kep to enable additional turnstiles and an exit gate to be
installed was concerned, the Club had reported to the Chief Executive
by letter that this had had to be deferred until the end of next season
due to the size of the problem and the possibility of creating hazards for
spectators.
I      Television Camera Facilities

It was noted that the scaffolding Tower erected on the Spion Kop for
Television camera purposes had now been removed.

There did not appear to have been any progress with the Television
Authorities to date on the subject of permanent or semi-permanent
facilities.

J     Fire-Fighting Equipment

Whilst the Club were confident that all of the fire extinguishers, etc,
were still sited as originally required by the General Safety Certificate,
the County Fire Service felt that a routine inspection of the equipment
would now be appropriate.

K     Maintenance

Certain areas of spalled concrete in the Stadium required attention, and
the Club had the work in hand as items of routine maintenance.
                     SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

           Note of a Meeting held at the Hillsborough Stadium
                      Sheffield on .24 August 1982


PRESENT:     Representing the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd

Dr W Eastwood (Messrs Eastwood & Partners)
E England (Club Secretary)
J A Strange (Messrs Eastwood & Partners)

             Representing the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)

            'City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
Ms J Barker (South Yorkshire Police)
D Billington (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
C Calvert (South Yorkshire Police)
R Carnall (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
R Herold (South Yorkshire Police)
J T H Ray (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
          (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
T Stuart (South Yorkshire Police)
D I Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)
A Wright (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)

 1
 _______Purpose of Meeting

The visit was the usual summer inspection carried out of all Football
League Clubs in South Yorkshire (originally referred to in the Chief
Executive's letter to the Club dated 10 January 1981).

    2______ Ground Inspection

A         West Stand

■It was noted that there was light surface corrosion at the foot of the
 steel supporting pillar nearest to the North-West Terrace. As there was
no enclosing wing to the stand, the pillar was open to the elements.

The possibility of spectators climbing onto the roof of the store shed to
the rear of the stand and adjacent to the boundary wall was discussed.

IT WAS    AGREED -

(i)     That the Club would arrange for the footof the steel    supporting
pillar to be cleaned and painted andpossibly for the gusset     plate to be
covered by a concrete haunch.

(ii)   That the Club would consider whether any useful purpose would be
served by retaining the store shed adjacent to the boundary wall.

(iii) That the Club would investigate and make good the crack in the
concrete adjacent to stand entrances "W" and "X".

B         North West Terrace

It was noted that the cracks in the concrete underneath the Terrace had
been repaired and appeared satisfactory.  However, there was seepage of
water between the North West Terrace and the West Stand in heavy rain.

IT WAS AGREED - That the Club'would make good the bitumastic sealing
between the Terrace and the West Stand.

C      North Stand

A crack in the concrete at the expansion joint adjacent to Stand entrance
"R" was noted.

IT WAS AGREED - That the Club would investigate and make good the crack.

D      Spion Kop

The Building Authority suggested that at some future date the Club should
consider giving attention to the original steps at the rear of the Kop
(at the bottom of the new staircase) so as to remove the slight downward
tilt and ensure a common height of risers.

IT WAS AGREED - That, whilst there had been no reported incidents, the Club
would bear the suggestion in mind for attention at a future date.

E      South Stand

The Club reported that tue gantry access to the Commentary Box on the top
of the Stand was not now used, except byground maintenance staff.

IT WAS AGREED - That the Club would replace the missing rings   in the chain
used as a handrail on the gantry.

F      Crush Barriers

The Club reported that the remaining third of the crush barriers on the
Spion Kop had now been tested. The only problem had been rusting of some
of the clips over the top tubes. These had been replaced or would be
replaced by the start of the Season on 28 August.

A visual inspection,had also been carried out of the clips on the crush
barriers on the West and North-West Terraces, and similar action taken.

G      Police and First Aid Facilities

The new police and first aid facilities under the North Stand were well
on the way towards completion, and would be utilised at the opening match
on 28 August.

H      Penistone Road Side
       '■   1 ■ 1 1■ 1 " r * *" ■

It was noted that the steel girders ad j o ining the wall at the rear of the
Butcher's Shop had been satisfactorily attended to, and that the Folding
Exit Gates had had new tops and runners installed and the concrete made
good.

So far as the proposal to re-site an existing toilet block to the rear of
the Spion Kep to enable additional turnstiles and an exit gate to be
installed was concerned, the Club had reported to the Chief Executive
by letter that this had had to be deferred until the end of next season
due to the size of the problem and the possibility of creating hazards for
spectators.
I      Television Camera Facilities

It was rioted that the scaffolding Tower erected on the Spion Kop for
Television camera purposes had now been removed.

There did not appear to have been any progress with the Television
Authorities to date on the subject of permanent or semi-permanent
facilities.

J     Fire-Fighting Equipment

Whilst the Club Were confident that all of the fire extinguishers, etc,
were still sited as originally required by the General Safety Certificate,
the County Fire Service felt that a routine inspection of the equipment
would now be appropriate.

K     Maintenance

Certain areas of spalled concrete in the Stadium required attention, and
the Club had the work in hand as items of routine maintenance.
                            TELEPHONE MESSAGE

JOB No.        C>311              PROJECT:
                                                   y- e •
DATE:      rl ^ l & j d l
                                             cA>yi^ L M c
TO:

FROM:




      fcvs.t-rrtiwo,        \£*                 iJL^,   C.<*W   0 K
                                                                      FILE
                           TELEPHONE MESSAGE

JOB No.          W !)          PROJECT:
                                                 W . f . C •
DATE:

TO:                                    Vfr-2t)

FROM:



              1'Cki        t-j-uvL:   ^ ivva^     ihA"    Hvl(v knvrw-|..

      O'Vv.      Qvfc,   '"■OU (             otjvt'oi ?         't'-—■^

  oW
                                                         W E /JA S /C W /3911




Eric England Esq.,                                       27 July, 1982
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.,                  (Dictated 26 July, 1982)
Hillsborough,
Sheffield.
S6 1SW


Dear Eric,'.

               New Clips and Rails for Crush Barriers

      As John Strange explained, to you this morning we have
received three tenders for the new clips and rails.           These
were opened by Or. Eastwood in the presence of John Strange.
The total tender sums received are as follows:
      Bless Vale (Fabrications). Ltd.               -     £
      George Shaw Engineering       (Sheffield) Ltd. -    £
      Norman Tate A Sons Ltd.       .               -     £
      Each tender includes a contingency sum of £             which
may or may not need to be expended.       The work for which we
invited tenders was for repairing the barriers tested last
month, i.e. approximately one third of those on Spion Kopy
                                •
                                .         ■
However, if we now include all the clips and rails which on
visual inspection are badly corroded, based on the tender
figures the cost is likely to be in the region of ^
plus a contingency sum of say £ ^ I We have inserted what
may seem a high contingency sum because of the worry that
when the corroded clips and tubes are removed we find the
supporting frames are also badly corroded.       These may then
need plating or otherwise reinforcing.
     All the work will be completed by 27 August, ready
for the first home game against Middlesborough.
      As agreed yesterday we have informed Bless Vale that
you are prepared to accept their tender.
      A possible draft of a letter of acceptance is enclosed
together with a copy of our tender documents.


                              , Yours sincerely,
                                                          WE/JAS/KH/3911




 Bless Vale (Fabrications) Ltd.,                          29 July 1982
 Staniforth Works,
 Maih Street,

 Sheffield,
 SI2 4LB.



 For the attention of Mr.


. Dear Mr.    ’    ■.
                   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.
                   New Clips and Rails for Crush Barriers
         Please find enclosed two prints of each of our drawings
 161Q/63B and 64A on which we have marked the clips and rails
 to be replaced.
        We have added clips at Leppings Lane end bringing the
 total to 35.   The rail noted as 2.7m long in our letter of
 26 July should be 3.6m^# barrier No. 17.      You will see that
 the barrier posts do not line through and the rail will need
 to be cranked.
         As explained to you yesterday it is absolutely essential
 that once the work is started it is ready for use by the public
 on 28 August.    This means that paint must be dried and hardened
 by this date.
         We also draw your attention to the fact that a friendly
 game has been arranged for Saturday, 14 August, although it is
 not certain that the terraces will be open to spectators.


                                       Yours sincerely.
     The simplest treatment which is likely to retard the
decay significantly would be to fill all the cracks with
an epoxy mortar which needs to be well packed to as great
a depth as possible.   I attach a note giving details of
a mortar which would be suitable.    The men carrying out
the work will need to be quite painstaking in their efforts
to fill the cracks as deeply as possible.
     There are a couple of places where small lengths of
bars are exposed due to toncrete spalling.     In these cases
any loose concrete should be hacked off and the bar thoroughly
cleaned of all rust with a wire brush before painting with
a rust inhibitor.   The bar Should then be covered with the*
epoxy mortar which should be well-packed into placef and to
sufficient thickness to restore the shape of the column.
     A brief specification is attached.     John Strange will
also explain to your staff what is required.


                               Yours sincerely.
                                                                                        FILE
                                 TELEPHONE MESSAGE

    JOB No.                           PROJECT:
                                                         S v y ^ ,C •
    DATE:        ajtiJji
                                                                 »0 w.
    TO:                               (
    FROM:


£          VM -         ^                                                ^       JU4-


                      vj;                 .      e^jlr       J 4 a ”4.- _                 £

          A*S.                 UOst    u^ c              ov\..

             I'^S.P         ^ 4 A*-   ^vsr^jt-
                                                                             f* m».
                           TELEPHONE MESSAGE

JOB No.        33 | )         PROJECT:

DATE:        1 l/7 ) S I

TO:

FROM:



        )p tw - U ^ U J -           M frs# e<   „ He     0 ,4    JU
        y                                 u
                            /^u^ovrrv.) ,       T ^ -w    U ^e   -rou2Juv»J

      O-K.        •l*tW      -j*,     V vw ^ q ,
                                                                      FILE
                        TELEPHONE MESSAGE

JOB No.      tS ) V \           PROJECT:
                                               S -w ip .c .
DATE:      13)1)* 1

                                                        V    ^v£.
TO:       ‘L tvo            4

FROM:



                                 COv,,^
                                                       ^rw-4'




                        Y                      ^         u      yjr
      ^        -UwA ,            O'JL      .       I
                                                                FILE
                           TELEPHONE MESSAGE

JOB No.    ^3 I I             PROJECT:

DATE:

TO:

FROM:



                       ^       **~4c   Ltrw U
                                            '-*         \-..f    en.-


        UM/ill—.      Qstrx*'dtj r ^              /-8 0 ot£

                   c_rw^-’
                         '-4'%^-^ (




                                                         -»
                                                          %
  \
                                                       WE/KH/3911




The Secretary,                                         20 August 1982
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.,
Hillsborough,
Sheffield,
S6 1SW.



Dear Eric,
                   Annual Inspection for Safety Certificate
      As you will know I had a look round the ground on 16 August
preparatory.'.to the meeting with the South Yorkshire C.C. Working
Party next week.   One or two minor matters came to light which
are being put right by your own staff prior to the visit, but
I thought I should write you a note concerning some of the
reinforced concrete columns at the back of the South stand.
      It is clear that at some time in the past (I believe you
said just after the war) the columns were treated with sprayed
concrete, often called gunite.   The most likely reason was that
the steel reinforcement had rusted and the consequent swelling
had begun to spall off the concrete round the bars. The treatment
which was applied was very appropriate and it has clearly had the
effect iof preserving the life for another 30 years.
      It can now be seen that further cracks are developing.
Sometimes these are vertical in the outer face of the gunite.
In other cases the gunite is being pushed off the original
concrete causing cracks in the sides of the columns roughly
in line with the face of the brickwork (the gunite stands proud
of the brickwork)•
      These cracks will be allowing dampness and air to get
at the reinforcement so that rusting will now take place at
an accelerating rate*   The loss of metal due to rusting
will obviously reduce the carrying capacity, but more
seriously those parts of the columns which are subjected
to bending (near first floeo level for example) may lftse
completely their bending capacity if the reinforcement
becomes debonded from the concrete.
     Fortunately, the splitting is only taking place in the
lower part of the columns which mery much reduces the
immediate problem.   I suspect that the rusting is taking
place at this level due to rising damp, probably through
the brickwork.   Alternatively it may be rain is penetrating
sideways from the brickwork into the columns.    There
certainly seems to be a relationship with the brickwork
because the last two or three columns at the west end
are free-standing with no brickwork infilling and they are
showing no signs of serious decay.
     The cracking is also beginning to occur on the inside
face of the columns within the building. Most of the columns
are covered on their inner faces by panelling or other
finishes so the extent of the trouble on the inside cannot
easily be determined.
     Something should be done fairly soon to provent unacceptable
deterioration.   You have made It clear that in the present
financial climate there is no possibility of a ruthless
treatment involving hacking off all the splitting concrete
cover to fulfy expose the bars# cleaning off all rust, treating
with a rust inhibitor, and then restoring the cover to the
bars with either an epoxy mortar or gunite.     This would be
too expensive.   Your Board would probably prefer to apply
first-aid using the labour of your own staff, even though this
will only last a year or two.
                Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.
                    South Stand - Repairs to Concrete


1.   Cracks
     a)   Remove all dirt and loose adhering material by
              wire brushing.    Blow out any dust and dirt
              in the crack.    Make sure existing concrete
              surface is dry before applying Reebafill mortar.


     b)   Mix the constituents as directed by the
           manufacturer and using a trowel or knife press
              the mortar as far as possible into the cracks.


2.   Spalled Concrete
     a)   Hack away all loose concrete and thoroughly
           wire brush the exposed concrete.


     b)   Clean     all exposed reinforcing bars with a
           wire brush to remove all rust.


     c)   Paint     the cleaned bars with Nitozinc in accordance
           with the manufacturers instructions.


     d)   After     the Nitozinc has dried apply a priming
           coat of Nitoprime S to all the surfaces.


     e)    Prepare sufficient surfaces of concrete to accept
           a full pack of mixed     Nitomortar HB, to reduce
          waste.      Mix the Nitomortar HB as directed by
           the manufacturer and apply the mortar with a
           trowel in layers of up to 50mm thick just as the
           second coat of primer begins to gel.


     The Reebafill, Nitozinc, Nitoprime S and Nitomortar are
all manufactured by CBP U.K. Ltd. Vimy Road, Off Leighton Road
Leighton Buzzard, Bedfordshire LU7 7ER.     Telephone 0525 375646
EASTWOO D & PARTNERS                                                                                                B o w m a k e r H ouse
              C o n s u ltin g     E n g in e e rs
                                                                                                                    23 K ingfield Road
                                                                                                                    S h effield S11 9AS
W . E a stw o o d            B.Eng., Ph.D ., F.Eng., F.I.C.E.,                                                      T el.: (0742) 583871
                             F.I.Struct.E., F.G.S., M.C ons.E.
                                                                                                                    Telex:         547266
A. A. W ood                  B.Eng., Ph.D ., C.Eng., F.I.C.E.,
                             F.I.Struct.E., M .I.W .E.S., M.C ons.E.
                                                                                                                                       and at:
A. G. B u rd e tt            G .M ., B .Sc.(Eng ), C.Eng., M .l.C .E .
                                                                                                                      3 6 H ig h   H o lb o rn
R. C. A. E a stw o o d       B.Sc., C.Eng., M .I.C .E ., M .t.S truc tE .
                                                                                                                      London W C 1 V 6A A
Associates:
                                                                                                                      T e l.: (0 1 ) 242 7436
G e o ffre y S pir           C.E ng., M .l.C .E ., M .I.M e ch .E .

C. S. Greaves                B.Eng., C.E ng., M .l.C .E ., M .I.S tru c t.E .
                                                                                                 Our Ref:      WE/JAS/CW/39 11
A . J . Clough               B .A ., C.E ng., M .C .I.B .S ., M .I.M e c h .E .

J . A. Strange               C.E ng., M .I.S tru ct.E .                                          Your R e f:
Consultant:
A. L. Percy                  M .T e c h .(H o n .), B.Sc., C.E ng., F.I.C .E .,
                             F.l S tru c t.E ., F.I.M u n .E ., M .R .T .P .I.




George Shaw Engineering (Sheffield) Ltd., Carlisle Street East,
   Sheffield. S4 7QN
                                                 27 July, 1982
Norman Tate & Sons Ltd., Fabrication House,
   Barbers Avenue, Rawmarsh, Rotherham.




Dear Sirs,

                            Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.
                            New Clips and Rails for Crush Barriers

              Thank you for your recent tender for the above work
which we are sorry to say was not successful.                                                             The tender
submitted by Bless Vale (Fabrications) Ltd. of Sheffield
has been accepted by our client.
              However, we would like to thank you for your time
and effort spent preparing your price and hope you will
be successful on future occasions.


                                                                                  Yours faithfully,




                                                              Registered in England -   No. 1134531
                                                   W E /JA S /C W /3911




                               .                     26 July, 1982



                  Draft of Acceptance of Tender

            Sheffield Wednesday, Football Club Ltd. to
                  Bless Vale (Fabrications) Ltd.


     We accept your tender dated 20 July 1982 for the
installation of new clips and rails for the crush barriers.
The Contract will be in accordance with the tender documents
issued by Eastwood & Partners on 13 July 1982.
      The whole of the Works as, described in the Documents
and shown on the Drawings is to be constructed and maintained
for the sum of £371.20 or such other sum as may be
determined in accordance with the Contract.
      The whole of the Works is. to be complete by
27 August 1982.                            —
                               TELEPHONE MESSAGE

JOB No.                              PROJECT:
                                                               S.W. ^ ,c ,
DATE:       rL ^ j l j s fl
                                                                           b ^ c            is>^i
TO:

FROM:



                                   U ^ L jz> T^r                   JU^3        ^       id*. ,

       A -jpj             <\LA'            bU^M                                1,-Vr^t

      3- . tn^A.

  VJb O            ■*.
                              1
        ^          J i             ALt            W     t .    ^      c i^ o



                         *-ut£jL         c w \-           4 « -i4 '   .?   k       6    ^    lb o


         r ■ a£ “) 5 o                            OK.
                                                       W E /JA S /C W /3911




Bless Vale (Fabrications) Ltd.,                        26 July, 1982
Staniforth Works,
Main Street,
Hackenthorpe,
Sheffield.
S12 4LB


For the attention of Mr.


Dear Mr.

              Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.
              Nev Clips and Rails for Crush Barriers

      Thank you for your tender, dated 20 July 1982 in the
sum of E         We are pleased to say that our client
wishes to accept your tender and has asked us to send
you this letter of intent.    Formal acceptance will follow
shortly.
      Since issuing tender documents, the scope of the work
has increased.   The quantities are now as follows*
      Clips   $4 2>5              „
                                                                          4.4.
      Rails   60.3bbb x 5mm CBS   *        2.4m - 2                       3't
                                      Vfe JUrTii - 1                      <u
                                           4.8m - 2
                                                                          1_
                                           6. 4m — 1                     14 <
      We will mark on    site the .clips and railsto be
replaced tod then record these on a copy        of thelayout
drawing# but in the meantime would you please place
orders for the materials and proceed with fabrication.
      All the above work soist be comple te by 27 August 1982
together with the outstanding items associated with the
gates and fences.
                                  .Yours sincerely,
Sheffield W ednesdoy'^/j^g1Club
                                                                                    Registered Office
                                                                                    Hillsborough, Sheffield S6 1SW
                                                                                    Telephone: 0742-3 43 1 23 /4
Chairman:    H. E. McGEE
                                                                                    Telegrams: Wednesday Sheffield 6
Manager:     J. L. CHARLTON, O.B.E.
                                                                                    Registered No. 62478 England
Secretary:   E. ENGLAND


             Messrs. Eastwood & Partners                                            EE/CB
             Bowmaker House,
             23 Kingfield Road,                                                     21st July 1982
             Sheffield, S11 9AS




             Dear

             ANNUAL CERTIFICATE OF GROUND SAFETY

             Many thanks for your letter of the 12th July re barriers on Spion Kop
             and Leppings Lane, and I agree that you put the work in hand as
             detailed in order that we have no dangerous barriers for the start
             of the season.

             Yours sincerely,




             Secretary.
                                      E astw ood & P ai'tueis
                                                 22JUL1982
                                      Rec’d *......... ■-........................
quotatioV
 This quotation is given subject to our Standard Conditions of Contract




Norman Tate & Sons Ltd,                                                         Structural and Fabrication Engineers
                                                                                Registered Office:
                                                                                Fabrication House, Barbers Avenue,
                                                                                Parkgate, Rotherham,
                                                                                South Yorkshire. S62 6DE
                                                                                Rotherham (0709) 524267




Eastwood & Partners                                                             20th July, 1982
Bowmaker House
23 Kingfield Road                                                               Y our Ref.   3 9 1 1
Sheffield
Sll 9AS                                                                         Our Ref.     ST/CB/Q7923



Dear Sirs

re:                                            New Clips & Rail for Crush Barriers -
                                               Sheffield Wednesday Football Club


Further to your recent enquiry regarding the above we take pleasure
in submitting the completed form of tender as requested.

We have assumed in the preparation of our offer a small transit
lorry will have access to the base of the Spion Kop.

We thank you for your enquiry and trust we may be of service
in the near future.

Assuring you of our best attention at all times, we remain,


Yours, f a i t h f u l l y
                                                 SONS & LTD




GENMAlTMANAGER




                                                                                 Directors:
                                                                                 D. N. Tate (Managing)
                                                                                 A. C. Tate (Secretary)
 Ib c s a J'
 I    ME MB ER
                                                                                 Registered No: 676468
       SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB LTD

   CONTRACT FOR THE INSTALLATION OF NEW CLIPS AND

             RAILS FOR CRUSH BARRIERS




To: Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.,
    Hillsborough,
    Sheffield.   S6 1SW



GENTLEMEN:

     Having examined the Drawing, Conditions of Contract and
Specification for the construction of the above named Works,
we offer to construct, complete and maintain the whole of the
said Works in conformity with the said Drawing— Condi tinns
of Contract and Specification for the sum of



or such other sum as may be ascertained in accordance with
the said conditions.

     We undertake to complete and deliver the whole of the
Works comprised in the Contract within the time stated in the
Appendix hereto.

     Unless and until a formal Agreement is prepared and
executed, this Tender, together with your written acceptance
thereof, shall constitute a binding Contract between us.

     We understand that you are not bound to accept the
lowest or any Tender you may receive.
                                                                                       Am ount
Number                  Item Description                     Unit   Q uantity   Rate




                    Summary

     1 . Clips as shown on        drawing 3911/4             nr        12

     2 . Rails, 60.3 mm x 5 mm C.H.S.

         2400 mm long                                        nr          2

         4800 mm long                                        nr          1




         General Contingency




                              J_________________________ L

                           Total Tender Sum
                             Ap p e n d i x


Amount of Bond          (10)                            Not required

Minimum amount of third party
insurance             (23(2))                           £500,000

Time for completion     (43)                            The whole of the
                                                        Works to be
                                                        complete by
                                                        27 August 1982


Liquidated damages
for delay                                               £ 100/week.

Period of Maintenance (49(1))                           12 months

Vesting of Materials not on
Site                  (54 (1)) (60(11))                 Not applicable

No form of measurement adopted,
lump sum, fixed price (57)

Percentage of adjustment of P.C.
Sums                  (59A(2) (b) ) (5(c))              No P.C. Sums

Percentage of the Value of Goods                        No retent ion .
and materials to be included in                         Single payment on
Interim Certificate    (60(2) (b))                      completion of work
Minimum amount of Interim                               to satisfaction of
Certificate           (60(1))                           Engineer




                                   We are, Gentlemen.

                                    Yours fait

                                              Sigr

                                              Addi




                                              Witr




Date ..      .T-KX. • .5/V
       SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB LTD

   CONTRACT FOR THE INSTALLATION OF NEW CLIPS AND

             RAILS FOR CRUSH BARRIERS




To: Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.,
    Hillsborough.
    Sheffield.   S6 1SW



GENTLEMEN:

      Having examined the Drawing, Conditions of Contract and
Specification for the construction of the above named Works,
we, offer to construct, complete and maintain the whole of the
said Works in conformity with the said Drawing.^ Conditions
of Contract and Specification for the sum^of



or such other sum as may be ascertained in accordance with
the said conditions.

     We undertake to complete and deliver the whole of the
Works comprised in the Contract within the time stated in the
Appendix hereto.

     Unless and until a formal Agreement is prepared and
executed, this Tender, together with your written acceptance
thereof, shall constitute a binding Contract between us.

     We understand that you are not bound to accept the
lowest or any Tender you may receive.
    a
L



N um ber                   Ite m D e scrip tio n                           Rate




                                                                           S U P P LY £t FIX
                       Summary

           Clips as shown on drawing 3911/4                    nr     12



           2400 mm long                                        nr

           4800 nun long                                       nr




           General Contingency




                                                               r\ O

                            4.8                    i&djiyo')

                             la'4                  t4

                                                     as~J.

                             u*Ms<                  «i*-0




                               Total Tender Sum

                                                                                               j
4


                              APPENDfX


    Amount of Bond          (10)                        Not required

    Minimum amount of third party
    insurance             (23(2))                       £ 500,000
    Time for completion     (43)                        The whole of the
                                                        Works to be
                                                        complete by
                                                        27 August 1982


    Liquidated damages
    for delay                                           £ 100/week.
    Period of Maintenance (49(1))                       12 months
    Vesting of Materials not on
    Site                  (54(1)) (60(11))              Not applicable
    No form of measurement adopted,
    lump sum, fixed price (57)

    Percentage of adjustment of P.C.
    Sums                  (59A (2) (b)) (5(c) )         No P.C. Sums
    Percentage of the Value of Goods                    No retention .
    and materials to be included in                     Single payment on
    Interim Certificate    (60(2)(b))                   completion of work
    Minimum amount of Interim                           to satisfaction of
    Certificate           (60(1))                       Engineer




                                   We are, Gentlemen,

                                   Yours faithf

                                         Signat

                                         Addres




                                         W itnes




    Date


                                                   2/o - 7
   .*• rwo* -0                            I                            f           r    h                                        Bowm-ikc.'        M.
                       Cons u l t i n g       ingh>eers                                                                          23 Kin g f Hr Id Fk,»d
                                                                                                                                 S h e f f i e l d S11 SAS
W . E a s tw o o d                    B.Eng.. P k P                              i C. i .                                        T e l, ; { 0 7 4 2 ) 5E3E71
                                      F I.Struc; t . !                           ,nr..E
                                                                                                                                 T elex :            547266'
A. A . W o o d                        B .t n g ., Ph.D., C.Enf].. f . l . C . L ,
                                      F.i.Stn-ct.F... M .I.W .E S.. M .C o n s I

A. G, B u r d e t t                   G .M .. B .Sc.(Eng ), C.Eng., M .I.C .E .

R, C. A . E astw o od                 B.Sc      C.Eng., M .I.C .E ., M.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                                                    36 High H o lb o r n
                                                                                                                                    London WC1V SAA
As s o c ia t e s :
Geoffrey Spir                         C .E n g ., M.I.C.E., H .I.M e c h .E .                                                       Tel.: (01) 242 7436
C, 5, Greaves                         B .E n g., C .E n g ., M .t.C .E ., H . I . S t r u c t . E.

A, J . Clough                         B .A ., C .E n g ., M .C .f.B .S ., M .t.M e c h .E .
                                                                                                              Our R e f ;      WE/JAS/PM/3911
J. A. Strang®                        C .Eng., M .i .S truc t.E ,                                              Your R e f ;
C o n s u lt a n t :
fk, L. Percy                          M .T e c h .(H o n .) t B.Sc., C. Eng ., F.I.C.E .
                                      F.l S t r u c t , E „ F J . M u n . E . , M.R.T. P. i,




                       George Shaw Engineering (Sheffield) Ltd.,                                                             13 July 1982
                       Carlisle Street East,
                       Sheffield. S4 7QN




                       Dear Sirs,
                                          .Sheffield Wednesday Football Club L t d ,,
                                              New Clips and Rails for Crush Barriers
                                 On behalf of our clients, Sheffield Wednesday Football
                       Club Ltd., we have pleasure in inviting you to tender for
                       the supply,                       fabrication and installation of new clips and
                       rails for crush barriers on the Spion. Kop terrace.


                       The Site
                                 The site of the Works is at Sheffield Wednesday Football
                       Ground, Hillsborough, Sheffield.


                       Conditions of Contract
                                 The Conditions of Contract will be the Fifth Edition
                       (1973) issued by the Institution of Civil Engineers and
                       Federation of Civil Engineering Contractors, with amendments
                       but the variation of price (Labour and Materials) clause is
                       NOT included.


                                                                           Registered in England — No. 1 1 34531
E A S T W O O D ( t PA R TN E R S




             Programme
                     The whole of the works to be complete by 27 August
             ready for the first league division two game on 28 August 1982.
             The commencement date shall be no later than 28 July.


            Overt ime
                     Working overtime as necessary in order to complete the
             Contract by the date agreed must be allowed for in the Tender.


             Care of the Works
                     The Contractor is to keep all persons     (including those
             employed by sub-contractors) under his control and within
             the boundaries of the site, and he will be held responsible
             for the care of the Works generally until their completion,
             including all work executed and materials deposited on the
             site by himself or his sub-contractors and suppliers,
            together with all risks arising from weather, carelessness
            of operatives, damage or loss by theft or any other cause.


             Insurance
                     The Contractor must provide evidence that he holds a
             current third party insurance policy, as required by the
             Conditions of Contract to the sum of at least £500,000 for
            any one accident, the number of accidents is to be unlimited.


            Attendance and sub-contractors
                     The Contractor must allow in his price for the general
             attendance of one trade upon another,        including all sub­
             contractors and for the provision of all transport, plant
             and equipment.         All sub-contractors are to be approved by
             the Engineer before placing any orders .


            Contingency Sum
                     Please include in your tender a contingency sum of
             £100 which may or may not be expended in part or full at
EASTWOOD i t   PAR TN ER S




         the direction of the Engineer.


        Completion of Tender
                Please complete and return one bound copy of this
        document.        Your tender is to be on a fixed price basis and
        remain open for acceptance for a period of 28 days from the
        date or return.       The inviters of this tender do not under­
         take to accept the lowest tender, or any, received.


        Return of Tender
                All tenders must be returned in the envelope provided
        no later than noon on Thursday 22 July 1982.
                We would be pleased if you would acknowledge receipt
        of this document and confirm whether you intend submitting
        a tender.
                If you are unable to submit a tender, kindly return
        the documents immediately.




                                        Yours   f ai t h f u l l y ,




                  V
       SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB LTD

   CONTRACT FOR THE INSTALLATION OF NEW CLIPS AND

               RAILS FOE CRUSH BARRIERS




T o : Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.,
      Hillsborough,
      Sheffield,   S6 1SW



GENTLEMEN:

     Having ex a m i n e d the Drawing, Conditions of Contract and
Specification for the'construction of the above named Works,
we offer to construct, complete and maintain the whole of the
said Works in conformity with the said Drawing, Conditions
of Contract and Specification for the sum of          ............
£373,00 (three hundred and seventy three pounds)',

or such other sum as may be ascertained in accordance with
the said conditions.

     We undertake to complete and deliver the whole of the
Works comprised in the Contract within the time stated in the
Appendix hereto.

     Unless and until a formal Agreement is prepared and
executed, this Tender, together with your written acceptance
thereof, shall constitute a binding Contract between us.

     We understand that you are not bound to accept the
lowest or any Tender you may receive.
                           APPENDIX


Amount of Bond           (10 )                        Not required

Minimum amount of third party
insurance              (23(2))                        £500,000

Time for completion      (43)                         The whole of the
                                                      Works to be
                                                      complete by
                                                      27 August 1982


Liquidated damages
for delay                                             £100/week.

Period of Maintenance (49(1))                         12 months

Vesting of Materials not on
Site                  (54(1)) (60(11))                Not applicable

No form of measurement adopted,
lump sum, fixed price (57)

Percentage of adjustment of P.C.
Sums                  (59A (2) (b) ) (5(c) )          No P.C. Sums

Percentage of the Value of Goods                      No retent ion .
and materials to be included in                       Single payment on
Interim Certificate    (60(2)(b))                     completion of work
Minimum amount of Interim                             to satisfaction of
Certificate           (60(1))                         Engineer




                                 We are, Gentlemen,

                                 Yours faithfull

                                       Signature

                                       Address .




                                       Witness .




       21st July 1982,
Date
                                                                                A m o u r '!
Number                  Ite m D e s c rip tio n         Q u a n tity




                    Summary
                                                                       154(9®
     1. Clips as shown on drawing 3911/4           nr        12         8Q>

     2. Rails, 60.3 mm x 5 mm C.H.S.

         2400 mm long                              nr          2

         4800 mm long                              nr          1

                                                          Vl-40




         General Contingency




                               I
                               _______________ L
                             Total Tender Sum
     Specification oi Works for use in Connection

     with the Instal lat ion of New Clips and Rails

                     for Crush Barriers


Cl ips

     Twelve new clips are to be provided on the
Spion Kop terrace. The clips to be removed have been
marked with yellow paint and we indicated on our
drawing 1610/63B.

     A detail of the new clips is shown on the
attached copy of our drawing 3911/4.  The Contractor
is to remove the old riveted or bolted clips and
thoroughly wire brush the exposed barrier frame. Each
new clip is to be fitted with new bolts. The bolts
and nuts shall be galvanised grade 4.6 to BS 4190
16 mm diameter.  The nuts shall fit spanner tight and
be given an application of Loc-tite to prevent subseq­
uent unfastening. Galvanised washers to BS 4320 shall
be fitted under the nut of every bolt.

     All cut edges of the clips must be left straight
and true and any burring or fash shall be removed. All
corners shall be neatly rounded.

Ra ils

     The following lengths of 60.3 mm diameter x 5 mm
mild steel circular hollow section are to be provided
on the Spion Kop terrace barriers 111, 112 and 113.

         Two lengths, 2400 mm each -      single span
         One length,  4800 mm      -      double span

The rails to be removed have been marked with yellow paint.
The work includes undoing the existing clips and replacing
these with new nuts and bolts.  It is intended to re-use
the existing clips if possible.

     All cut edges of the tubes are to be       filed smooth to
remove all fash and burring.

Painting

     All surfaces of the steelwork shall be thoroughly
scraped and wire brushed until all dirt, rust, mill scale,
grease and oil are removed.
     After cleaning all surfaces of the steelwork shall
receive one coat of Zinc Phosphate metal primer. One
coat of Alkyd gloss is to be applied over one coat of
undercoat over the hardened priming coat.

     No painting shall be carried out under adverse
weather conditions and primed and undercoated metalwork
shall not be left exposed or unsuitable situation for an
undue period before completing the painting process.

     The final coat of paint is to be the same colour as
the existing and is to be dry and hardened by 27 August 1982.
GEORGE

SHAW ENGINEERING
                                     (SHEFFIELD) LTD.
                                                                           RE SE A RCH M E M B E R S H I P , T H E W E k O l N G IN ST IT U T E


Registered Office & Works                                                  Date:        14th July 1982.
CARLISLE STREET EAST
SHEFFIELD S4 7QN
                                                                           Your ref:         WE/JAS/PM/3911
Telephone (0742) 77011-2

                                                                           Our ref:          GS/LG. 3011.

Eastwood and Partners,
Bowmaker House,
23 Kingfield Road,
Sheffield. Sll 9AS.

For the attention of M r .J .Strange.

Dear Sirs,

                    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.
                    New Clips and Rails for Crush Barriers

          We thank you for your valued invitation to tender in the above matter

and confirm we will submit our quotation by the required date.

                                           Yours faithfully,
                                   GEORGE SHAW ENGINEERING (SHEFFIELD) LTD.,




                                                 Director.




                                                               icisiwood &                            p. itteers                             I
                                                               w d            15 JULI982




             Registered in England No. 1084079     Directors: G. SHAW, K. M . SHAW, G. ATCHISON
                     1

E A S TW OOD & PARTNERS                                                                                                B o w m a k e r H o use
              C o tas u I t i n g     E n g in e e rs
                                                                                                                       23 K ingfield R oad
                                                                                                                       S h effield S11 9AS
W. E a s tw o o a               6 . Eng., Ph.D., F.Eng., F.I.C.E.,                                                     T el.: (0742) 583871
                                F.I.Struct.E., F.G.S., M.C ons.E.
                                                                                                                       Telex:         547266
A. A. W ood                     B.Eng., Ph.D., C.Eng., F.I.C.E.,
                                F.I.Struct.E., M .I.W .E.S., M.C ons.E.
                                                                                                                                          and at:
A. G. B u rd e tt               G .M ., B .S c .(E ng ), C.Eng., M .I.C .E.
                                                                                                                         36 H ig h    H o lb o rn
R. C. A. E a stw o o d          B.Sc., C.Eng., M .I.C .E ., M .I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                                          London W C 1 V 6A A
Associates:
                                                                                                                          T e l.: (0 1 ) 242 7436
G e o ffre y Sp ir              C .E ng., M .I.C .E ., M .I.M e ch .E .

C. S. G reaves                  B.Eng., C .E n g ., M .I.C .E ., M .I.S tr u c t.E .

A . J . Clough                  B .A ., C .E ng., M .C .I.B .S ., M .I.M e c h .E .
                                                                                                     Our R e f:      WE/JAS/PM/3911
J . A. S trang e                C.E ng., M .I.S tru c t.E .                                          Your R e f:
Consultant:
A . L. Percy                    M .T e c h .(H o n .), B.Sc., C .E ng., F.I.C.E.,
                                F.l S tru c t.E ., F .I.M u n .E ., M .R .T .P .I.




                                                                                                                   13 July 1982

              Bless Vale (Fabricators) Ltd., Staniforth Works, Main Street,
                                                  Hackenthorpe, Sheffield. S12 4LB

              George Shaw Engineering (Sheffield) Ltd., Carlisle Street East,
                                                  Sheffield. S4 7QN

              Norman Tate and Sons Ltd., Fabrication House, Barbers Avenue,
                                                  Rawmarsh, Rotherham. S62 6DE




              Dear Sirs,
                       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.,
                                       New Clips and Rails for Crush Barriers
                           On behalf of our clients, Sheffield Wednesday Football
              Club Ltd., we have pleasure in inviting you to tender for
              the supply,                         fabrication and installation of new clips and
              rails for crush barriers on the Spion Kop terrace.


              The Site
                           The site of the Works is at Sheffield Wednesday Football
              Ground, Hillsborough, Sheffield.


              Conditions of Contract
                           The Conditions of Contract will be the Fifth Edition
               (1973) issued by the Institution of Civil Engineers and
              Federation of Civil Engineering Contractors, with amendments
              but the variation of price (Labour and Materials) clause is
              NOT included.


                                                                  Registered in England -   No. 1134531
                                                                 SHEET



EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




       Programme
            The whole of the works to be complete by 27 August
       ready for the first league division two game on 28 August 1982
       The commencement date shall be no later than 28 July.


       Overtime
            Working overtime as necessary in order to complete the
       Contract by the date agreed must be allowed for in the Tender.


       Care of the Works
            The Contractor is to keep all persons (including those
       employed by sub-contractors) under his control and within
       the boundaries of the site, and he will be held responsible
       for the care of the Works generally until their completion,
       including all work executed and materials deposited on the
       site by himself or his sub-contractors and suppliers,
       together with all risks arising from weather, carelessness
       of operatives, damage or loss by theft or any other cause.


       Insurance
            The Contractor must provide evidence that he holds a
       current third party insurance policy, as required by the
       Conditions of Contract to the sum of at least £500,000 for
       any one accident, the number of accidents is to be unlimited.


       Attendance and sub-contractors
            The Contractor must allow in his price for the general
       attendance of one trade upon another,   including all sub­
       contractors and for the provision of all transport, plant
       and equipment.    All sub-contractors are to be approved by
       the Engineer before placing any orders.


       Contingency Sum
            Please include in your tender a contingency sum of
       £100 which may or may not be expended in part or full at
                                                                SHEET



EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




       the direction of the Engineer.


       Completion of Tender
            Please complete and return one bound copy of this
       document.   Your tender is to be on a fixed price basis and
       remain open for acceptance for a period of 28 days from the
       date or return.    The inviters of this tender do not under­
       take to accept the lowest tender, or any, received.


       Return of Tender
            All tenders must be returned in the envelope provided
       no later than noon on Thursday22 July 1982.
            We would be pleased if you would acknowledge receipt
       of this document and confirm whether you intend submitting
       a tender.
            If you are unable to submit a tender, kindly return
       the documents immediately.




                                    Yours faithfully,
       SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB LTD

   CONTRACT FOR THE INSTALLATION OF NEW CLIPS AND

             RAILS FOR CRUSH BARRIERS




To: Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.,
    Hillsborough,
    Sheffield. S6 1SW



GENTLEMEN:

     Having examined the Drawing, Conditions of Contract and
Specification for the construction of the above named Works,
we offer to construct, complete and maintain the whole of the
said Works in conformity with the said Drawing, Conditions
of Contract and Specification for the sum of ...............



or such other sum as may be ascertained in accordance with
the said conditions.

     We undertake to complete and deliver the whole of the
Works comprised in the Contract within the time stated in the
Appendix hereto.

     Unless and until a formal Agreement is prepared and
executed, this Tender, together with your written acceptance
thereof, shall constitute a binding Contract between us.

     We understand that you are not bound to accept the
lowest or any Tender you may receive.
                           appendix


Amount of Bond           (10)                        Not required

Minimum amount of third party
insurance             (23(2))                        £500,000

Time for completion      (43)                        The whole of the
                                                     Works to be
                                                     complete by
                                                     27 August 1982


Liquidated damages
for delay                                            £100/week.

Period of Maintenance (49(1))                        12 months

Vesting of Materials not on
Site                  (54(1)) (60(11))               Not applicable

No form of measurement adopted,
lump sum, fixed price (57)

Percentage of adjustment of P.C.
Sums                  (59A (2) (b) ) (5(c))          No P.C. Sums

Percentage of the Value of Goods                     No retention.
and materials to be included in                      Single payment on
Interim Certificate    (60(2) (b))                   completion of work
Minimum amount of Interim                            to satisfaction of
Certificate           (60(1))                        Engineer




                                We are, Gentlemen,

                                Yours faithfully,

                                      Signature ..

                                      Address




                                      Witness




Date
    Specification of Works for use in Connection

    with the Installation of New Clips and Rails

                    for Crush Barriers


Clips

     Twelve new clips are to be provided on the
Spion Kop terrace. The clips to be removed have been
marked with yellow paint and we indicated on our
drawing 1610/63B.

     A detail of the new clips is shown on the
attached copy of our drawing 3911/4. The Contractor
is to remove the old riveted or bolted clips and
thoroughly wire brush the exposed barrier frame. Each
new clip is to be fitted with new bolts. The bolts
and nuts shall be galvanised grade 4.6 to BS 4190
16 mm diameter. The nuts shall fit spanner tight and
be given an application of Loc-tite to prevent subseq­
uent unfastening. Galvanised washers to BS 4320 shall
be fitted under the nut of every bolt.

     All cut edges of the clips must be left straight
and true and any burring or fash shall be removed. All
corners shall be neatly rounded.

Rails

     The following lengths of 60.3 mm diameter x 5 mm
mild steel circular hollow section are to be provided
on the Spion Kop terrace barriers 111, 112 and 113.

        Two lengths, 2400 mm each -      single span
        One length, 4800 mm       -      double span

The rails to be removed have been marked with yellow paint.
The work includes undoing the existing clips and replacing
these with new nuts and bolts. It is intended to re-use
the existing clips if possible.

     All cut edges of the tubes are to be       filed smooth to
remove all fash and burring.

Painting

     All surfaces of the steelwork shall be thoroughly
scraped and wire brushed until all dirt, rust, mill scale,
grease and oil are removed.
     After cleaning all surfaces of the steelwork shall
receive one coat of Zinc Phosphate metal primer. One
coat of Alkyd gloss is to be applied over one coat of
undercoat over the hardened priming coat.

     No painting shall be carried out under adverse
weather conditions and primed and undercoated metalwork
shall not be left exposed or unsuitable situation for an
undue period before completing the painting process.

     The final coat of paint is to be the same colour as
the existing and is to be dry and hardened by 27 August 1982.
                                                                                 A m ount
    Number                  Item Description          U n it   Quantity   Rate
                                                                                  £          P




                        Summary

         1 . Clips as shown on drawing 3911/4         nr          12
         2. Rails, 60.3 mm x 5 mm C.H.S.

             2400 mm long                             nr           2

             4800 mm long                             nr           1




#
             General Contingency                                                 100        00




•




                                   i              i

                               Total Tender Sum
                                                            WE/KH/3911




Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.,                     12 July 1982
Hillsborough,
Sheffield,
S6 1SW.

For the attention of Mr. E. England


Dear Eric,
                Annual Certificate of Ground Safety
     We have completed the testing of the remainder of the
barriers at the Spion Kop end of the ground excepting
those barti&es which baaause of their position cannot be
subjected to the test load.      I am pleased to say that all
the barriers withstood the load but unfortu&ately in a number
of cases the clips retaining the horizontal tube deformed
considerably.      It is inevitable thatwwater gets under
these clips and they rust thus becoming weaker with the
passage of time.      In one or two cases the clip actually
snapped as the final load was taken off.      A total of 25 new
clips are needed on Spion Kop including a few on the barriers
at the top which have not actually been tested.       John also
inspected the Leppings Lane end and 10 clips are sufficiently
corroded to make it wise to change them rather them wait until
they are tested during the next two years.     JSe are using
a heavier gauge metal for the jainforocmo^t clips so that the
future life expectancy will be increased.
     The metal in the tube beneath the clips is also subject
to corrosion and 11 lengths each about 8ft. long on Spion Kop
are clearly nearing the end of their life.      We have to bear
in mind that the corrosion which can be seen on the outside may
be matched by corrosion inside the tube which cannot
of course be painted.     Whilst all 11 lengths successfully
carried the test load you may think it prudent that they
should be replaced now because they could become dangerous
within five years.
     If all this work is carried out (new clips on both
Spion Kop and LeppingsLane plus 11 new lengths of barrier
top rail on Spion Kop) the likely cost is between £1250
and £1500 exclusive of professional fees.     I should be
pleased to have your view as ttowhether we should carry out
the whole of this work or merely replace the clips on
Spion Kop which deformed under test in which case the cost
of the work would be approximately halved.
     John has already walked round the ground and he tells
me that some splitting and spalling of the concrete columns
i* developing at ground floor level at the back of the
South stand.   I*shall be making my inspection in company
with the Building Surveyors department representative during
this month and it is likely he will raise the matter.       In
any case it is important that splitting of this kind be dealt
with reasonably quickly so as to retard the rate at which the
reinforcement corrodes.    I will discuss this matter with you
when I have seen the damagemyself.


                                     Yours sincerely,
                                                                             FILE
                            TELEPHONE MESSAGE

JOB No.       S .till              PROJECT:
                                                     ■S. ,\M .   -C      -
DATE:       B j l j m
                                                                 GlU'


FROM:


                                                             -*jU

  V4                                 &k*%Ct^    L^J        Vw*yo»itd

 eJ.        Uwu.        u         vUU-    ^      ^          &. to , ^         (— #     .

  \(jijjl          —        cJJL                 b, I-o          ^A-l'        A<^ "v

   t>»^L                    fc.     yi^^-cJdi

        1               'lO-J         *^<-^’d-r(r tL Hi
                                 EASTWOOD                     &    PARTNERS,                 C O N S U L T IN G          E N G IN EE R



                                                         MEMORANDUM
FROM :

TO :         T)-r -                                            JOB No :                 Cj3 I I                             DATE     : zo J <0/ an.
SUBJECT.__________




                                                    Urw^jJ&Lll                  jtht                                 &v>.


       K21                t't r r t M s                                    ja s y o e A              fcUc       £jz~{~ "              KrW-e-^<r


                       v ^ A ^ lr tr           /j                 CtTYMyJbd                 c lc ^ o                                                       U ^e^.



       \jm/W                                                                       iiLa                ^ 4                            ,


             I                                                                               1                                  re~~Ji              M


         ^                  ***-“                                      .           K         U-             ^                         ^             \m A         j


             c~«<U                                       «v         ^              U l ^                                    , ^ 4J                  ^

                                                     A U             ^       t 0        ,         S^»           .*           *u              iJ U .


        c~r^~                             t5t-Al-t-p                                                     k           u              tc*£j t JC^ <y

                       , 2                ^LC^L                    +U^             oUrvii               U        r^ L + J i ,                0<tLco

       -i-            ca^^J\ j j                -Hn^i                                                  «~e.     U X JL^4                  -tU c.        t^-oJl


        &V-V          *S>                            *


                             0.5            V2A-0             C,£.\_-o,3           Ovv           S> O                                               ^
                                                                     ^                                                      ^                '5o-iq0$<I5
                              1 0           V iu^)            cfi- A ^ ) 0             evv         ^ ^ ^ 3 'V w ^ i                   .             ( f ^ 0 0 ]



                             'I                                    ^                                    v- f
                                                                                                 fc>0 I'V                   a 40 0                       0W
                             5)^3 i-C''-'                      ,              ^otM^ <1 5 0 0 ^


                 J.       tLs/w ~1c             t^&^v                                  Iwk                                                          *|—

                 bcx-^c         A         ■S <;a^tL.           Ssfc^'w l „              [ t'fi"7C.                   bo-^-L^              fl^CJt"        ft^(-
                                    I                                      _.                                                   ^           3
                                                                           FILE
                        TELEPHONE MESSAGE
               ^°ni
JOB No.        2«ad           PROJECT:

DATE:     14 )    81

TO:

FROM



        \XtL                                         iU^V       t^ a   ^



                          „    Ov-    rt                    ^




      c-et.      Lx^<r*w--y      v>-u^A.     IM+vjL*^ % Kp

                Uo                         j}u'~T'rV-C^/~   to              W
                             VIA                 TXr . Ly
                                                                                             FILE
                                   TELEPHONE M ESSAGE

JOB No.         M        \ 1               PROJECT:             ^   W

DATE:

TO:
                                                                                       k lU
                 TXvo gvq?Uv                l.'4^                                   ./ % ) & -
FROM:




       ?^a               ^          ^                                                    Q&Ji

        ^4.                                     V^J        ytoAMo          jWt     l^k

       \»c^Jt            a-               WA        /j                  ^        . I

                                   1vm4jIo .           ^

      I Li      (i^-it         Urt/vfc.               Oa-Vx^t^v 'jtiwv^J      b-njil.'ov^j
      *      t^ L L a                wjl         <twiair             &t .

             lOLei.v         <£*          L*_    Vc^Hfv      fcWW-J"        'tkt    lAtu

          VW>~ "I                    -                     1*4^        <J                k    Cj-*-i<^ .
    *L '      oC (d                    I'^ ^




                        •44                              ■O *<=1


                                                         'V+'W
                                                                 h t
            I'b


            H4Q >o                       fc U               G O <j)                         0 ^ “^ -   J
           ^ o o                           H
                                                           G O (jt                                     J

           1 400                   w       b         -      CO J
                                                               f
                                                                                        *9cw -
                                                                                          J
                                                                                                       J
           ■5.1.00                                                               0
           'i n e > o         *«           V                <o&j             f^irv^A                   /
           <*Aoo              I*                            yoj             X ^-^j                     y
            4?o°                                                                       ’T
           4 1 5 (7           \\               \A
                                                            (aQ^j           Jbt^J^U    rjT^^Wv         J

                                                                     L,
                                                    H r -?
           -JJ 5



3     4-<-^             L^ei                        ty~^Ju^               <>Yj   i*




                          %
                                               W E /JA S /P M /3 911




South Yorkshire County Council,                16 June 1982
County Hall,
Barnsley,
South Yorkshire. 870 2TN


lor the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan




Dear Mr. Vaughan,
           Sheffield Wednesday Football Club L t d .,
                  Safety at Sports Pound Act
     On Monday 21 June, in accordance with the five year
test programme, we intend to begin testing the rea»inder
of the barriers on Spion Kop.
     We have spoken with Mr.            today to invite
hia or one of his representatives to call at the ground
say next Tuesday to witness a few of the tests.      The
results of the tests will be passed to you within the
next few weeks.




                          Yours sincerely,




c.c. Mr. E. England
                                                                             FILE
                           TELEPHONE MESSAGE

JOB No.         to |            PROJECT:

DATE:     lfe> / fo k T
                                                          GuA-    U J c .      '361


FROM



        1oU.      U-v^->    4tvJ."    u-t£Sl   Aa.     Jta^,^ysX»<^

  b«-rru^>                           VWJL, 1 Uh .            Uc       vrLd
                            o             o
                  Z^K      Ovw^ev*      ^                              ^

 ^      un^Sl                                  e^Uuv^J.     ik             •


 NiJ-U.                                L,      bpv^J       \)-t*^_«w^
          TELEPHONE MESSAGE

JOB No.     PROJECT:

DATE:

                                   \D9-l
TO:

FROM:




                              0/
                                                                             Vllt


   Messrs, Eastwood &• Partners
                                                                         Staniforth Works, Main Street,
BLESS VALE (Fabrications) LTD.                                           Hackenthorpe, Sheffield, S12 4L3.
                                                                         Telephone: {0742} 4 8 7 4 7 6
                                                                                             44^3 57
invoice
Customer
                                                                 1        Invoice No.      76C

   Sheffield Wednesday F o o tb a lU            Our Ref t a v / ’p t u    VAT Reg. N a 380-2350-85
   ’1iir|
                                                Your Ref

                                                'four Order No.

Quantity                                                                  Prise           Amount




                   Strengthening to 6 No Sanchions




                    u<                    £Jd   «Ar-




Delivery Address
                                                                                  Total


                                                                         +VAT     15%

                                                                                Invoice
                                                Signed                            Total


                     English C a Reg. 1367330
                          TELEPHONE MESSAGE

JOB No.       -ig \ \       PROJECT:

DATE:       I! I 5 1 81

TO:

FROM:



                                                 Jts»4r
      Ui,                       %       (




            -L    u4X                    T^'5>     &




          £
                                                              FILE
                      TELEPHONE MESSAGE

JOB No.                     PROJECT:

DATE:

TO:

FROM:


            UeJULu,

      iVa             ^ cnt"C   '   Lrwoi'        /itavv




            3
            .




        V       '”A* tr i       y*“               . w         bv

                'Jb    bL*i~                 £t     J2»*_e.
                                                     WE/JAS/CW/3911




Bless Vale (Fabrications) Ltd.,                      27 April, 1982
Staniforth Works,
Main street,
Hackenthorpe,
Sheffield.
S12 4l b


For the attention of Mr.


Dear Mr. Walker,

             Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.
                     Ground Safety Work 1982

        As explained yesterday afternoon after I examined the
repairs in stanchions 4, 5 and 6, the welding is extremely
poor.   In fact, the worst I have ever seen.     Welds are cold
lapped, porous, cracked and undercut.     There are gaps in the
runs, the angles have been placed too near the inside of the
flange so that a weld run cannot be made down the back.
        Would you please remove all the plates and angles
and do the work again.     This should be done immediately
so thaft the Club can concrete the stanchions.
        We also confirm having sent to you yesterday a marked
up copy of our list of remedial work for the radiil fences
and gates.   Please do this work at the same visit.


                                  Yours sincerely,
                                                      WE/JAS/CW/3911




B1    ale (Fabrications) Ltd.,                        8 April, 198 2
St    orth Works,
Main Street,
Hackenthorpe,
Sheffield.
S12 4LB


For the attention of Mr.


Dear Mr. Walker,

             Sheffield Wednesday Football club Ltd.
                     Ground Safety Work 1982

      We write to confirm this jnornings telephone conversation.
      Now the stanchion bases have been exposed it is evident
that stanchion number 3 is corroded below the top of the
concrete.   Would you please weld to this stanchion two
plates 80 x 10> say 300 long, one to each flange.


                                 Yours sincerely,
                                                      m\\
SOUTH
Y O R K S H IR E
COUNTY
C O U N C IL




                          With the Compliments of

                           THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE


D e p a rtm e n t o f Ad m in istratio n
C o u n ty Hall
Barnsley
S o uth Yorkshire S 70 2 T N               Tel. No. Barnsley (S T D 0226) 86141
                                           Telex: 547675
                                                                         C-Q P I

                S outh Y orkshire C o u n ty C o u n c i
               f:. A .   M a l l t - U , L L.B.,   Chief !xecutive                           Coijsii ii.ill
                                                                                             Ban'..-.;;;y
               J.C. Harris, M .A ., LL.B.,(Cantab), Countv Secretary                         Soutl'. Yorkshire S70 2 r N
               Departm ent of Administration                                                 Telephone: Bat nsiey
                                                                                             (STD 0226) 861‘i 1
                                                                                             Telex: 54767b


               Our Ref: dv/ka/583/5                          Your Ref:                       Date; 31st March, 1982.



                Dear Sir,

                Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975

               You will recall that paragraph 2.G of the Note of the meeting held
               at the Hillsborough Stadium on 4th February, 1982, referred to
               Temporary Structures generally and scaffolding used in connection
               with Television Transmissions in particular.

               Since that date, a number of 'phone conversations have taken place
               as to the possibility of semi-permanent or permanent facilities
               being provided. As only ideas were being floated fin d these were
               mainly of a structural nature, it was agreed that the Television
               Authorities should contact the Building Authority direct.

               I understand that the position has now almost been reached when
               these proposals will have substance.  This being so, I would
               suggest that the next stage is for the Club and its Consultants to
               agree appropriate proposals with the Television Authorities, and
               then to submit arrangement drawings to me for consideration by
               the whole Officer Working Party in the usual way.


                                                                Yours faithfully,




                                                                Chief Executive.




                                                                                   E a stw o o d      h       P a r tn e r s
                                                                                                  1:J^R f
                                                                                    'c ’d.




    Mr. E. England,
    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd. ,
    Hillsborough,
    Sheffield,
    S6 1SW.
u
                                                                        FILE
                       TELEPHONE MESSAGE

JOB No.      5>9ll              PROJECT:

DATE:     18/C>/81
                                                                136 i
TO:

FROM:


        K 0 U d.     <J>9-wtV      Onr^lc   «U“   S.VJT   ..c   ,

           VV^w.      Lj"<J"C                               Vj
                                                          WE/JAS/SEB/3911




     Bless Vale (Fabrications) Ltd.,                      4 March 1982
     Staniforth Works,
     Main Street,
     Hackenthorpe, ■
     Sheffield
     S12 4LB


     For the attention of


     Dear 'Mr. Walker., .

                    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.
                            Ground Safety Work 1982

            We write to confirm that your price of £285 for
     strengthening the six stanchions, shown on our drawings
     3911/1-3, has been accepted by our client.       As stated in   our
     letter dated 24 February this work will be added to your        present
     Contract with Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.
            Would you please proceed with the work.    There are
     home     games on 6,20 and 27 March but as you are already aware       .
;:   tiiiS'^patt'.of-the ground is open to ptiblic durihg the day    and
     evening, and in accordance with the original Contract documents
     you will be required to clear away and make the Wdrks safe for the
     visiting public. •,


                                              Yours sincerely.
                                                              FILE
                      TELEPHONE MESSAGE


JOB NO.   0>°UI         PROJECT:

DATE:
                                                i*Jk \09>L
TO:

FROM:
                             (U




           'o ’   ,    K c^r<JtA     &    Sxt    ^>2&oo Voiv

                         .         0 X~   1^4      6L'VVi
                                                        -*i
                                                                          FILE
                              TELEPHONE MESSAGE


JOB NO.          ^      1        PROJECT:

DATE:

TO:

FROM:




        1                                                     oloXf'VK)

                 JjKJsv^      <MjLA^^SLol   . ^CtX^vw         C/Vv   W^t\

                                                    ^   ^4rfC)(^>    Cwi" ^*CWm.



            ,L       iJvt£A
                                                W E /J A S /P B /3 9 1 1 /S B W




Eric England Esq.,                              1 March, 1982
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.,
Hillsborough,
SHEFFIELD S8 18W.

Bear Brie*/
                  ****** P»ncea and Gates :
     We'have today forwarded a certificate for the payment
of S     to BlessVale (Fabrications) Ltd. for work on the
new gates at the back of the Vest Stand. The original is
enclosed. A copy of the certificate together with a
statement will again be presented to you by Bless Vale.

     As requested we have obtained a pride from Bless Vale
for repairing the six stanchions round the boundary wall
near gate *0*. They have given a figure of «        for
this work, plus VAT. We have recently had some similar
work done by another contractor at a chemical works in
Inainghaa. The rates given by Bless Tale are very mseh in
line with these after accounting for breaking out the
concrete round the base of the stanchions. We therefore
recommend that the price given by Bless Tats is accepted.
 ■ Last week John Strange spoke to Mr.'________ from
the B.B.C., about a proposed extension to the existing
camera platform walkway in the South Stand.
                said that because of our local knowledge
and familiarity with the structure and procedures with
S.Y.C.C. it would be less expensive for the club if we
dealt with the extension. He is probably correct in his
                                                                2




thinking but we do not know what financial arrangements exist
between the Club and the B.B.C. Perhaps we can discuss this
with you in the next few days.
    Their proposals arrived last Friday.   Single copies of
their letter together with sketches are enclosed.




                                    ¥ours sincerely,
BLESS VALE (Fabrications) LTD.



                                                                                              Staniforth W orks, M ain Street,
                                                                                              Hackenthorpe, Sheffield, S12 4LB.
                                                                                               Telephone: (0742) 0S6SS6    1      fc


                                                                                               VAT No. 380 2350 85


   Eastwood & Partner's Ltd,                                                                         jaw /kw
   Bowmaker honso,
   2 3 1- Kinyfield Hoad,
   Sheffield S 11.


   2 4 .2 ,8 2 ,



   He;- Sheffield Wednesday-Football Club,
   Strengthening of stanchions                            adjacent gate f0*


   dear Sirs,

   U?A   i : j'":; p y
            ran for your enquiry and have pleasure in submitting our tTiei
   for the completion of the work in accordance with Plans/Specifications/
   (Quantities.




  Specification                       39/ 11/3

  Drawing 3911/1
                     ' 3911/2


  £285»»00 (two hundred and eighty five pounds*)




                                                                                    f   h d / / y              >1
  Yours faithfully.




         D ire c to rs: E. J. WALKER, E. E. W ALKER   Reg. No. 1367330 (E ngland)
                                               W B /J A S /P B /3 9 1 1




South Yorkshire Couaty Council,                24 February, 1982
County Hall,
BARNSLEY, S. York*.
870 2TN.

For the attention of Mr. P. Vaughan.

Dear Mr. Vaughan,
            Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.
                   Ground Safety Work 1982
     Referring to minute F(ll) of the meeting held on 4
February, 1982, we are presently organising the repair
of six stanchions supporting the sheeting above the
boundary wall near gate 'O' on Penistone Road. Two copies
of our A4 size drawings 3911/1-3 which show details of the
work are enclosed.

                                   Yours sincerely,




c.c. Mr. I. England,
     S.W.F.C. Ltd.
                                               W E /J A S /P B /3 9 1 1




BlessMale (Fabrications) Ltd.,                 24 February, 1982
Staai'forth Works,
Main Street,
Sackenthorpe»
SHEFFIELD 812 4LB.

For the attention of Mr.                ■

Dear Mr. Walker   ,
            Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.
                   Ground Safety Work 1982
     We have pleasure in enclosing two copies of our A4
size drawings 3911/1, 2 and 3 showing details of soae
strengthening required to six stanchions adjacent to
gate *0* at the Penistone Road end of the ground.
     Would you please write to us giving a price for the
work shown.
     If we can agree a price with you we propose to add
this work to your present Contract.


                                  Yours sincerely,
                                               JL / ZJ-ZZZ.




                                       M




   .CATE 'o '




         P      E   N    I    S    T       O        N   E                          R     O      A     D




                                                                                       Orn.         Chd.      Date
    EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                  Consulting Engineers
    Bowmaker House,     23 Kingfield Road, Sheffield. S11 9AS. t«i. 583871.             JBD                17/2/82
                                                                                       Sca,es       nts
                 S .W . F. C. LID.
Strenahenina of stanchions adiacent to aate 'O'
    a    n                                      *             a
                                                                                       1-3911/1
                                                                  5626MT c.o.s. Ltd. m m m m m m m m m m m m m
        Stanchions 1 - 3                                                                         Stanchions
                                                                                                                                  C o n C£E7E         S l* * O u w O
                                                                                                                                  LA<&       70       FAUJ%       AW Ay
                                                                                                                                  /f«oM          iitftwoec
                                                                                                                                  ay      & . w . p. c . .    i-7D.




                                                          f&oxTS >«o «sA
                                                                                                                                  J S e /A /ffo fiC M jC     a h c le . .

 fZ£j,-jpoec*JG                                                                                                                   /0«-~ TUlC-K
 Pla te .   to ~ ~                                                                                                                CQCE
 TUICjC .                                                                                                                         3JZ£ )


                                                                                                                                                                NB0g.
                                                                                                                                     Tt? B.XISTV<4G FL-AMGE.
                                                                                                                                       X-s» p o a u A L C ..




                                                  BEf&ee       PAvsriMa       «a
                                                  PocJC£f      W (W CO/^OPCTE

                                                  ia >o   To   Pa u jl   /*w /»y
                                                  s<rC£i-'i~o/e<.


                             S   d w c m w          S / z £.             F la *c /l    P late.          WJsa           R e jH p & a cE r^E sfT


                         »        a *       V                      1/ S o * 3 0 0 » / o          2 //5 0 x 7 S * iO                 So©



                     2            «"x      4 -*                    l/flO K l o o X > o           2 //S 0 x ? S x /0        £ *A    Soo        LohJC,



                     3            io " x   4    % '                                —             2 / 2 0 0 * 3 0 0 * IQ .          PLATE.



                     4            9"* 4 "                          )/® o x 'i o o * / o          1 / iS O k Z S »/c>      £ sA     Soo        Zxsmg



                     5            S%       4 % '                    i/f io x 2 o o x /O           2 / SO xS ox/O                       2 o o L o ^jc,



                     (p            3 x 4                            (/s o * 2 0 0 x /O            2 / t S . O x 7 & * 'C> USA i o o             4cmc;




                                                                                                                                  Dm.             Chd.              Date
        EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                             Consulting Engineers
       Bowmaker House,                 23 Kingfield Road, Sheffield. S11 9AS. Tei. 583871.                                          J BO                         17/2/82
                                                   Scaies nts
                 S .W. F. C. LTD.
Strengthening of stanchions adjacent to oate 'O ' I 3 9 1 1 / 2
       1.   Break out concrete or brickwork round corroded section of
            steelwork.

       2.   Remove all rust and scale by power chipping,grinding or
            brushing down to bright metal.

       3.   Position reinforcing angles or plates equally about centre
            of corroded section and fully weld all round.

       4.   a)   Stanchions 1-3 to be thoroughly cleaned to remove all
            dirt and contaminants before being painted.

            b)   Pocket formed in slab to be filled with concrete after
            welding plates and angles.

            c)   Apply two coats                          of red lead primer.          Top coats of paint
            to be applied by S.W.F.C. Ltd.


       5.   Stanchions 4-6 to be thoroughly cleaned to remove all dirt
            and contaminants before being encased in concrete.                                                         Concrete
            casing to be done by S.W.F.C. Ltd.




 *




                                                                                                         D rn .                Chd.          D a te
     EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                    Consulting Engineers
     Bowmaker House,       23 Kingfteld Road, Sheffield. S11 9AS. Tei. 583871.                                                            u /2    m
                                                                                                          Sc a le s

                S . W. F . C . LID.
                       w    •   * *   •   •   »   w   •       '   ar •                       |         ■ -------------------    -     -


Strenqhening of stanchions adjacent to gate 0                                                          | 3911/3
                                                                          5 6 2 6 M T C .D .S . L t d . ■ *    ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■
w
                                                                                                                      S. .7



     GP V-V                                       Ljd-r - I Pi HO X %0Q '

                                                          - I \ so (iaoo
                                                              L ^ V V ^ ix   ir^       i^OO

                                                                                                               p-frKjf* '



                                                                                                 4/ ^
                                                                                             1           <3>      Ci),     G>
                                                                                         0
                                                                                                        1 — p ...Jt ■I "*■ I
     (§)          § < 4%         -   /yU^ - t - 8 0 * *L00                    gf

                                U^lr t *• 6,0 X 'Loo                                 vo^ 4^1              'uto i^'iooxioo
                                                                                                        \   ^     T '*-



                                                                                       iUi d.wi                        60 <^00
                                                                                                                    IC?0 &t O
                                                                                                                 "10     ^ |__ _
                                |x-ic                                                                      n




     CCV-i,-4>,   lX**0 f—^

                              tlel }rA*~   ■


                                                                                                    is.0




                                                                                   JU& »L.J.




(§           « * .4                            i - ixi^e < ^oo
                                               _ 1 - do   k   'IOO


                                                                                                                                   V
                                                                 M\___              -x^ 4.00
                                                                           FILE
                            TELEPHONE MESSAGE


JOB NO.     CfcU              PROJECT:
                                               V H     , c   ,

DATE:     Ioj l j 8 l
                                                      CeJ-           087
TO:

FROM:



                        —    Vj.      Lc     UuJkj   A-® &

      ln^w»i                  xnJjt            UtU

   0_YTW^'                             /(^            Q*         _           OK ,

                                                                      •
                                                        WE/KH/3911




The Secretary,                                          10 February 1982
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,
Hillsborough,
Sheffield,
SI 1SW.



Dear Mr. England,
                Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
       Temporary Structures Associated with Televising Matches
       You will recall that the Clubts Safety Certificate makes
specific mention of television cameras and other equipment.
The Cl&b also has overall responsibility to ensure that all
aspects of the stadium comply with good engineering practice.
       During the inspection of the ground on 4 February in
company with representatives of the Licensing Authority, it was
noted that a temporary structure had been erected at the rear
of Spion Kop to provide a camera vantage point.     The access
ladder ran parallel to the side of the structure and anyone
using the ladder to get to a camera would need to either
climb over the handrail or duck beneath it.   Such an arrangement
would not be permissible on an ordinary construction site and
the television authorities should be asked to ensure that appropriate
access arrangements are provided on future occasions.
       It was also noticed that the two scaffold poles placed
either side of the top exit from Spion Kop had been fixed in
position by clamps Attached to the existing railings.      in one
case the claims were not wrapped around the horizontal rails
but merely pushed against them and tightened up so that the
fixing relied entirely on friction.   It la not difficult to
imagine that this pole could have become displaced thus
permitting the cable to drop across the exit gifealt
spectators at the top of the stairs.   Even if the cable
carries low tension electricity there would still be a
danger of people tripping.    Again it should be stressed
to the television authority that even though the various
structures and supporting poles may be of a temporary
nature they must be erected in such a way that they
do not cause danger to spectators•


                             Yours sincerely.




c.c. Mr. D. Vaughan
                        SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

                  Note of a Meeting held at the Hillsborough Stadium,
                      Sheffield on 4th February,   1982


'PRESENT:   Representing the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd

            E. England        (Secretary)
            Dr, W. Eastwood   (Messrs. Eastwood & Partners)
            J, Strange        (Messrs. Eastwood & Partners)

             Representing the Officer W orking Party (Sheffield District)

            Ms. J. Barker        (South Yorkshire Police)
     i      R, HeroId
            D. Horner
                                 (South Yorkshire Police)
                                 (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
            M. Johnson           (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
                                 (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District
                                  Council)
                                 (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District
                                  Council)
             D. I. Vaughan       (South Yorkshire County Council)
             F, Waterhouse       (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)

1.       Purpose of Meeting

The purpose of the meeting was to discuss^the apparent difference of opinion
on certain aspects of the radial barriers installed on the West Terrace
and the security gates at the top of the North stand ramps, as well as to
carry out the usual winter inspection of the Stadium,

2,       Ground Inspection

A. -     West Terrace

Whilst the whole Terrace had yet to be used, the matches played since the
erection of the radial barriers indicated that generally they worked well and
satisfactorily effected the segregation of opposing groups of fans.

However, the police pointed out that in places the existing crush barriers
had been extended up to a nd, in some cases, completely through the new
radial barriers, which had the effect of making it- relatively easy for anyone
who wished to do so to climb from one pen to another. Also, in the pen
nearest to the South Stand, a small length of existing crush barrier had been
left unsupported.

IT WAS AGREED -

(i)   That, on balance, it was preferable from a safety point of view to
prevent crowd surge by the existing barriers being extended up to and/or
through the new radial barriers than to completely prevent persons being
able to climb from one pen to another, subject to review at the end of the
current season.

(ii) That the unsupported small length of existing crush barrier would
be cut off.


                                                I k ’Cl
                                                                                  \




B.    West Stand '

One of the security gates which the Club wished to instal at the bottom of
the two staircases had now been erected.

IT WAS AGREED       that this could be regarded as satisfactory.

C*    North Stand

The Fire Service felt that the manner in which the security gates had been
installed at the top of the ramps unduly restricted the exit width available.

The Club's Consultants and the Fire Service disagreed on the interpretation
of paragraph 16 of the "Green Guide", and consequently on the figure to be
applied in the calculation for assessing whether the exit width lost at the top
of the ramps by the method of security gate installation was critical or not.

IT WAS AGREED   that, as   the point might well have been covered in the
initial consideration of   the Club's application for a General   Safety
Certificate, the point would not be pursued at the moment.

      NOTE - A search of   the file subsequently revealed that, as
             suspected, the point had been considered at a
             meeting of the Officer Working Party on 12.2.79,
             the relevant part of the Note of the meeting reading

                    "the construction and width of the ramps being
                     such that they could quite-properly be
                     regarded as elevated roadways".

D.     Spion Kop

It was noted that the infilling of the step adjacent to the handrail on
the left of the original exit at the top of the Kop had taken place; that
the boundary fence at the top of the Kop had been reinforced, and that the
existing barriers had been permanently extended and the area at the foot
of the new Kop exit (adjacent to the brick built refreshment point)
levelled off as agreed.

E.     South Stand

The agreement to visually inspect the roof trusses for apparent deflection
after exceptional gale or snow loading conditions was recalled.

F.   Items       of General Maintenance

IT WAS AGREED       that the following items of general maintenance required
attention:-

(i)   The rounding off of the corners on the steelwork of the underside of
the exit at the southerly endof theWest Stand (tobe done    that day), as
well   as the roundingoff ofthe brackets to the North Stand security gates.

(ii) The repair or replacement of the corroding stanchions supporting the
fencing and sheeting above the boundary wall on the right hand side of
Gate "0".


                                          -2


             9
(iii)    The cracks‘in the concrete terracing     of the Spion     Kopto befilled.

(iv)The wooden support to the electrical  line between the brick built
refreshment point and the Owls Club to be fixed more securely.

(v)   The brick wall between the South Stand and the Spion Kop (nearest
to the South Stand) to be pointed.

(vi)    The concrete supporting strut to the     wall between       theSpionKop and
the South Stand (nearest to the Spion Kop)       to be protected (cracks and
exposed bar).

G.      Temporary Structures

Concern was expressed as to the possibility of inadequate structural stabili
of temporary structures, such as scaffolding used in connection with
television transmissions.

Paragraph 20 of the Club's General Safety Certificate required T.V. cameras
and portable equipment to be placed only in such positions as may be agreed
between the Police and the Club.    TheClub also were generally required   to
ensure that the Stadium complied   with good engineering andbuilding practice
and with the relevant British Standard Specification or Code of Practice.

IT WAS AGREED that the question of temporary structures should be kept
under review, and that the Club's Consultants should give advice to the
Club.

3.      Future Developments

A.      Police and First Aid Facilities

It was likely that, following continuing consultations with the Police, the
Club would shortly be in a position to formally notify the County Council
that the new Police and First Aid Facilities would be provided in the
forthcoming close season.

B.      Additional Turnstiles and Exit Gate in Penistone Road

The Club hoped to formally notify the County Council shortly of their^
intention to proceed in the forthcoming close season with the demolition of
some of the existing toilets on the Penistone Road side of the Stadium in
order to provide additional turnstiles and exit gate on that side of the
Stadium.

C.      Widening of Walkway and Erection of New Fence

Because of drainage problems, the existing concrete panel fence to the
rear of the Spion Kop (nearest to the Owls Club) had had to be removed.
When settlement was complete, it was intended to widen the existing
walkway and erect a new fence on the revised line.
                                                                                                          FILE
                                 TELEPHONE MESSAGE


JOB NO.                               PROJECT:
                                                               5 . Vvi            C     .

DATE:        4|'j8*

TO:

FROM:



      •\)    0fvv/vJLi:/^        ^                        ^

       J*wt- oLXlJ.^                   ^                                  Lnj^                         ^ _ u

       L r,~ ^ uo     *v w          >nH a.           X        tA X l        'U v lv .

  i)                b / t, w          c^,            lJUU         L                         fa-       vjt»i- -jU,J




 A)         Av               ^       TVNAX                                       Ww           *Jl-        ekw    .



        ok.
          .                                                                                  tLtJ'         mJI
                    ^ —          O-^JU           ,


            PoCv^kJ.         *vJr      /tUa-         L^ttk,              c^JlxcJ                  ^
                     0t&^X             i^            iU       ^jiy               o^ta
                                                                                 ^          _5
                                                                                             /*       ^

       ^     "° '                            *w                                       fcj^ z              a-
        ^♦o^l             wJfek .                             Ur

       U^vwU-          Ui„o4^              5V-       ti^v,             ffV^. ,
South Yorkshire County Council
F. A. Mallett, LL.B., Chief Executive                        County Hall
                                                             Barnsley
J.C. Harris, M.A., LL.B, (Cantab), County Secretary          South Yorkshire S70 2TN
Department of Administration                                 Telephone: Barnsley
                                                             (S T D 0226) 86141
                                                              Telex: 547675
                                                      a°iu
Our Ref:   DV/AA/583/5          Your Ref :WE/JAS/SR/356^ Date:      28th January,
                                                                         1982.




Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

Referring to my letter of 20th January and the sub­
sequent phone conversations between our respective
offices, I confirm the arrangements made for the
meeting at the Hillsborough Stadium at 2.30 p.m. on
Thursday next, 4th February, 1982.    '-   ~~-


                                        Yours faithfully,




                                        unier executive.



                      Eastwood & Partners
                                        30 JAN1982
                     Bec’d.
Dr. W. Eastwood,
Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,
Consulting Engineers,
Bowmaker House,
23 Kingfield Road,
Sheffield,
Sll 9AS.
                             Itff-                  FI LE
                        TELEPHONE MESSAGE


JOB NO.                   PROJECT:

DATE:         26.1.82

TO:           Karen for WE

FROM:         Mr. Vaughan, South Yorkshire C.C,



              Confirms that the meeting at
              Hillsborough will be held on
              Thursday.— ^February, at 2.30.




                                      v~-
                                     c>7    /< .   jjlfY


          I
