  Stephen Charles Moran, Police Constable 1573.
  Maltby Police Station, High Street, Maltby, Rotherham.
  Tel 812282.




  I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police ^orce, presently stationed at Maltby
  Police station.

  At 8am Saturday 15th April 1989, I commenced duty at Maltby Police Station, from where I

  was transported to Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield.

  At 10.00am a briefing was held in the main stand, which I attended.

 My detail was Serial No 5^» which entailed the supervision of Nottingham Forest Supporters

  and traffic on Herries Road South. I took up these duties at 11.15am. Whilst I was on

  these duties on Herries ^oad South I saw a number of Forest supporters approaching the

^^round with cans of beer and lager, these people were instructed that no alcohol could be

  taken into the ground, at which they either drank the contents of the cans or threw them

  over a nearby wall, nearer the time of the kick off at 3»00pm the majority of the Forest

 supporters that were approaching the ground appeared to        be well behaved with theodd number

  of rowdy drunken groups, shouting and waving banners.

  At 3»00pm, Phase 1 of this detail was completed and it was our intention to attend

  Claywheels lane for a meal, however, we were instructed to stand by at the junction of

  Herries Road South and Penistone Road.

  At 3»05pm we were directed into the ground, upon reaching the main stand at it's junction

^^ith the Kop, further directed to go onto the pitch and form a cordon accross the pitch

  near the goal at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

  Upon arrival at this point I saw that many of the supporters from this section of the

  stand were on the pitch and many more of them appeared dazed and distressed. It appeared

  that there was some major problem inside the stand, and more and more people were trying

  to get through the gaps in the wire fencing andonto the pitch, General control     was

  maintained of the crowd coming onto the playingarea,

. I then along with other officers went to the goal area at Leppings lane end and assisted

  Liverpool supporters with the transfer of the deceased and injured people to the

  Gymnasium, upon reaching the Gymnasium there was a rather chaotic situation outside the

  Gym due to the number of persons trying to get injured and deceased persons into the
                                    (2 ).


Symnasium through the side door, this resulted in a nHmber of fights breaking out

between supporters, Having assisted with removal of a;'number of dead and injured persons

to the Gym I was detailed to wait in the Gymnasium with other officers to assist with

the removal of some bodies from the rear tunnel of Leppings Lane stand but these had

already been brought out.

At 5•20pm I returned to the Main stand where I rejoined my serial and an appraisal of

the days events was given by a senior officer, we were stood down at 5»^5pm, returning

to Maltby at 7»30pra, where after a further de-briefing, we retired from duty at 8.00pm.




            PC 1573.
