                            SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

                                                        REF:                   D2/£C2665/HMT
FROM:   Police Constable 2665 Pierpoint *!   ''
                                                        S T A T IO N « g K \   Attercliffe
TO:   Chief Superintendent Broonhead, D Division
                                                        DATE:                  27.4.89

            SUBJECT:


                         KILLSBOROKH FOOTBALL GROUND, 15.4.89

           With reference to incidents related to the above football ground, on
           Saturday 15 April 1989, I submit the following report.

           At 2.05 pm on Saturday 15 April 1989, I was covering D2 61 duties on
           mobile patrol.

           At this time, I attended a report of a transit van depositing litter on
                  Drive, Sheffield.

           The call originated frari        ]Drive, the informant being a Mr
           On attendance, I saw that a large amount of paint had been thrown ocross a
           grassed area (well-kept) bordering the property at                  Drive.
           Approximately twenty empty beer cans were littered about thxs area. There
           was also a small amount of furniture at the same location.

           The residents of several     properties had obtained the transit van's
           registered number as,            A Police National Computer check revealed
           that the keeper was a


           Unfortunately none of the residents appeared to h a w witnessed the actual
           deposition of the litter.

           However, when they approached the vehicle to show their obvious
           disapproval, the occupants showed their bare backsides to than through the
           vehicle glass. It then drove off onto |               . It was clear that
           these people were intoxicated and frcm the Police National Computer check,
           I believe that they were Liverpool fans.

           I, therefore, circulated the vehicle, asking natch control to be made
           aware at Hillsborough, with the intention of having the driver breath
           tested.

           It was also ray intention to have a report ccmpiled and forwarded to the
           Merseyside Police, with a view to interview regarding the litter offence,
           should the vehicle not be found.

           Hcwever, since the incident at the ground and lack of direct evidence, I
           have not continued it further.

           I ask that this information be forwarded to Detective Superintendent
           McKay, at 'P' Divisional Headquarters, for his attention.




                                                               Ol<2-
           Police Constable 2665
