                                                                                                          M IR .15



                                                                         2 .» o         • °v o            i o <oo                    3 >3 ^ o (
OTHER DOCUMENT FO RM ^                            Date and time raised                                                   Number
                                                               <2^
T itle
                               *0^
                   ■T v o fy ' S             ^ V -o   s e e
                                                            o'1
                                                              v

                                                                             ■v -   l5 ^ x g » < A o f e jL j- - v T c
                               h                                                                                         \v v J L ® < m   c x K c*>-
(Include source and any document number if relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — ^ e f/N o C O           Ho     ^          iO fix                                        C ask:
                                                                                                                                           Receiver
           £> c c = A tSesA o S u j n v                   Qf'-oeMrvcyv                    ^^^v-vc^VoS, V-cxK


                                                                                                                                           Indexer
Document registyed/inde^ed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised                                                                                                                   3 feSG.
                                                                                                                                      Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                                           Indexer
Indexed      idicated

No(s) of actions raised                                                                                                              9 6 SG.

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                                             SIO




Further action No(s)                                                                                                                       Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                          OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOB       MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                           WATERY STREET
                                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE          SHEFFIELD
                                                       (West District)
                                                                           S3 7ET
             STEFAN L. POPPER, LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                           CORONER
                                                                                7
                                      Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721   •■       -Se-ptem-ber- ■■■19 ..90-



        SLP I J T .
        JMJ/HJ/162.




        Mr. M.Jones,
        Deputy Chief Constable,
        Cheshire Constabulary,
        Police Headquarters,
        Chester. CHI 2PP.


        Dear Mervyn,

        HILLSBOROUGH CORONAL ENQUIRY - PROGRESS REPORT.


        Thank you for your helpful and clear letter of the 12th of September 1990 the
        contents of which I have noted.

        With regard to the question of the release of documents and statements, you
        are of course quite right that apart from those which were already in the
        nublic domain, it had been my view that these should remain confidential
        until after the conclusion of the D.P.P.  inquiry (which has now happened)
         and the Inquests.

         The position with regard to the release of copy statements was explored in
         R - v - Hemsworth, Coroner ex parte Peach 1980 (2WLR496 et sec).  The
         statements in the Hillsborough Disaster were of course obtained by West
         Midlands Police who acted for various parties at different stages of the
         investigation.

         On the assumption that the restrictions outlined in the case of Blair Peach
         apply to these statements, I would have no authority to order the disclosure
         of the statements to third parties.

         However, it is my view that in respect of at least those statements w h ich_
         have been disclosed to one of the interested parties, fairness would require
         that the same information is made available to other interested parties by
         the people or organisation who have control and custody of the statements.

          It has been suggested to me that the statements have been made available to
          South Yorkshire Police solely for the use in disciplinary proceedings, but
          even if this is in fact so, it does present the recipients with a very major
          problem of ensuring that information supplied for one purpose is not used for
          others. Even if they were able to achieve this, there is still a problem of
          persuading other parties that this has taken place.

          The statements which are currently held by West Midlands Police fall I think
          into three categories:-




R8606

LESAAF
1.   Those which are contained in the D.P.P. file and which have been
     furnished to South Yorkshire Police.

2.   The additional statements in the body files which have been
     furnished to me but have not, as I understand it, been released to
     South Yorkshire,

3.   The-large number of statements which have not been released to
     anybody.  The reason for this category being that it is considered
     that the contents of these statements add nothing material to
     the information which is already available.

On the assumption that Category 3 statements referred to above are as
described, I think it would be difficult to argue that they should be
kept confidential if the relevant statements in the D.P.P. file are in
fact released.

This only then leaves the statements in the body file and it seems to me
that there really is not very much point in trying to keep just these
statements confidential until after the conclusion of the Inquest if
everything else is going to be available for release.

In the circumstances, whatever my authority might be with regard to ordering
release, I feel that it would be improper for me to maintain my request that
the copy statements should not be released to interested parties and in the
circumstances as far as I am concerned, I have no further objection to their
release.

Whether or not you or indeed anybody else have the capacity to make copy
statements available, bearing in mind the vast numbers, and whethar or
not these have to be supplied on a free of charge or chargeable basis is
not a problem I can help you with but obviously one that will have to be
addressed.

The difficulty of supplying copies of course is compounded if one
applies this to photographic and/or the video evidence.

Whilst I entirely agree with you that it is sensible that you should act
as a link between me and Mr. Richard Wells, for the sake of convenience
I am copying this letter to him and to Mr. Leslie Sharp.




      Mr. Richard Wells, Chief Constable, South Yorkshire Police
      Mr. Leslie Sharp, Chief Constable, Cumbria Police,
