PUBLISH POL/9/1/D3812
COMPLAINT 7/89,13/89,14/89 AND 15/89
This file involves fives complainants who alleged between them that:
   1. A mounted police officer was throwing punches at people and had lost control of
      himself.
   2. That the same officer used threatening, abusive and insulting words and behaviours
      towards him and his daughter.
   3. That a mounted police officer “cuffed” a man in a distinctive top across the face and
      head.
   4. Relating to incident 3, that a mounted police officer started to “clip” people about the
      head and did this at least twice.
   5. A mounted police officer in trying to “clip” a youth around the head with the flat of his
      hand actually hit the complainant across the face. (This complaint was formally
      recorded as a result of information contained within a supporters questionnaire. The
      supporter was then re-visited with the intention of showing him the video of Leppings
      Lane during this visit the supporter formally withdrew the allegation in writing).


West Midlands Police investigated all of these complaints allegedly committed by the same,
identified officer and found that they occurred during the police attempts to control the
crowds at Leppings Lane entrance to the ground.
Enquiries were made and statements were examined from numerous witnesses, some of
whom were able to corroborate the allegations made but did not identify any supporters by
name who had been assaulted and could therefore be approached for evidence. The blows
by the officer were described in various ways; “cuff”, “swipe”, “slap” or “clip”.
The complainant for allegation 1 and 2 was accompanied by his children. He declined to
have his children interviewed due to stress they had endured already. This may have
assisted in clarifying/corroborating his complaint.
Following a lead to identify the male in the distinctive top officers were met with a refusal to
cooperate from one fan, which ultimately ended that enquiry. The complainant for allegation
3 and his relatives were emphatic that the officer involved in the incident had worked at
Anfield but the officer they themselves identified from video had never performed duties
there. Numerous further enquiries failed to identify the male involved in complaint 3 (he did
not complain).


VIDEO EVIDENCE
A Freelance photographer filmed the scene including the incident alleged at points 3 and
4.This was widely televised in the aftermath of the disaster.
The video shows the extreme build up of supporters at the time of the alleged incident and
how officers, including mounted officers were struggling to maintain control of the crowd. It
also shows provocation from a number of youths towards the officer identified. Two
witnesses confirmed that youths were shouting at or giving the officer abuse prior to the
incident subject of complaint 3. One of the witnesses was a neutral supporter who entered
the West stand and the other was a Liverpool supporter. The neutral supporter stated that he
feared the officer and horse were going to be impaled due to being pinned against a spiked
railed fence.


POLICE EVIDENCE
The Operational order stated that the mounted sections duties were to maintain order,
segregate supporters and to escort them to and from their transport. All mounted officers
who were posted to Leppings Lane were interviewed by the Investigating team. Two officers
describe the way that the crowd were behaving towards the identified officer and they
thought the officer or his horse was in danger of being injured.


OFFICER INTERVIEW
The officer identified as being involved in the incidents was interviewed under caution
(criminally interviewed) with a solicitor present. He denied all allegations.
He described how he found himself in a difficult position in a hostile crowd. He became
aware that his horse was being abused from behind making it difficult to control. He saw a
group of youths near his horse in possession of cigarettes and that others were urging them
to stub them out on his horse.
He saw a youth in distinctive top stub out a lit cigarette on the horses hind quarters. He
therefore attempted to knock the cigarette from the youths hand whilst trying to restrain his
horse so that bystanders were not injured.
The officer denied allegation 2 but stated that he was shouting at the youths involved in
burning his horse.
Examination of the video recording shows the behaviour of the horse prior to the incident,
the behaviour of one fan (not in the distinctive top) with a lit cigarette and that the blow by
the officer towards the youth in the distinctive top appears to be with an open hand. It was
noted as well that the youth ducks at the time so it was difficult to state where the officer was
aiming for.


HORSE INJURIES
A Farrier contracted by South Yorkshire Police examined the horse involved in these
incidents and found that it had 14 distinct burns on its backside and a number of others to its
tail. These were consistent with lit cigarettes being twisted on its skin. A number of the burns
went beyond the outer skin and in to the flesh. The farrier noted that since the incident the
horse showed signs of nerves when approached and was of a different character. An
experienced Chief Inspector from West Midlands Police Mounted Section, who was not
present, but viewed the video of the incident, was able to state that the police horse involved
displayed “some form of discomfort or injury from the rear” .


OUTCOME
No supporters came forward to allege that they themselves had been assaulted by the
mounted officer.
West Midlands police concluded that the officer’s actions in relation to allegations 1 and 2
were not corroborated and that therefore there was insufficient evidence in relation to
criminal proceedings.
In relation to allegation 3 and 4 they concluded that the officers actions did constitute an
assault. However, his actions were intend to prevent crime e.g. Animal Cruelty and given the
difficult circumstances as corroborated by the above evidence his use of such force was
considered as reasonable and therefore the evidence was insufficient to justify criminal
proceedings.
The report and supporting evidence was submitted to the Director of Public Prosecution
(DPP) who also confirmed that there were insufficient evidence to support any criminal
proceedings.
The potential Discipline aspects were then considered by the Police Complaints Authority
who recommended that no formal action be taken against the officer, but that he be advised
by the Deputy Chief Constable of the need to exercise the utmost restraint at all times.
