                                                                                       M IR .15


                                                                                                                        M       w
QiTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                n a tp and tim e raised        k    I                 Number


                       j-ct
                         rd<vv
Title
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)                             r/   r v t      ,


Receiver's instructions - - urgent action — Y                      ^          ^    ^                  f    ---------
                                                                                                                            Receiver
__________ l I V          ?J
                                          G'TU^ '                             _________________________

                                                                                                                            Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                       Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions


                                                                                                                             Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                        4-SrT
                                                                                                                       O/M          SIO
Examined     further action to be taken




                                                                                                                             Indexer
Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                       N




iQje O / V              'Vc^ a a ^ )


                 C'T    CMC-lo^5                       ^ V c b t ^ iAA£\Aj|;


1W           IU J ^ bowvj^U                olvso^W        .

                   \^       t^cM            y\Jtod     Vo     ccvlW cV

                              cU '         +U ?      oJ oca^        axioW.sc

                               U ovaat S          ^ i V y c X / K y ^
                                     \

S TAIEIEIT B Y ________________ ABOUT THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER ON 15/4/89.

I and my mother, sister and brother-in-law attended the Liverpool/ Notts
Forest semi-final this year. 1 am a resident of Sheffield, they had
travelled up from Sussex the night before. We had seats in the west
stand, gangway W, row 8, at the Leppings Lane End among Liverpool fans,
although we ourselves are general football supporters, not specifically
Liverpool fans.

My family attended the same semi-final the year before. We drove early
to the ground and parked on a lay-by along the Peniston Road, some way
from the ground, parking at around 2.15.
We walked slowly towards the Hillsborough ground together with many
Notts Forest and Liverpool fans, but also passing by many who were in
and outside the pubs, cafes and hot-dog stalls along the route. There
was a good deal of bustle and noise and banter between fans but no sense
of menace or disturbance.

We arrived at the Leppings Lane end at about 2.30. There was not a high
police profile on the way, some officers and traffic control, and two
mounted police at the gates, beginning to request non ticket holders to
move back away from the gates, clearly but unaggressively.
I saw that there was quite a crowd building up to the right where fans
were queuing for the standing area of the Liverpool end and was glad to
find that our tickets meant we had to go through the middle turnstile at
which there was no queue at all. I was surprised at how easy it was to
get up to the turnstile. I expected a greater crowd control and police
or official presence.
The tight packed appearance at the terrace turnstile,  still only a few
people deep and quite orderly, made me relieved not to have to queue
there. I realised then that if those who had been drinking and eating
late along the route turned up in any numbers I would not have felt very
safe because there was nothing to control the crowd pressing forward or
any of us getting pushed in to the narrow funnel of the turnstile. As in
any crowd no one of us could have influenced the press of many people in
such an enclosed space.
However we passed easily through our turnstile and had our tickets
calmly checked there and twice more by officials before we climbed the
steps. A fan who was trying to come down to buy a programme was told
politely that no-one was allowed down until the game had started.

As we reached the top of the steps to our stand the atmosphere hit us
-it was very exciting. The ground and stands looked very good, it was
already pretty full all round although we were surprised, and commented
to see several empty seats, even up to the kick-off. There was sixties
music being played, fans singing, the Liverpool team out warming up and
a great sense of anticipation throughout the ground. The sun was shining
and everyone seemed to be relishing the scene. We found our seats in
among the Liverpool supporters, young and old. They were understandably
very excited. We. met up with two friends who had travelled up from
Sussex that morning for the match. They'd been there some time and
confirmed our feeling, that the atmosphere was good, that it didn't feel
threatening, that as always in a big excited crowd it all feels a little
out of your control as you are dependent on what everyone else does but
that we were in for a good afternoon.
Liverpool went off and Forest came on for a few minutes. The crowd our
end sang a few build up chants and also sang 'shitty ground, shitty
ground, shitty ground' once or twice which we assumed was to do with the
end they had been allocated and the smallness of their stand. It was not
sung with much anger, just a comment at that stage. We commeneted on how
good a ground it was now, compared to many.
There was a roar of excitement as the teams came onto the pitch and
everyone was standing up, singing and chanting their themes with great
commitment but again not agressively. The teams were announced and this
was clear but we noticed that all other announcements over the P. A,
system were very fuzzy and indecipherable. There were particularly loud
cheers for favourite players and a lot of loud singing to drown out the
names of the Notts Forest side as they were announced. These cheers we
later learned had drawn large crowds forward in a fatal rush outside the
ground.
As the game started everyone sat down very quickly and in a surprisingly
disciplined way and the football got off to an exciting start,
increasing the cheers and roaring of the crowd who sometimes stood, in
their excitement*and sometimes sat.
From the very start though we, who could see the front of the terraced
part of the crowd and the fences very easily, were distracted by ominous
movement in that area and attempts by fans to climb up over the fence.
None of us understood then or for many minutes, why this was happening
but it continually drew our eyes from the ground to the crowd there,
especially as one or two fans started to get over, mill around on the
touchline, or climb back on the fence to try to pull others over. At
that stage I think none of the crowd except those in the crush and
possibly those right at the front of the seats above the terrace
understood what was happening. The rest of us appeared to desperately
want it to be a small disturbance quickly brought under control so that
what then seemed the most important thing to us all, the match
continuing, was able to happen. It was apparant that the police were
also acting on the same assumption, that the disturbance must not stop
the game going ahead. We had no information to help us understand what
was going on.
Clearly however it wasn't a small incident that would stop. Hore people
 struggled to climb over and push the gates open and there were sometimes
 desperate struggles between them and the police. In a matter of minutes
 I changed from thinking that it was inconceivable that the match would
have to be stopped to becoming very clear it could and then would have
 to. We still had no idea of the cause, only that fans were being forced
 to escape in a terrible panic. Was it because of a fire? Too many people
 in that area of the ground? Reckless crowds? A few irresponsible people
 showing off? At that stage it could've been any of these. One or two of
 those who climbed over did the classic runs across the pitch pufeued by
 police officers and this confused things further.

We watched while police office®, men and women, tried desperately, for
several valuable minutes, to force the gates closed again, to push
people back over fences, to keep more people from invading the pitch,
reinforcements rushing in and doing the same. I assume this was
according to pre-match instructions and rehearsals to keep the fans off
the playing area. We could just make out a crackly message repeated on
the P.A. for fans to please move back, please move back away from the
fences. We saw the senior officer run out onto the pitch and some fans
shouting at players, we now know asking for the match to stop. Still
there were struggles between fans and police to keep the crowd off the
pitch and stay inside the fences, to allow the match to continue.

But the picture began to change. The message was slowly getting through
to the nearby part of the crowd watching as well as the police. From it
just being fans climbing the spiked, high fences and desperately trying
to pull people up and to safety, the officers began desperately to join
in. Apparantly, fans in the front of our stand also joined in pulling
                                  3


people out of what was clearly then a terrifying crush. These men,
pulled to safety, were desperate and climbed in a panic over us allj
shaking and unsteady, still unsure they had really escaped from their
ordeal. One of these men said "You've no idea what it's like down
there." Most didn't speak at all. I looked around and realised that our
area too was beginning to become overcrowded. I thought this could not
just be from people being pulled to safety but others arriving late to
the ground. The aisles we re full. There looked to be no easy way out. I
looked at the crowds still crushed in the standing area and, though the
pitch was getting fuller, the crowd in the terraces didn't seem to
lessen. Ve had no idea whether this terrible crush would spread to our
part or yet what was causing it. Still no more information was
announced.
Fans all around were shocked and confused. They had chanted "Scab” at
the police for pushing people back into the crowd and strugglng with
their fellow supporters. They yelled in unison to the man climbing the
goal posts to get off and he did. They chanted "shitty ground” with more
anger. We were still unsure why it had happened but we all began to
realise it was serious and that people we re being badly injured. The
ambulance came on from the far corner and pulled up just below us by the
goal. It stayed there a long time while mouth-to-mouth and other
ressucivktion was attempted on fans.
Whatever had caused it, we became aware of terrible injuries, of people
still taking a long time to get out, despite the gates being opened
 (they looked shockingly inadequate and narrow) and a piece of fence
being cut to release others. The crowd began to clap and cheer
individual acts of heroism which were being carried out everywhere by
fans, officers and officials. People, supporters and police were going
back in to pull others out, pulling people up over the fence, giving
emergency first aid, tearing off advertising hoardings to use as
stretchers and running the full length of the pitch to fetch and carry
the injured.
Throughout all this time the press photographers gathered in large
numbers and moved among the fans and police and officials taking close
up shots of all the events, which disturbed many members of the crowd as
it was very intrusive and, many of us felt, insensitive to peoples grief
and shock. As well as their intrusion there were so many it felt that
they could hamper the rescue operation.
Some fans just lay on the ground or sat around shocked and crying, or
injured. It seemed that the rescue procedure began to take on some
coherence. The crowd watched as one man was not able to be revived
despite the skilled efforts of those attending him. All around us in the
stand the shock and the press of too many people, together with the
anger and dismay at the sights we were helplessly witnessing felt
ominous, but in fact no-one hit out,   no-one was aggressive, except
sometimes in their voices full of frustration at being so helpless, and
at the exciting prospect of a wonderful afternoon turned so sour so
quickly. We felt it was clear by then that it was not because of crowd
violence or clashes between fans, but due to some other cause like
overcrowding.    -

We began to realise that the football was unlikely to resume and that if
it did we had no heart for it after what we were seeing. The only reason
we could think for it being resumed was to pacify the crowds. It is
important to remember that it was still less than half an hour since
thousands of us gathered in great spirits and there was frustration as
well as despair at the turn of events. None of us had any information
except what we could see for ourselves and no idea what we were to do
for the best. Was it safe to stay? Were more people going to come and
overcrowd our stand? Was it a fire or some problem with the physical
                                   4


construction behind the terrace that had pushed people forward and if so
was it safer to stay or to go? Was anything safe? How might that many
people respond under such panicky circuirstances? Vas it still to get
worse or not? Would it cause another crush to leave or would it ease it
and therefore help?
We had no idea.  We could hear nothing more from the P.A. We watched,
thought, stayed still like the other thousands all around the ground who
showed great self-control. Gradually, perhaps about twenty minutes
afterthe game was stopped, though I a m not sure, we quietly discussed it
and felt it would be best to try to slowly leave, and get safe, and
leave more space for the Liverpool fans who had even more reason than us
to be distressed and confused and to want to stay to see what happened
to their fellow fans. We had witnessed people dying, injured and
distressed.
We couldn't have got through the gangway we had entered by, it was now
too crowded, so we moved slowly and carefully up and through the crowded
other gangway. No one stopped us or advised us.
We saw^that we could continue without endangering anyone and, taking
care to all keep close together, we again picked our way through and saw
there was a clear way down and out of the ground so we slowly left,
passing men sitting and lying, crying and shaken, passing ambulances and
fire-engines waiting or coming in to the gates outside the Leppings Lane
entrance that we'd only recently walked through with others in such
anticipation. We still didn't know if the fire-engines were there for a
fire, to cut fences, on standby or what.

I did know by then, though I like most others was still reluctant to
acknowledge it fully to myself, that there had been a major catastrophy
in that part of the ground and that people had died in front of our
eyes, while thousands of us were helpless. I also knew by then that,
despite the -febe tremendous emthusiasn of the fans, it wasn’t due to
violent fans in any area I had seen. Though being among such a partisan
and devoted crowd of supporters feels unpredictable and a bit tense, at
no time had any fans I could see, and I could see a lot of the Liverpool
end, done anything deliberate to cause or aggravate the situation while
many had done a great deal to ease it or to rescue those who couldn't
get out themselves. Also I realised that whatever had happened at the
back of the terraces to cause the crush, many of those killed and
injured would be fans who had been in the ground for some time and had
taken their favourite place in front of us behind the goal and were
therefore helpless victims.

We walked slowly away, still feeling shaken and stunned by the situation
and still not quite believing we had ourselves got out safely, while
aware others had not. Some other supporters, including young lads, were
beginning to walk away too, equally stunned. It wasn' until we got home
that we began to hear of the full extent of the tragedy, though if we
had dared to think it through we could've guessed from the terrible
crush and the time it took to ease the overcrowded terrace in any
visible way that the death toll would be high.

 AFTERTHOUGHTS AFP ...LDEASL.
 Mostly this section will be based on what I actually saw and was able to
 think through. I have read much information since, but other eye
 witnesses are better placed to comment on those things.
 The thing I feel most strongly is that it was a very complex situation,
 developing not just from that Saturday but also from circumstances and
 reactions to what has happened at football before that day. I do feel
 that the actions that have been taken over the recent history of
 football have been too simplistic, that those reactions partly
contributed to the extent of this tragedy and that there is a very real
danger of this tragedy producing over-simplistic responses too. It would
be terrible if this was to happen.
I also feel that, however hard I think about it, and however much I
read, I don't feel it is appropriate to point to anyone and blame them.
There are many things that could be done differently, and many lessons
to be learned but I felt and feel that there was a reason for every
situation and every groups behaviour on the day and that a whole
catalogue of circumstances contributed, not just one. Many ended up
doing unhelpful things for understandable reasons. We all, not just
those at the game,  share some responsibility for generalising about
fans behaviour from a small but persistent proportion of attenders
behaviour at other games; for taking a long time, too long, to realise
the fans were in mortal danger and from feeling that the most important,
thing would be for the match to continue when in fact had we and
othershad more infromation we would have know immediately that this was
of very little importance on that particular day.
I watched the police officers carrying on doing what we might all have
wanted them to do if it had been a small pitch invasion by a few
irresponsible fans. They seemed to me to be fearful of attack and geared
up, because of that understandable fear, to resist the fans for several
minutes, not to act spontaineously and trustingly and let the fans take
control by helping them escape. This seems to be where the simplistic
attitude towards football fans has been responsible for many over-
simplistic measures. This is not just by the police but. by clubs, local
and national government etc. By building barriers designed only to cage
fans in, not barriers to keep fans off the pitch but ensure safe escape
when necessary.
When the police did realise that it was a very different scenario to
the one they have presumably come to fear, they entered fully into the
rescue and responded courageously, as did fans and officials. I feel
sad for those officers as I do for the fans, all of whom became part of
a nightmare not of their direct making.
The crush and the numbers involved was terrifying. I can easily believe
that a similar crush of people outside the stadium would have led to
officers being fearful of a large number of casualties. As I wrote
above, even at 2,30 there was the beginnings of hold-ups at the terrace
turnstiles and officers on horseback asking those without tickets to
move away. I feel very strongly that for well-attended matches such as
these it is crucial to have more syphoning of crowds into queues or
preferably filtering through 'chambers' where one isn't filled until
there is space in the next. I appreciated the low-profile policing and
feel this could be maintained if sufficient spatial control of the crowd
occured outside matches. The proviso of delaying the start would help
but this would have to be balanced against the building frustration of
those inside the ground if there wasn't a clear reason for delay. With
the inadequate communication system in operation on that day this might
not have became clear enough to us inside if it had've happened.

The P. A. system itself was technically inadequate as well as the
availability of important information being given out by it. If the
crowd had notbeen so well disciplined on that day the lack of
information could have caused more problems or frustration once the
incident was occuring.
The megaphones used by the police inside the grounds were also
inadequate and far better communication systems are needed, inside and
outside the ground.They need to be able to be used by the officers or
officials spontaineously in any of many emergencies that could have
happened in a crowd as large and as contained as we all were in that
very enclosed space. If it had been a fire, for example, we would have
been completely unable to make a decision for ourselves about the best
course of action. In a crowd that large you can have very limited vision
and no idea where or when it is safe to movetwith disastrous results.
I realised at the time that if trained officials with adequate two-way
radio contact with a central control and P.A. had been positioned at key
viewing points such as on horseback outside the ground AND at the front
of stands above the terraces where the most enthusistlc crowds are
always to be found,(and therefore problems anticipated), the situation
could immediately have been analysed and the police and officials
informed. There would not have been minutes wasted while desperate fans
and equally desperate but uninformed officers operated inadvertantly but
fatally against each other. Videos for surveillance are not the same as
trained individuals with means of communicating directly with each
other.
The gates out of the fences were too small. Even when open and with
people assisting they didn't free people quickly enough and must have
added to the crush by funneling people into too narrow an area. They
were ineffective for a long time for those up against the fence. The
fences, clearly , were too good at only one job - keeping fans off the
pitch whatever the occurance. If there had been a fire the same or worse
devastation would have ensued. Ways of preventing fans invading the
pitch must be possible without that being by preventing escape. This
seems an example of many ways in which authorities have assumed that the
only task was to contain fans, the only response was to 'police'
 everyone because some were not coming purely to watch football. Equally
 unsubtle responses that might occur now eg all-seater stadiums (that
 would not have caused less deaths in this circumstance and would change
 many fans enjoyment) would only look like a solution but in fact could
 create new problems (seats trap and restrict movement more than a crowd
 standing d o e s ) .
 On the way to the ground I was asking myself some questions which I
 still ask. Why are fans frisked for drinks, and drinks no longer allowed
 in the ground but all the pubs on the way to the ground open right up
 until the start? Doesn't this just make it more likely that fans be
 tempted to arrive late. Why aren't they closed, say, an hour before kick
off?
Why are so many press given passes. So many were disturbing for fans and
could easily have hampered rescue, while they did not help the injured.

I understand why the ends were allocated as they were and feel this will
be hard to rectify until purpose built stadia, (which we all deserve,
not just football fans but everyone who likes going to spectacular
outdoor events) are invested in, at least in strategic parts of the
country. I feel this is urgent and essential for matches like this where
it is inevitable that larger and better facilities are needed than for
average league matches.
In retrospect I feel it should've been understood that a possible large
contingent of Liverpool fans who hadn't managed to get tickets
beforehand would be wanting to get in. The crowd acknowledged this by
singing 'shitty-ground' before the incident. Whether or not there were
likely to be fans without tickets or late, wasn't it likely that we
would arrive unevenly and isn't it clear that, even worse than the
narrow gates in the fences, the turnstiles create such a narrow funnel.
Identity cards will surely add to this at many matches. While I liked
the low profile the police were keeping I don't feel that carefully
controlled stages of entry would need to be aggressively controlled and
I do feel that narrow turnstiles with no approach control make even
small crowds pushing forward a real danger.
