 :•                                                                               Q c P3S1
                                                                          fO Q 5XD             ..X   -,
                                                                       DENNIS PELLEGRINE

                                                                       Police Constable 269^

                                                                       Maltby Police Station

                                                                       T/N 0709 812282

      At 8 am Saturday 15 April 1989, I commenced duty at Maltby Police Station to cover the

      Liverpool versus Nottingham Forrest FA Cup semi-final at Hillsborough Football Ground.

      At 8.15 am I left Maltby Police Station by Force coach to attend Rotherham Police

      Station to pick up more Police Officers.

      At 9-30 am I arrived at Hillsborough Football Ground.

      At 10 am I attended a briefing in the North Stand.

      At 11 am I commenced foot patrol of Herries Road along withother Officers        in    my serial.

      The patrol area was from the 5 Arches Bridge, sitauted approximately 400 yards from the

      Football Ground to the 5 Arches Public House situated approximately     % mile   along the road.

      The duties of our serial was to control the Nottingham Forrest football supporters making           j
                                                                                                          3
      their way to the Ground.   This duty proceeded without incident.

      At 3 pm I was situated outside the 5 Arches Public House for the last of the Nottingham

      Forrest supporters leaving the Public House.

      At 3-10 pm I walked down Herries Road with the remaining Nottingham Forrest supporters

      making our way to the ground.    As the supporters were going    into theGround, the     serial

      started to walk towards Claywheel Lane for a meal break.

^ ^ A t approximatley 3-20 pm our serial was called into the Ground to the Leppings Lane end as

      there were crowd problems at that side of the Ground, I made my way along with the serial,

      via the playing area towards the stand.    As I approached the stand I observed a large

      number of people pushed up against the perimeter fence and other people climbing over the

      fence.   By the time I arrived at the fence one of the gates was opened, the one towards

      the right hand side of the goal post.     I made my way towards the gate and started to help

      people out of the stand and onto the pitch.     I could see people squashed up against the

      perimeter fence, but I was unable to get into the stand due to the volume of people try­

      ing to get out of the gate.     Eventually some Officers managed to get into the stand and I

      witnessed 2 Officers giving mouth to mouth resuscitation.       I then, along with other
                                                                             I9p^, /& \

                                                  2

  Officers and supporters, attempted to pull the netting of the fence, in front of the

   stand, down to enable us to get injured people out of the stand and onto the pitch.

  However, we were unable to pull the netting down and therefore not able to get anyone

   out by these means.   I then went back out through the open gate and onto the pitch.     By

   this time I was joined by St. John's Ambulance men and other first aiders who began treat­

   ing the injured.

   At approximately 3-50 pm I, along with 2 Officers and some supporters got hold of an

   advertising board and took the body of a young man, approximately 17 yrs to the gymnasium

   situated at the back of the North Stand which was being used as atemporary mortuary.          We

   left the body with Officers in the gymnasium, and returned to the pitch with the

^^advertising board.     On arrival back at Leppings Lane stand I was informed by an Inspector

   that all the bodies had been removed and to go and join a cordon of Police Officers across

   the football pitch.

   At approximately 4.50 pm we    were moved outside the ground onto Penistone Road to direct

   Nottingham Forrest supporters away from the ground.

   At 5*45 pmI returned to the North Stand with the rest of my serial.     I was thentold    to

   go to Claywheel Lane with the rest of my serial for transport to Barnsley Mortuary     to help

   lay out bodies from the ground.

   At 6 pm standby for transport to Barnsley.

^ ^ A t 6.30 pm I was informed that I was not required for Barnsley.

   At 6.45 pm stood down and driven back to Maltby Police Station by Panda car.

   At 7 pm arrived at Maltby Police Station in the CID Office to be given a de-briefing by CID

   Officers.

   At 7.30 pm I went off duty.
