                                       SOUTH YO RKSHIRE POLICE                                                £.77
                                                                    Ref:                               i/vd
           From: PC 3336 Giblin    Ops, Dog Section,                Station/Dept:     O p s /D o g s

                                                                    Date: 2 0 mk . B $ .
           ^o: Chief Superintendent Ops and Traffic.



                 SUBJECT:   Report on my attendance at the incident at Hillsborough
                            Football Ground,




                 With regard to the incident at Hillsborough Football Ground, I have to report
                 my involvment and feelings as follows:-


                      I started duty at 6am at E1 as force cover until 8ant when I collected PC
                 159^ Allott from his home address and went down to Niagara for the briefing,
                 I was in good spirits looking forward to policing the match after the success
                 of last years semi-final between the same two clubs, when everything had gone welli
                 with just a handful of arrests made.


                      On arrival at Niagara we were briefed by senior officers as to our duties
                 and who our partners were.     My partner was PC 17^1 squires fro® the Nottingham­
                 shire Police Cog Section and we were to police the Midland Station prior to the
                 match, receiving both Liverpool and Nottingham Forest supporters,                                   .


                      We arrived at the station at approximately 1030am and some Liverpool fans                      j
                 had already arrived by train and were waiting transport by South Yorkshire
                 transport buses to the ground.    Most of them were in good spirits although
                 some had already been drinking and a number of arrests were made by the serials
                 in attendance there for drunk and disorderly. A number who had brought drink
                 with them on the train had the drink confiscated from them or they poured it


Qq 0 | £
                 down the drain,    A second train of Liverpool fans arrived at the station and
                 they were a little rowdier than the first and on instruction from Chief Inspector
                 King myself and PC squires took our dogs from the vehicle and patrolled the area
                 where the fans were being held until they could be put on SYT buses and trans­
C65T3>           ferred to the ground.    Some of these fans didn't like this as they stated they
                 had made arrangements to meet people in city centre pubs prior to attending the
                 match, but they were still ushered back into the waiting group and taken to the
                 ground without any trouble.    We stayed at the station receiving the fans until
                 2,^0pm and then on instructions from PS 721 Hill, we attended at West Bar to take
                 an early meal.    Both myself and PC Squires remarked generally how well behaved
                 the fans had been apart from the odd ones who had been arrested for drunk and
                 disorderly and joked that we wouldn't get much overtime from this match as it
                 would be a repeat of last years semi-final.
   Gen/2

                                                                              Continue
                                                                                               2.

       We met up with PC 159^ Allott and his partner in the canteen and I beleive at that
time we were all in good spirits, laughing and joking again about the overtime and how PC
Allott and his partner had been patrolling town centre, attending several skirmishes at
pubs and how we had been down at the station, doing nothing much* We were still monitering
the radio on Channel 29 when we heard control ask PS Hill to send all his dog handlers from
the town centre to the ground as assistance was needed urgently.    We heard PS Hill tell
them to ring the canteen to inform us as we had gone in for early meal but we managed to get
through and tell them that we were already on our way.


       We went downstairs and as we were passing through the station sergeants office towards
the garage where the vans were parked I remember a PC shouting to me ' Denisef you used to
work in Ops Room. Whats Operation Support mean?'.    I hadn’t heard this come over the radio
and asked him what he meant and he said that it had come over the radio that Operation
Support was required at the ground.    I informed him then that it meant all available
personnel was required at the ground at asf=irt with a serious incident.    I then went to my
    with my partner and looked at my watch, seeing that it was only 3 .05pm and saying to
myself, 'They've only been playing 5 minutes. I wonder whats happened?*     We arrived at the
ground at 3.12pm and parked on the central reservation in Penistone Road outride the Kop end
of the ground.    A number of police vehicles were already there and officers were stood look­
ing bewildered. No one seemed to know what was happening and what was required from us.         Then
a call came from one of the other handlers that we were to take the dogs into the ground.
I took my dog and went into the ground through gate 'O' and stood with the other handlers
near to the police room at the top of the ramp which leads down onto the pitch.      People were
running around, some coming up the ramp with stretches and people laid on them with coats ot
jumpers over their heads.     It then hit me that people had in fact died in whatever had gone
off inside the ground and I remember thinking, perhaps selfishly, I don't know, * I hope the
bobbies that are in there are alright.* We were then instructed to take our dogs back to the
^uas and remain with them until instructed further. Once back at the vans we stood talking
amongst ourselves, trying to work out what had happened to result in peoples deaths.      I

couldn't make anything much over the radio, all the transmissions on it seemed to blurr into
one.    Several Notts.Forest fans came out of the ground and said it was the Liverpool fans
that had invaded the pitch.

       I remember watching in awe as ambulance after ambulance passed by me and went into the
ground to be followed shortly afterwards by the fire brigade.     An off duty doctor in his
own car pulled up and stated he had heard the radio message on local radio and had come to
help. In the rear seats were his two young children and he arked if someone could look after
them. As I was the only policewoman around I stated that I would look out for them.       The
children were both about 5yrs old and were strapped in child safety seats    bo   I left them
there as I thought it would be safer than trying to keep them with me outside in the steady
stream of fans that were now beginning to leave the ground.     I then saw all the other dog
handlers getting their dogs from the vehicles and going into the ground. I had to remain
with the children as there were no other officres either male or female around.       At one
                       SOUTH YO RKSHIRE POLICE
                                                  Ref:

    From:                                        Station/Dept:
    To:                                          Date:



            SUBJECT:




Gen/2
                                                                                               3.
   p&int, I seemed to be the focus of the fans because they kept coming up to me in a very
aggressive and angry manner, spitting and occasionally punching me saying it was all my
fault.     Some of them were complaining that the gate men had been letting fans without tickets
in for a tenner a time and one very irate Liverpool fan who refused to give me his name said
he had seen a gate man let in ten at once and his words were ' He made £100 while people
suffered and died.*     The fans were very aggressive and angry continually converging on me
saying what they had to say before making their way off towrads city centre.     A number were
banging on the car which contained the 2 young children and I began shaking with fear thinking
that they might turn the car over so I moved away from the car shouting at them to take it out
on me and not the children in the car.     They came towards me and I thought * This is it. I'm
going to get it now.' but apart from being pushed around and spat on yet again and a couple of
punches to my body they went away,     I went back to the car and comforted the children who were
beginning to cry and got them laughing again talking of all things about 'Thomas the tank
engine.'     I again stood away from the vehicle so that the children would remain safe if any­
more irate fans came to me.     I could hear coming from inside the ground cheers, screaming and
b ^ L n g and began to wonder what could possibly be happening to my collegues inside the ground,
because if I was being subjected to this abuse outside the ground, what was happening to them
it there.


     The doctor then returned to his vehicle stating that there wasn't much more he could do.
I asked him what has happenidi and he told me that people had been crushed and he had seen
about 30 people dead. I saw that he was very white and shaken. I asked him for his name but
he said he had given his details to someone inside the ground*     He then drove awajr and I began
to make my way towards the ground when Inspector Phenix came out and asked me if I had seen PC
Dowdall, another of the handlers because he couldn't find him. I said I hadn't all the time
I had been stood outside the ground, so he asked me to take him round to the Leppings Lane
end of the ground in the dog van to see if he was there.

     As we arrived at the Leppings Lane end all I could see was a mass of red and white,
Liverpool fans were everywhere, most of them surrounding what police officers I could    see,
arguing with them and pushing them around.     Inspector Phenix got out of the van and told me
to get back to the Kop end as soon as possible and get into the ground with the other dog
handlers.     Liverpool fans began to come towards the van shouting and swearing , some banging
on the front of the van and I waited until they had vented their obvious feelings and then
drove back to Penistone Road. I went into the ground with my dog again through gate 'O'. All
I could see was ambulances, their crews and police officers running around either to the
ambulances or gym with people on stretches.     Once onto the pitch I saw a number of dog handlers
lined up in front of the Kop and others in the middle of the pitch between the Kop and the
cordon of police officers that were across the pitch near the Leppings Lane end.     I stood
in the middle of the pitch and looked around. People and officers were running around everywhere
with stretches or just helping people on foot back towards the gym. Everything just seemed to
be chaotic.     I looked over towards the Leppings Lane end and I could see fans in the stand
above the terrace throwing things down onto the people and officers below and thought,     * Can't
                       SOUTH YO RKSHIRE POLICE
                                                 Ref:

    From:                                        Station/Dept:
    To:                                          Date:



            SUBJECT:




Gen/2
                                                                                               4   .
they see that people are hurt and     we are trying to    help them. ' I wasonly   on the pitch with
ray dog for about 5 minutes but it    seemed like an age and then PS Dent came around telling the
dog handlers to return to their vans and try to get to the points we had been given which for
my partner and I was Brook Shaws forecourt, at Shalenaoor*      We arrived there and got out of
the van,   watching the steadystream of fans coming passed. Quite a few of them came up asking
for the telephone   numbers to ring regarding friends or relatives and I gave them the numbers
they needed*


     All the Liverpool fans that I spoke to were well in drink, some of them were even carry­
ing cans   or large plastic bottlesof beer.     When the stream of fans had finished we made our
way into   the town centre and down to the Midland Station and waited until the fans had been
placed back onto their respective trains.      We were then told to stand down and return to
Niagara, which we did*   As I walked upthe steps into     the club, I remember seeing a male
officer sat crying and I was told that he had been at     the front and had carried some of the

injured and dead from the crush.     Other officers were just sat around quietly with looks of
^biess and disbelief on their faces and       it wasn’t   until speaking to other officers that I
realised just how lucky, if thatsthe word to use,     how lucky I was to   have been stood outside
the ground with the children.     Then after a de-briefing from Inspector Phenix we were stood
down from duty at the ground and together with PC Allott returned to E1 where we went off
duty at 8pm.


     All I can sfiy in closing is that I was very frightened and upset by the actions of the
majority of Liverpool fans towards myself and the other people who were trying to help the
injured inside the ground.     Especially when on my own outside the ground, the group of
supporters advanced on me because I honestly feared that I would be caused serious injury and
that even though I wanted to call for assistance I didn't because I knew people inside the
ground needed help more than myself so        I would sufferthe consequences and not add to the



•
already large burden inside.


Submitted for your information.




Police Constable 3336,
                   SOUTH YO RKSHIRE POLICE
                                             Ref:
From:                                        Station/Dept:
To:                                          Date:



        SUBJECT:
