                                                               ©OR 5 io'b

STATEMENT OF:           DAVID WASSELL

AGE:                    Over 21

OCCUPATION:             Detective Constable 2338

ADDRESS:                C.I.D. Dinnington.



At 7.30 a.m. on Saturday, 15th April 1989, I was an duty in full police uniform

in connection with the Liverpool v Nottingham Forest F.A. Cup Semi-Final at

Hillsborough Football Ground.

At that time in company with D.C. 1805 Latham, I took a police vehicle to

Main Street Garage Rotherham, for service.

At 8.30 a.m. that day I was then conveyed by coach to Hillsborough Football

Ground.

At 9.30 a.m. I attended a briefing with Serial 40 in the North Stand.

At 11.00 a.m. in company with my Serial I commenced duty on Halifax Road,

Sheffield, where we took charge of parking and unloading coach loads of

Liverpool supporters.     The supporters that alighted from the coaches were

generally good honoured.     It was obvious that a large number of than had

been drinking but were not incapable.     The last twenty or so coaches that

arrived an Halifax Road were empty.

At 3.10 p.m. after we had completed parking the coaches, together with

other Serials we were directed to Hillsborough Stadium to the rear of the

Leppings Lane entrance.

We were re-grouped outside the entrance by Inspector Charles who then

directed us into the area between the turnstiles and the tunnel leading to

the rear of Leppings Lane Stand.     In that area I was confronted as were

other officers by the scene of angry supporters, sane coming from the upper

part of the stand, shouting abuse at the Police for opening the Leppings Lane

Gate.     I saw several supporters staggering about in a daze and entered the

tunnel in an effort to clear the way.     Several people were brought out of



                                                         continued
Statement of:   DAVID WASSELL                                       Page 2



the tunnel in an unconscious state by police officers and members of the

public and were laid an the ground in the area outside the tunnel entrance.

I assisted in keeping the access to the tunnel clear as supporters were

continually trying to enter it and causing a major obstruction to the

rescue operation.   Several police officers were rendering mouth to mouth

resuscitation to unconscious supporters and I assisted further in clearing

the area as more space was constantly needed for injured fans being brought

from the tunnel.

It became obvious that several people were dead after being brought frcm the

stand.    I recall going into the stand to see if any further assistance was

required and saw that the football pitch was full of supporters being given

first aid and that the stand was now clear and no further assistance was

required in that area.

At this stage I was hit on the back of the leg by a bottle, obviously thrown

frcm the stand above, and which broke on the ground behind me.

I was not injured as a result of this action.

I decided to return to the tunnel to keep the access clear for the accident

and emergency services.

I then continued to render assistance and cleared the ground after the game

had been abandoned, returning with the Liverpool fans to their coaches.




 Dated:                                      Signed:
