                            IMMEDIATF          /




'IMMEDIATE
                                RE: DISCIPLINARY ACTION
    £       1
                          HILLSBOROUGH - C H I E F SUPERINTENDANT
    /^ T   c *^ ""
                          DAVID DUCKENFIELD        & SUPERINTENDENT

                                        BERNARD MURRAY
           : 7       I




                                INSTRUCTIONS TO COUNSEL




                         Mr R Payne)^                   ^Tk-rS
                                                          -K jP * .



                              (T )




                                               “X' t>s '
                                        pMOtt SOKyS ainSf1 CtSAy
                                        iwiy          cDtuai
                                         _______________O * fc2D
                         Ref: SW/

                         Stephen Walker Esq,
                         Solicitor.
                         South Yorkshire Police,
                         Police Headquarters,
                         Snig Hill,
                         Sheffield.
                         S3 8 L Y .



                                                             poL~
                  IN THE MATTER OF THE POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY
                 AND DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS ARISING OUT OF
                 THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER




Instructions to Counsel to advise In conference.



Counsel will receive herewith:



1) The Police     (Discipline) Regulations 1985 SI 1985   No 518



2) The Complaints & Discipline files In respect of Chief Superintendent

     Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray



3)   Memoranda and accompanying letter of 28 March 1991 from ACC

     Mr Anderson to Brigadier Pownall of the PCA



4)   Home Office Guidance to Chief Officers on Police Complaints and

     Discipline Procedures



5)   The summing up of Doctor Stefan Popper, Coroner for South Yorkshire



6)   Correspondence:



     a) letter    from Police Complaints Authority dated 7 May 1991

     b) letter    from Mr Leslie Sharp, Chief Constable of Cumbria

         dated 16 May 1991

     c) letter    from DPP dated 30 August 1990
    d)    letters of 10 April 1991 from PCA to ACC Mr Anderson and reply



Instructing Solicitor acts In this case for Assistant Chief Constable

Mr Graham Moore of the South Yorkshire Police and Counsel Is Instructed on

his behalf.   As Assistant Chief Constable he is the disciplinary authority

for officers below the rank of Assistant Chief Constable having been

delegated that responsibility by the Chief Constable (See enclosure 1 and

Regulation 15 in particular).



These instructions are concerned with possible disciplinary proceedings

arising out of the Hillsborough Disaster, many aspects of which Counsel is

already well acquainted.     The police officers concerned are Chief

Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray of the South Yorkshire

Force.



Arising out of the disaster a number of public complaints were made against

a number of police officers including Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and

Superintendent Murray.     The complainants and the nature of their complaints

are detailed in schedules A and B of the complaints file for Chief

Superintendent Duckenfield and the Complaints against Police form, page 1

of the file relating to Superintendent Murray (see enclosure 2 for both

files).



Those complaints were referred to the Chief Constable of West Midlands for

investigation under the terms of the Police Discipline Regulations 1985

(the discipline regulations) (enclosure 1) and his investigation was

supervised by the Police Complaints Authority under the provisions of S89




                                      -   2   -
of the Police & Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE).



On the retirement of Mr Geoffrey Dear, Chief Constable of West Midlands the

papers were passed to Mr Leslie Sharp, Chief Constable of Cumbria, to

complete the investigation.   For ease of reference he is referred to as the

Investigating Officer and the Police Complaints Authority, the PCA.



It will interest Counsel to know that once the Investigating Officer was

appointed and the PCA decided to supervise the investigation, neither ACC

Mr Anderson nor any of his subordinates took any further part in the

investigation.   The files only came back to Mr Anderson after the

investigation had been completed to enable him to consider what if any

charges should be levelled against any officer this being his responsibility

under Regulation 8 of the discipline regulations.    More about this later.



Only the Complaints and Discipline files associated with the investigation

into the complaints have been supplied to Counsel and this is for the sake

of brevity.   Other files including all the statements taken from witnesses

and considered as part of that investigation are available if Counsel wishes

to see them but at this juncture it is not felt that they will add anything

to Counsel's consideration of the issues.



When an investigation is completed the disciplinary authority, in this case

ACC Mr Anderson, is required to complete a memorandum to the PCA in

accordance with the provisions of s90(5) of PACE.    The memoranda touching

upon the complaints against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and

Superintendent Murray are attached as enclosure 3 together with a letter

of explanation dated 28 March 1991 from ACC Mr Stuart Anderson to the PCA.




                                    -   3   -
r   .




         It is perhaps noteworthy here to mention that the contents of the memoranda

         are based solely upon the evidence contained in the Investigating Officer's

         report.     In other words because of the serious public interest involved in

         these matters Assistant Chief Constable Stuart Anderson did not see fit to

        put any further gloss on what could then be said to be a totally independent

         investigation and report.     Counsel will see from the Complaints & Discipline

        files that the Investigating Officer's conclusion is that no disciplinary

        offence is made out against either officer.



        After the memoranda had been submitted to the PCA there then transpired

        correspondence between the Authority and ACC Mr Suart Anderson (enclosure

        6(d).      Ultimately the PCA wrote on 7 May disagreeing with the view that no

        discipline proceedings were justified against Chief Superintendent

        Duckenfield or Superintendent Murray.          In this letter they explain why they

        come to this view and identify four charges of neglect of duty and one of

        discreditable conduct against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and one charge

        of neglect of duty against Superinendent Murray.         These charges are laid

        down in the Discipline Code for police officers below the rank of Assistant

        Chief Constable and which is Schedule 1 to the Discipline Regulations

        (enclosure 1).     Counsel will note that the letter is couched in terms of

        recommendations to ACC Mr Graham Moore, who has now succeeded ACC Mr

        Anderson, under the provisions of s93(l) of PACE.         The letter also provides

        the necessary degree of consultation under s93(3) so that if the disciplinary

        authority is still unwilling to prefer charges the PCA can direct him to

        do so.     It is as part of this consultation process that Counsel is

        instructed.



        ACC Moore's first response to the letter of 7 May was to ask the




                                               -   4   -
r


    Investigating Officer for his views.       These have been provided in some detail

    in the letter of 16 May (enclosure 6(b) and in which the Investigating

    Officer justifies his conclusions contained in the two reports.          It will

    be noted that he is to consider the PCA's letter further in consultation

    with an officer of the West Midlands Force who was an integral part of the

    complaints investigation and a further response is awaited from him.          Mr

    Sharp's letter in itself requires no additional comment from instructing

    solicitor but it may be helpful to Counsel to say a few things by way of

    addendum.



    When instructing solicitor spoke to Counsel a few days ago about the issues

    Counsel asked to   see a copyof the Coroner's summing up in the inquests into

    the 95 deaths at   Hillsborough and this is enclosure 5 to these instructions.

    The Investigating Officer's reports do not include particular evidence or

    views expressed at the inquests but clearly what took place there is relevant

    because it can and should be used in any discipline proceedings which are

    brought against any officer.



    As Counsel has already said much of what happened at the inquests helped

    in no small way to redeem a balance which          had hitherto weighed heavily in

    criticism of the   actions of   some officers at Hillsborough, not least being

    Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray.          Counsel will

    I am sure remember much of what was said by the Coroner about these two

    officers but a number of comments made by him are worthy of particular

    mention and emphasis in connection with the justification for disciplinary

    charges recommended by the PCA.



    What follows is extracts from the Coroner's summing up and the page




                                           -   5   -
references are to the transcript at enclosure 5.




Thursday 21 March 1991



Page 52
               i



At this point in the transcript the Coroner is discussing breach of duty

as one of the three gates, as he puts it, which the jury must pass through

before they can even consider recklessness as a constituent of unlawful

killing.



At Paragraph D/E he says "In an emergency the fact that in the event a wrong

decision is taken need not constitute a breach of duty provided that a

decision was not unreasonably taken in the circumstances which prevailed

and taking all of the aspects into account.



Page 97



Here the Coroner discusses the principle of "finding own level" as a policy

for dealing with the distribution of fans on a terrace and the Coroner makes

the point that no-one criticised this as a policy.



Page 99



The Coroner refers to a number of supporters making the statement that in

a big match they expect to be crowded, they expect to be crushed, they




                                   -   6   -
expected to be uncomfortable and that It will sort itself out once kick off

has taken place.



Monday, 25 March 1991



Page 25



At Paragraphs E/F "All you can do is put yourself as near as you can into

the shoes of the people who were there on 15 April and say given that

situation was that a reasonable thing to do?    Would a reasonably skilled

officer have done the same?   All the evidence would seem - not all but

virtually all the evidence would   seem to point to that direction,   that the

decision to open the gates was a reasonable one in thecircumstances."



Page 42



Here the Coroner is dealing with the time when pens 3 and 4 became

overcrowded and relates this to the opening of Gate C.    He says at paragraphs

B-D "I'll try to look through some of these witnesses whom we had and in

summary although quite a lot of witnesses describe discomfort at an earlier

stage than what I am now going to tell you, the vast majority of the

witnesses in that pen (pen 4) indicated that they did not become distressed

until the players came on to the   pitch or after and infact while    I am on

that subject that is exactly the   same in pen 3."



Page 44



The Coroner then went on to discuss the evidence of Robert Knowles who went




                                    -   7   -
into pen 4 with two boys after gaining entrance to the ground through gate

C.   He describes how pen 4 was full but he didn't think that was in itself

unusual.      Indeed he worked his way down to the front and right at the front

there was a gap near the fencing which he was able to walk along almost

unimpeded.     Then at Page 45 the Coroner remarks on Knowles' evidence that

he was perfectly satisfied with his position when the players were already

on the pitch.



Page 55



When dealing with the question of monitoring pens and appreciating serious

overcrowding, the Coroner says that the distressing situation did not occur

until the players came on to the pitch or later or from there onwards.      He

also deals here with a number of witnesses who were reasonably happy in pen

3 right up to kick off and probably beyond.



Page 58



The Coroner says "So you had some people who even within this pen (3) and

even relatively late in the day had not appreciated the enormity of the

situation which was developing in front of their very eyes."



Page 66/6 7



The Coroner deals with the evidence of Mr Wright who was positioned in the

corner of the North West terrace almost opposite the police control box.

In his evidence Mr Wright said that as the match was in play he looked at

the Leppings Lane terrace and said, "Wish I was there."     Mr Wright's evidence
was that he would have been quite    content to go into that crowd at the time

that he assessed it.   The Coroneralso deals with evidence from others

outside the Leppings Lane terrace, all of whom could see nothing seriously

untoward until at least kick off time.



Page 71



The Coroner deals here with evidence of BBC commentator John Motson who did

not describe pens 3 and 4 as being overcrowded.



Page 108



There is evidence that "Chief Superintendent Mole had selected his support

team and had allocated supervisory men to the different parts of the stadium.

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield had the understanding from Mr Mole and

others that the plan   which he was operating and the operational order which

he was following wasone which had been used in     the past, which was in

standard form and which had not presented any difficulties."



Pages 108-129



It would be impossible for instructing solicitor to do justice to this

section of the transcript by being selective.     These pages should be read

in their totality as an expression of the Coroner's views on the actions

of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield as operational commander, leading up

to and during the day of 15 April.



So far these instructions have dealt with the evidence and the extent to




                                     -   9   -
which it is sufficient to found any disciplinary action against Chief

Superintendent Duckenfield or Superintendent Murray.    However Counsel is

also asked to address the legal as opposed to pure evidential issues which

are in part broached by Mr Sharp in his letter of 16 May.    Is neglect of

duty co-terminus with a criminal offence of say culpable malfeasance such

that the decision of the DPP (enclosure 6(c)) not to prosecute for any

criminal offence is relevant in deciding whether a disciplinary charge is

justified.   It is acknowledged as the PCA says in their letter of 10 April

(enclosure 6(d)) that such a decision of the DPP does not preclude fresh

consideration by the PCA but its relevance appears axiomatic.    In this regard

Counsel is referred to the Home Office Guidance (enclosure 4).



Paragraph 9-22 makes it clear that the burden of proof is the same as in

a criminal matter but at paragraph 9-3 the guidance states that for many

disciplinary offences the mental element necessary for a finding of guilt

is less than that for most criminal offences.   This begs the question what

degree of mens rea is required to secure a finding of guilt for neglect of

duty.   The views of the Investigating Officer expressed on the second page

of his letter of 16 May (enclosure 6(b)) are noteworthy in this respect.



It also must be said that to the knowledge of instructing solicitor the

standing of the guidance has never been tested and it does on the face of

it appear illogical to require the same standard of proof as in criminal

trials and not require the same degree of mens rea.    Is mens rea anything

but an absolute standard.



These are all questions which Counsel is asked to address in conference for

the following purpose.   The import of these instructions is to secure




                                   -   10   -
Counsel's opinion on whether the charges recommended by the PCA are in

reality supportable.   ACC Mr Moore has of course no principle objection to

taking disciplinary action against either officer and it may be the PCA will

direct him to do so but there is clear concern that the PCA's recommendations

fly so dramatically in the face of the Investigating Officer's views.



If Counsel's opinion is that the PCA's views are supportable disciplinary

proceedings will be taken as recommended.        If however Counsel is of the

opinion that they are not supportable either in law or on the evidence it

is anticipated Counsel will be asked to prepare a written opinion which will

be submitted by ACC Mr Moore to the PCA as part of the consultation process

under S93(3) PACE.



It will be self evident that the instructions are not complete since further

correspondence from the Investigating Officer is awaited.        However, the

documentation which is available will enable Counsel to give some initial

thought to the issues and it will also ensure we can arrange the earliest

possible conference once that final piece of information is available.




                                    -   11   -
