                                                                                               M I R . 15



                                                                                                                          1)21S]
OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and tim e raised
                                                                        ft mi
                                                                        ! /        Ia Ih         /_
                                                                                                                Num ber
                                                                                                                n
T itle   LUsy h                                     1     7\                       i
(Include source and any document number if relevant)
                                               vant)      /1                                     I
                                                                                                            '   HdX
Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/N o   j) hm i I                          is/                                    Receiver




                                                                                                                               Indexer
D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated
                                                                              -f   i G(    ,
No(s) of actions raised

Statem ent reader's instructions
                                                                                                                                q.
                                                                                                                                lent Reader
                                                                                                                          Statement  Re




                                                                                                                               Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised                                                                                                      4#'3'

Examined - fu rth er action to be taken




F urther action No(s)                                                                                                          Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Num ber Form
                               CXCJC^cLr\




Headteacher:



Telephony:
                                                            j
    y
                                                        1 8 th April 1 9 8 9 .

Mr. Robinson
Chairman and Chief Executive
Liverpool F.C.
ANFIELD.
Liverpool.



Dear Mr. Robinson

May I first express my deepest sympathy to all those who suffered
bereavement or injury on Saturday at Hillsborough.
I attended the match as a Member of Nottingham Forest F.C. (Card
Number        |) and accepted, because of my irregular attendance thait I
would have to stand on the Kop behind the goal. I was accompanied by
my two sons.

At first, along with all the Forest supporters I thought that there was
trouble being caused by the Liverpool supporters. Many jeered in all
innocent. However, as events developed, they became silent and, to their
credit, began to clap those who were helping.
It was not until 3*^0p.m. that Mr. Dalgeish announced "We have a problem
or two*, please stay calm". It was another 40 minutes, or thereabouts,
that a second announcement stated that the match had been abandoned.
I now have to live my conscience that, both as a Headmaster and as a
trained St. John's First Aid person, I did nothing to help.
Why was the P.A. system not used to tell the crowd the extent of the problem?
I had to buy a newspaper in the centre of Sheffield at 5 .3 0 p.m. to find out
what had happened. The shock of realising what we had seen was very great
indeed.
The bringing out of dogs to face the Forest fat^s Was provocative rather
than calming. Everyone at the Forest end was marvellous - surely they
could have been told.
I would willingly have helped, especially with those I know best, young
people. I trust such a thing will never happen again, but please let us
move away from the idea that all those who watch football from the terraces
are hooligans to be fenced in and controlled by dogs.
One final thought. If the P.A. system is to be used, make it clearly
audible. Not only at Hillsborough on Saturday but also on a local railway
station, the messages were almost inaudible. Surely in this day and age
we can create a system which everyone can hear.

Ymira   si n r o r o 1 v
    J MERVYN JONES M Sc                                   FURNIVAL HOUSE
    ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                             Furnival Gate
     HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY TEAM                            Sheffield S1 4QN
                                                          Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 7 5 9 9
    WEST M IDLANDS POLICE HQ                              SM ITH D O W N LANE POLICE STATION
    PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                Liverpool L7 3PR
    Colmore Circus Queensway                              Telephone: 0 5 1 -7 0 9 7 1 9 0 /7 2 3 1
    Birmingham B4 6NQ
    Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5       Your Ref:
    NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
    Fowler Street                                         Our Ref:
    Birmingham B7 5DA
    Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2                       Date:          JMJ/RR/33

                                                                         25 July 1989




     HULL




      Dear

      I have received your letter dated 18 April 1989 from Hr Robinson, Chairman
      and Chief Executive, Liverpool FC, concerning the tragic events at Hillsborough
      on Saturday 15 April 1989.

      The contents of your letter have been of great interest to my investigation
      team.

      If you have any further information please do not hesitate to contact my
      investigation team at Nechells Green Police Station. Alternatively you may
      write to the Secretary of the Inquiry as below:-

                              Mr R M Whalley
                              Secretary to the Inquiry
                              50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                              London SW1H 9AT

      Yours sincerely




I      J M Jones
-\tr4 -Assistant Chief Constable




       PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
