                                                                                         M I R . 15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                   Date and tim e raised                                 Number
                                                                                                                     1H°QX
T itle

(Inclu d e source an d an y docum ent num ber i f relevant)
                                                                                                                 r^S 9 9
Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Y es/N o
                                                                                                                         Receiver




                                                                                                                         Indexer
Docum ent registered/w duxed*as indicated         ^        \ C Tj ' I

No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                     Statem ent Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                          Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised                                                                                              46if
Examined - fu rth er action to be taken                                                                                         S IO




                                                                                              a isas &!ss

Further action No(s)                                                                                                     Indexer



When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Num ber Form
        u
             IS*
                  HILLSBOROUGH - SATURDAY 15TH APRIL 1989


                                 SECTION 1



                             Account of Events


Background

I travelled with my brother and three friends to Sheffield by car departing
from the                 ~~|, Liverpool, at 11.15 a.m. We are all season
ticket holders at Anfield. We travelled via the M62 and M1 to Sheffield.
The M62 heading towards Manchester was fairly busy with traffic travelling
to either Hillsborough or Villa Park with scarves flying from windows
showing the destinations of the cars. There was congestion on the M62
as we rounded Manchester to the north and headed towards the Pennines.
The stretch of motorway up to Saddleworth was very busy and was in fact
at a standsjgi.1# for perhaps 3, 4 or 5 miles on that stretch of road. There
was stop-start motoring for perhaps half an hour. We arrived in Sheffield
at about 1.20 pSn. and parked the car in Avisford Road approximately half
a mile from the Ground.

At that comparatively early time there were numerous Liverpool fans in
the vicinity. We called at the local off-licence where I purchased two
cans of lager. Fans queued outside the off-licence while the manageress
let us in two at a time. Others queued patiently for fish and chips.
None of the pubs were open. We sat down on a wall adjoining the
dual-carriageway, enjoying the sunshine, anticipating the match and
discussing the team Liverpool were going to field for the match. Streams
of fans passed heading for the Ground. At about 2.25 p.m. we started to
make our way to the Ground. At that time cars and coaches were still
coming down the road, dropping fans off, and looking for places to park.


                                 SECTION 2

                         Events outside the Ground

As we approached the Ground we passed underneath a railway bridge, passed
two stone cottages on the left-hand side, an industrial estate on the
right-hand side, preceded by an old style coaching inn also on the
right-hand side, we came upon some waste ground on the left-hand side,
at the side of which a group of policemen were standing blocking the
pavement. The group was fronted by a big policeman with a beard. The
group of policemen were preventing fans from going beyond that point with
any alcoholic drinks, cans or bottles. I did not see anybody who was
incapable through consumption of alcohol. We stopped briefly to finish
off a can and proceeded towards the Ground. We crossed over the
dual-carriageway adjacent to a traffic island and bore right towards the
Ground. The number of people heading towards the Ground was similar to
what I had experienced at similar junctures heading towards Anfield on
match days. We arrived at the perimeter of the Ground at approximately
 2.35 p.m. There were a number of policemen standing on street corners
 and the neighbouring streets to the Ground were coned and blocked-off with
 fencing. At the edge of the Ground, to the left, were the queues for the
 turnstiles for the stands in which the Liverpool fans were to be placed
 and slightly to the right was a gate through which I could see a throng
 of fans waiting to get through the turnstiles for the Leppings Lane end
 of the Ground, for which I had a ticket. At this point our group split
 up, my brother and two friends had stand tickets, one friend and myself
 had tickets for the *B’ Section of the Leppings Lane enclosure. As we
walked towards the Leppings Lane queue, there must have been more than
a thousand Liverpool fans making their way to the two sets of turnstiles
 in addition to the numbers inside the first entrance gate to the Leppings
Lane end, through which I could see quite a crowd building up trying to
get*through the turnstiles. As we passed through the outer gate for the
Leppings Lane end, I was aware of a number of policemen, a couple on
horseback, most on foot, standing still in pairs and a minibus full of
policemen, parked in what may have been a slip road on the Pight-hand side.
Straight ahead through that entrance gate was a sizeable crowd with one
policeman on horseback. There was no indication of any other policeman
 in the vicinity ||etween the entrance gate and the turnstiles. The space
between the CTtrance and the turnstiles, appeared to me to be similar to
a courtyard, was Roughly square and full of Liverpool fans clamouring to
get through the turnstiles. To the left in the courtyard were some fans
sitting abreast the wall and moving towards the turnstiles and some climbed
over the top of the turnstiles. I assume that this handful of people,
perhaps a dozen at the most, had no tickets. The crowd of people within
the couryard filled the entire area and appeared to me to be out of control
at that stage. The policeman on horseback appeared very agitated in what
was a vain attempt to impose some sort of control on the crowd. There
were a number of shouts from the crowd to the police begging them to impose
some order and gain some control. There was tension within the crowd
frustrated in attempts to enter the Ground. There was also tension etched
on the face of the mounted policeman as he berated those in the crowd who
were complaining at the lack of control. Apart from the policeman on
horseback, there was no attempt to try to partition the crowd or to
establish ranks or columns for orderly queues. Because of the numbers
in the crowd, and the general milling and shoving around, it was not clear
to me at that stage how many turnstiles there were at that enclosure.
I think there were perhaps six or eight at most. What was clear however,
was that the number of turnstiles was not accommodating the number of
people seeking to gain entry at 2.40 p.m.

Although we had entered via the gate to the left of the courtyard, movement
in the crowd was such that we found ourselves being flanked to the right.
We were in that crowd for between 10 and 15 minutes. I remember thinking
that we would be lucky to get into the Ground before kick-off time. At
this stage, in apparent desperation, some fans were actually climbing above
the turnstile walls to gain entry to the Ground. I watched three fans
scale the turnstiles in this fashion. These people were in the crowd near
the turnstiles, it is not clear whether or not they had tickets. We were
within perhaps fifteen or twenty people of the turnstiles, at between 2.50
and 2.55 p.m, when a concertina metal door was opened at right angles to
the turnstiles. Seeing a way out of the troubles, we made for the gate,
which was held open by a policeman, and were among the first dozen or so
people to pass through that gate. As we passed through the gate, two or
three people in front of us fell over, and I was shoved, along with several
other people to the ground. Although I was on the ground for no more than
a couple of seconds, I was shaken by the experience and struggled to keep .
hold of my glasses to prevent them being broken. Someone in the crowd
of people, yanked me up and yelled to others to get up and suddenly I was
on my feet once more. We were then inside the Ground, my ticket was still
in my wallet, nobody asked to inspect it, to check it or to tear off the
stub. My friend was in the same position as I was, he too had been shoved
to the ground and picked up again and he too had a ticket which had not
been inspected by anybody.

                                  SECTION 3

      *.                      Inside the Ground
   f. , .


 We were thus inside the Ground, ahead of us was entrance ’B*, with a big
 gate and a tunnel, through which I could see the playing area. There were
 no stewards or police to give directions or to channel fans into the
 relevant enclosures. As my ticket was for enclosure ’B* I made to head
 for the tunne|j. JJy friend, who had been in that section of the Ground
 at the same gilne last year, told me that we would be safer keeping to the
 right, round what Appeared to be the side of the Stand. Others headed
 for the tunnel. We went down a passageway with a cast-iron staircase on
 the left-hand side, a brick wall on the right, at the end of which people
were standing on the terrace and the Ground was before us with the Forest
 fans straight ahead at the other end of the Ground and in the Stand to
 our right. There was plenty of room still on the terrace where we were
standing and we were able to select an appropriate vantage point.
This was the first time I had been to Hillsborough, and I remarked to my
 friend that it appeared different than it does on the television. Within
thirty seconds or so of arriving on the terrace, the tannoy announcer read
out the Liverpool team. I was pleasantly surprised to hear the name of
Alan Hansen included in the side. I noticed also for the first time the
Liverpool section of the crowd in the rest of the Leppings Lane terrace,
divided from the rest of us by iron railings. I was at a loss to
immediately comprehend why terracing for the entire away section of the
Ground was divided into pens in this fashion. Moreover I could not see
any gap in the railings. I was not surprised to see the fencing at the
front of the crowd separating the enclosure from the playing area. I did
not pay any attention to whether there were any gates within that fence.
There was no time to dwell on any of these matters, because the Liverpool
team appeared at that moment from the tunnel. The Forest team then
emerged and the two sides warmed up for perhaps two minutes at the most
prior to the    kick-off. I was relieved to be in for the kickoff as the
game started. My watch said bang on three o ’clock. My section of the
Ground was still nowhere near full. I did not pay much attention to this
as I watched the game unfold. What did strike me however at this time,
was the vast number of people in the kop enclosure at the opposite end
of the Ground. I was irritated that this section of the Ground had been
allocated to the Forest supporters rather than ourselves.

The early play in the game was frantic as one might expect. As Beardsley
hit the bar there was movement in our section of the crowd. This was no
different to that which one experiences in the Kop under similar
circumstances. Immediately after this moment of action, my attention was
distracted by a group of fans appearing from the left-hand side and
spilling towards the pitch and by perhaps two young people climbing over
the fencing behind the goal. This number was quickly added to and several
youths ran onto the pitch to attract the attention of the referee and the
police. The police appeared to be arresting and holding people who were
scaling the fences. Policemen were standing next to the fencing and
yelling at the fans to get back. Fans were pleading with the police trying
to explain to them what was happening. The police could either not hear,
or took no notice of the cries. Fans continued to spill onto the pitch
and policemen continued to try to contain them. Several fans got onto
the pitch amongst the players. There were yells of disapproval from the
crowd. The referee called all the players off the pitch. Suddenly there
was a considerable number of fans on the pitch. The police had still not
appreciated what was happening. A number of fans were lying down on the
Pitch and groups of fans were running round trying to help and see to them.

 The police then appeared to grasp the true situation and those on the other
 side of the fencing started to try to help those people either climb
 through the gates or, where possible, to climb over the fencing. I watched
 two or three policemen jump into the crowd from the fencing to try to help
 the situatiorij| #kns were desperately trying to climb the fence from within
 the pen. I could,not see any stretchers or any sign of mass activity to
 try to help. Thei*e was some anger in the crowd at this stage as the Forest
 fans jeered at what must have appeared to them to be a pitch invasion.
Fans were now starting to rip up advert hoardings to use as stretchers
 to carry away the injured or the dead. Some fans were trying to pull away
 the perimeter fencing from the pen. Groups of fans were gathered round,
 some dazed, some injured and a significant number milling round seeking
 to help those who were injured or needing resuscitation. First aiders
and some of the police at the Leppings Lane end were helping with this
 process. However I sun left with the overall impression that the police
were of the opinion that this situation was borne out of a crowd invasion
rather than anything else - concerted police action took the form of lining
up a stream of policemen across the centre of the pitch, with the obvious
intention of containing the crowd or a crowd invasion. Although I gun not
fully aware of the rationale for this, I can only assume that it was to
prevent a crowd invasion by Liverpool fans towards the Forest end. If
the intention was to help alleviate the crowd congestion or the obvious
distress of the Liverpool fans, this was not immediately apparent. After
stretcher bearers had made several runs to the opposite corner of the
playing area, an ambulance drove slowly around the perimeter of the Ground
and stopped behind the goal. It was patently obvious that a serious
situation had unfolded. Efforts at resuscitation and rescuing of the
injured or dead continued both on the pitch and on the section of terracing
affected. My mind is full of images of people being carried out over the
top of the fencing unconscious or even dead and of crowds of people
including policemen, fighting desperately to resuscitate people on the
ground in front of me. I was numbed by what I was seeing. My friend said,
"Let's get out of here its just like Heysel all over again". I felt unable
to move.

As the severity of the situation became apparent, supporters of both clubs,
all around the Ground applauded the efforts of the fans and the police
to ferry the injured people out of the Ground.




                                   -   4   -
 My friend turned to me and said that we needed to make more room in our
 section of the terrace to try to ease the congestion in the centre of the
 terrace. We started yelling for the crowd around us to move to our right.
 In shock, people followed the instruction. Unfortunately this did not
 make any material difference to the situation.

  The stretcher bearer shuttle continued for perhaps twenty-five minutes
  or more with people lying around dead or injured. The next memory I have
  of any change in this pattern was when a youth was seen to be clambering
  on the crossbar of the goal at the Liverpool end. There were expressions
  of displeasure from the crowd at this until it was realised that the youth
 was in fact helping to remove the net. I had my personal stereo tuned
 in to Radio 2 at this time and almost absentmindedly I flicked across to
 hear,, what was being said. The commentator appeared to be as bewildered
 as other people within the stadium and was reporting on the number of
 people who had been carried out on the makeshift stretchers. He remarked
 even at that stage that the game had to be abandoned and that the situation
 was severe. I switched off the radio and watched as further advertising
 hoardings were ripped off the walls to help make more stretchers.
         ■■   ■m m
 It is difficult to remember clearly what happened from thereon as the
 number of stretchers and number of injured blurred into one long moment
 of anguish. One moment which remains in my mind however is that of a
 person attempting to resuscitate a lifeless body and calling for an oxygen
 cylinder from the St. John Ambulance. This cylinder was brought but
 appeared to be useless. The body being attended to was then carried off
 down the Forest Stand to our right.    I could see no movement on the
 stretcher. There were small children and teenagers amongst the bodies
 on the pitch.

I could hear on the tannoy system vague attempts by an announcer to give
a message to the crowd. Although I was close enough to a tannoy to have
heard the pre-match team news, I could make no words out that were being
spoken at that time. I tuned in once more to the radio to see if I could
ascertain any further news from that source. The radio commentator said
that they had unconfirmed reports of five people dead. Although this news
was shocking enough in itself, it did not tally in my own mind with the
sheer number of people and the sheer effort of people concerned in helping
the numerous injured and with the number of stretchers and advertising
hoardings I'd seen in use.

Kenny Dalglish then appeared on the steps of the policebox to our right
and went into the box. A minute or so later he emerged still ashen faced
and made his way down the steps. Immediately over the tannoy suddenly
a voice was clear, the voice of Kenny Dalglish relaying a message to the
crowd giving an indication of the seriousness of the situation and asking
people to remain calm and to assist the police in their efforts to stablise
the situation. This was the only communication which I heard over the
tannoy.

I noticed for the first time at this stage some firemen among the people
assisting on the pitch.

^■^n*e completely passed me by and I remember an announcement over the tannoy
at about 4.15 p.m. that the game had been officially abandoned. We were
 requested to remain in our places until all the injured and dead had been
 removed from the scene. We stood by until immediately after twenty to
 five when we made our way silently towards the exit. At the exit was a
 queue of people waiting to get out held up by the police whilst the injured
on the other side of an exit gate were removed to hospital and safety.
After what I had just witnessed I was apprehensive about joining any crowd,
and instead kept to the left-hand side near a wall, just on the edge of
the line of officers shepherding fans through the exit when it was opened.
We talked to a policeman last in the line nearest the wall who was perhaps
in his mid forties. None of us seemed to be able to make much sense of
what we had seen or indeed what we were saying. The policemen and women
appeared as shocked and horrified by what they had seen as we were. Mr.
Robinson, the Chief Executive of Liverpool with two others, passed by
looksing pensive. Five minutes or so later we went through the exit in
silence and made our way back to the car. People in the crowd heading
back up the dual-carriageway were commenting on the tragedy and speculating
on the causes thereof. We saw one of our friends near the waste ground
on the dual-carriageway and walked up the hill exchanging some impressions
of what we had seen. I told him that the radio had talked about five
people being djpadg He like us was horrified at five deaths. When we
arrived at AvJlsford Road, I was very relieved to see my brother and our
other colleagues, tjl switched on my radio once more and was overwhelmed
by grief when I heard that suddenly the figure of deaths was seventyfour.
Shaken we all made our way to the car to set off for home. We switched
on the radio to hear more news of the tragedy. As we were queuing waiting
to turn right onto the dual-carriageway we heard reports after five o'clock
of eightyfour casualties. We drove up the dual-carriageway until we found
a garage on the right-hand side and a residential road on the left with
a phone box near the corner. We all made phone calls home to advise of
our safety. The journey home was unreal.

                                 SECTIOH 4

                                  Co— enta

There has been much speculation in the press and on television and many
interviews conducted with people who had witnessed the disaster. I do
not wish to fuel any speculation or to support anything which I have heard
or read about the incident. However, what follows are my over-riding
impressions of the factors which contributed to the disaster.

1.      Ticket Allocations

I find it difficult to comprehend how a club with an average attendance
of 40,000 fans receives less ticket allocation for a major occasion, such
as a semi-final, than a club with an average crowd of round about 25,000.
To my mind, it was common sense to allocate Liverpool the larger standing
terrace to accommodate its larger number of travelling fans.

There were some Liverpool fans who had travelled to the ground without
tickets. For any big game there are always Liverpool fans who travel
without tickets. I have been approached outside Anfield, outside Goodison,
Outside Wembley and elsewhere by fans seeking "Spares'1.I was approached
in this way by no more fans than outside other ticketedmatches at which
I have attended. Similarly there were obviously ticketless fans in the




                                  -   6   -
crowd swarming outside the Lickers Lane turnstile. I assume that there
were fans without tickets who climbed over the wall or along railings above
the turnstiles to gain entrance to,the Ground. There was not however a
great number of such fans entering the Ground in this way. There was no
check on tickets prior to entering the perimeter of the Ground and, as
noted above, my ticket never even left my wallet, let alone was it
inspected by any official or policeman.

2.      Behaviour of the Fans

I have been to many big games with Liverpool, the behaviour of the crowd
was no different at this one, either outside or inside the Ground.
Certainly there were fans who had had alcohol, I had consumed alcolhol
jjci'the period leading up to the game, but I did not see any evidence of
above-average high spirits and did not see anyone who was obviously the
worse for wear or incapable of conducting himself. I was impressed by
the police in their attempts to prevent alcohol being carried near the
Ground. Equally I did not see any evidence of any fans either confronting
this barrier or wishing to by-pass it carrying any alcohol.

The behaviour of, the crowd outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles was
disordered but nbt disorderly and was to my mind out of reasonable policing
control. This, it is my opinion, was a result of the number of people
enclosed in that courtyard and of the lack of control by the police in
that courtyard. In the courtyard fans were shouting at the police and
pleading with them to impose some control over the movements of the crowd,
and there were genuine concerns about safety outside the turnstiles. I
can only contrast, in my own mind, the difference between the crowd control
at Hillsborough and that which I experience regularly outside Anfield.
Where there is order imposed and maintained at Anfield, there was none
on Saturday.

3.      The Police

It was a policeman who opened the gate to the side of the turnstiles which
allowed me access to the Ground. I was grateful for being out of an ugly
situation. However, there was insufficient crowd control outside the
immediate turnstile areas, and there was no police presence inside the
Ground to shepherd and marshal to the empty sections of the Ground the
numbers coming through the turnstiles and through the gates when they were
opened. In my opinion, this was a significant contributory factor in the
stream of fans making for the tunnel and enclosure ’B ’ and into the central
pen where the deaths occurred.

It is my impression, within the Ground, that the police were preoccupied
with the possibility of crowd trouble and "hooliganism'1. It is my view
that this preoccupation contributed to the police failing to respond in
a positive and speedy manner to the situation which unfolded in the middle
pen. In the early stages of the incident, when perhaps some positive steps
may have alleviated the situation, the police were actually preventing
people leaving the terrace. The gates in the fence, such as they are,
were not opened in time. No immediate attempts were made to help lift
supporters over the barriers. Moreover, given the appalling situation
outside the Ground, I am amazed that the kick-off was not delayed quarter
of an hour or so - the situation had been developing to my personal
 knowledge, since my arrival at the Ground at 2.40 p.m.

I was dismayed at the response of the police given the situation as it
unfolded, to preoccupy themselves with lining up policemen across the
middle of the pitch when there were so many dying and injured on the
terraces. Again it is my opinion that the police were preoccupied with
preventing hooliganism and not with the safety of the crowd.

4.       The Ground

I was struck before the incident by the presence of cast iron barriers
partitioning the terracing into three sections. I thought, even at that
stags, that supporters must be regarded more as animals than as human
beings in that the pens were similar in style to that reserved for sheep.
I have already referred above to the ticket allocation position, and it
is my opinion that the Ground Authorities should have had more regard to
the relative ticket merits of the two clubs. The safety or otherwise of
the fencing enclosing the terraces from the playing area is not to my
knowledge un<g?mm&n to other perimeter fences at other Grounds, but I
consider that it was the barriers on the terraces which caused or
contributed to ttis problem. Without such barriers, the crowd would have
dispersed quite naturally regardless of the entrance by which people
arrived on the terraces. Events have shown that there was no way out of
this pen on Saturday and I am surprised and amazed that this had not been
identified previously.

I was struck on Saturday by the absence of any stewards within the Ground
to marshal and direct supporters to their places on the terraces or in
the stands. Again I can only compare with the practise at Anfield where
there are always stewards in great numbers around the turnstiles.




Southport
Merseyside


Work Telephone Number;   Southport     jsxt
                                         \*YWc"   Vrt£\7V_>




  V.wv'G-f’OC*—   ^ <-"

 (IPvOtD    CjTTV

 (liVrno
  uv^«rCXbo'-       f)% '.y ^ r r    vecn o

 tVre Qvivao »'fV»o
" jv fL             V_\\A?CLv*-> c CUT


(low u \«           O-*^      »v^
