Mr C Bone
Hillsborough Scrutiny
Room 1108                                         Our Ref:       D&C/AMH/JDC
Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON
SW 1H9AT                                          Date:          16 October 1997




RE: RESEARCH AND AUDIT TRIAL RE COACHING OF OFFICER'S PRIOR TO GIVING
EVIDENCE TO LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INQUIRY

I refer to the letter dated 8 August 1997, from Ian Daines addressed to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith,
in which the question of coaching of officers to give evidence to Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry was
first raised and to our conversation with the Scrutiny team on 24 September 1997.

Having carried out a search through some of the non-indexed documentation in the Hillsborough
Archive I traced a number of South Yorkshire Police update bulletins two of which make specific
reference to briefing of officers to give evidence before Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry. Rather than
repeat in this letter that which I have already written I enclose a copy of my memorandum on the
subject sent to ACC Ian Daines together with copies of the two bulletins.

You will note in the final paragraph of my memorandum that I do not feel able to progress this
further without speaking to officers who were part of the Inquiry Liaison Team. Is this something
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith would wish or permit me to do, or would he prefer the contact to be by
yourself or Graham Catherall, or indeed is he content with the documentation provided? If Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith does wish me to speak to the officers how would he wish the conversation to
be recorded, notes of interview, written statement, tape recorded or a combination of these?




A M Hepworth
Superintendent

Enc




                                                  The person dealing with this correspondence is:
                                                  Superintendent Hepworth
                                                  Tel (0114)296 3084       Fax (0114)2963113
                               SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


                                                           REF:          D&C/AMH/EMR

FROM:   Superintendent Hepworth                            DCU/DEPT:      Discipline & Complaints

TO:     Assistant Chief Constable Ian Daines               EXT:          3084
        Legal & Technical Services
        Headquarters                                       DATE:         15 October 1997




SUBJECT:      RESEARCH AND AUDIT TRAIL RE COACHING OF OFFICERS PRIOR TO
              THEM GIVING EVIDENCE TO LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INQUIRY


A search through non-indexed documentation in the Hillsborough Archive, i.e. documentation that
was not a part of the enquiry by South Yorkshire Police or W est Midlands Police that was recorded
on the HOLMES system, has revealed copies of four update bulletins about the Hillsborough
Inquiry that were given wide circulation throughout the force. Updates I and I I are unfortunately
undated, whilst I I I bears the date 2 June 1989 and IV 30 June 1989. Updates I and I I are signed
by the then ACC Staff Services, Stuart Anderson and updates I I I and IV, by the then
Chief Constable, Peter Wright.

In relation to the above, action updates I and I I I are relevant and copies are attached
hereto.    Update I, although undated, was obviously written after the Inquiry started on
Monday 15 May 1989 and prior to Monday 22 May 1989. It outlined the purpose of the Inquiry, the
setting in which it was taking place, the wide admissibility of evidence and what
South Yorkshire Police had done to gather evidence for the Inquiry.             The update listed
approximately 80 officers likely to be called to give evidence and encouraged and welcomed them
to visit Headquarters, to see the progress of the internal evidence gathering and to get a flavour of
the Public Inquiry. Officers responding to this invitation were to be shown a compilation video
lasting 2 hours; were able to pose questions about the Inquiry, the evidence to date, or about any
concerns to a member of the internal evidence gathering team; were given the opportunity to visit
the Town Hall and see the Inquiry in session.

Update I I I circulated to the force on 2 June 1989, after senior officers had given evidence to the
Inquiry, described how the Treasury Solicitors, acting as "Clerks of Court" circulate statements to
all parties to the Inquiry and this is the first indication that an officer is to be called. The update
goes on to say "relevant officers will be contacted by a member of the South Yorkshire Police
Inquiry Liaison Team and furnished with all necessary information and assistance.
(The underlining of these words is on the original memo and is not mine.)

These two documents were circulated throughout the South Yorkshire Police and indicate how
open the force was in assisting and preparing its officers to give evidence before
Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry, but that this assistance falls far short of coaching them to give
evidence. More detail of the process could be obtained if I were allowed to contact the two officers
who acted as liaison officers.          These are Chief Inspector Norman Bettison, now
Assistant Chief Constable, W est Yorkshire Police and Detective Chief Inspector Ron Brooke, now
retired. Brief statements from these two former South Yorkshire officers would support the
2 documents I have traced, clear up the question of coaching of officers once and for all and leave
no room for ambiguity in the mind of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.
I therefore request that you review your decision that I should not interview officers or former
officers in connection with the Scrutiny of the Hillsborough Enquiry and evidence to enable me to
be more proactive in responding to queries from Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and his team.




A M Hepworth
Superintendent

/ f */#-97.

                                                                               i-e.
                            <-u.
                 ’ >L £ n     <.< * I* *    , . /   1           /iL’
                 ^44jz. a //*+<*{                       ^ 1 <



                 A c vI       *> '   f     S >S
                  THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - UPDATE I



You will no doubt be aware that the Inquiry into the events at
Hillsborough is now underway at the Sheffield Town Hall.  Lord
Justice Taylor is sitting together with Brian Johnson, the Chief
Constable of Lancashire, and Professor Leonard Maunder, who is a
professor of civil engineering at Newcastle University.

The purpose cf the Inquiry is net tc apportion blame for the
disaster but, rather, to discover seme of the multiplicity cf
causes and make recommendations tc try to prevent; something similar
happening again.  Whilst the oak panelled Chamber and the formal
line cf questioning from barristers gives the appearance cf Crcwn
Court,the tenor cf the proceedings is very different.   There is no
cath; witnesses sit down tc give their evidence, future witnesses
can sit"in the Chamber whilst ethers are giving evidence; hearsay
evidence and opinion are perfectly admissible.

The Inquiry is hearing evidence from witnesses in certain
categories.  The 'batting order' is as follows:

     Liverpool supporters

     Local residents/shop keepers

     South Yorkshire Police

     Hillsborough Ground Staff

     Ambulance/Fire Service personnel

     Football Association

     Technical Evidence of the state of the ground

You should be aware that the evidence to date has been almost
exclusively from Liverpool supporters, some of whom have lost
relatives in the disaster.   It is understandable therefore that a
less than comprehensive picture of events has emerged in the media.
The newspapers and 'television have reported individual and
sometimes sensational accounts, which do not represent the whole
evidence that has been given, not to m e n t i o n that which has yet to
be adduced.  Do not be disheartened by the reports which are
emerging, they are merely a small part of the jigsaw.

In very simplistic terms, the body of the evidence to date has
thrown up two very ,general questions which the police witnesses
will be expected to answer:
                                                                           (2)




    (1)   Did we do everything we could to prevent the
          situation arising outside Leppings Lane t u r n ­
          stiles, that did arise between 2.30 and 2.55pm?

    (2)   Did we react as quickly as we could to the p r o b ­
          lems that occurred in the central pens shortly
          before kick off?

We must   always remember that it is easy, in hindsight, to suggest
that we   could have done more, or done things more quickly but G IV E N
ALL THE   CIRCUMSTANCES AT THAT TIME could we have done more, or
done it   more quickly?

During the last three weeks evidence has been gathered, cn behalf
cf the Chief Constable, from members cf the South Yorkshire Police
and from members cf the Special Constabulary - many cf you will
have already provided statements.  This evidence has been distilled
and a report prepared for Counsel representing the South Yorkshire
Police at the Inquiry.  The process of collaring all the evidence
has necessarily been brisk and some individuals may have harboured
some uncertainties about the purpose of the internal enquiry, and
may now feel a little uninformed about its progress - hence this
update.

The report that is with Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police,
Mr. William Woodward Q C , paints the overall picture of our policing
the match at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989.     It contains an ove r­
view of the Force; a description of the Stadium; a review of all
the legislation concerning the policing of football; details of
the planning of this particular match and matches in general; an
examination of the quality of communications that existed on the
day and, finally; a summary of the events that occurred, drawn
from officers' statements.    It is this picture that we hope to
present when given the opportunity to put our case to the Inquiry.

Police evidence will be called from Wednesday 24 May 1989, beginning
with those senior officers responsible for planning and controlling
the policing operation.   Following-on from that, individual officers
will be called to give their account of a particular part of the
events in which they were involved.   Over 1,100 officers performed
duty at Hillsborough, it- should be obvious that only a relative
few of that number will be called to give evidence to the Inquiry.
If you are called it does not imply that you have anything to answer
for and, conversely, if you are not called it does not mean that
your efforts are unrecognised.

Solicitors for the Inquiry (who are sort of clerks to the court)
are responsible for sifting through all the evidence and choosing
those who might have  something to add to the facts already heard
by the Inquiry.  It is anticipated that something in the order
of 50-75 police officers will be called so, clearly, not everyone
will have the opportunity to tell his or her story.
                                                                           (3)




At the conclusion of the Inquiry, however, Counsel for the South
Yorkshire Police can call additional witnesses if we feel that
the whole story has not been presented or that the Inquiry has
been misled in any way.
      *                                  *
Attached to this report is a list of officers who, for one reason
or another, may be people that the Inquiry would wish to hear from.
That    is not to say that they will be called, we simply do not
know, but their particular evidence was considered useful in preparing
the report for our Counsel.

Each of these officers is encouraged and welcome, to see the pre-
cress cf the internal evidence c ~therinc to cate and to get a
flavour cf the Public Inquiry.

At S.00 am each morning Monday tc Friday 22 - 26 May 1989, there
will be a video shewn at the Lecture Theatre, First Floor, Force
Headcuart'ers . The video is a compilation of numerous films taken
by the BBC, the South Yorkshire Police and Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club.        It lasts for approximately 2 hours and is the
'official' video of the Inquiry.         (There are many, many,hours cf
video film available from different sources but this two hours
is thought to represent the most relevant).         A member of the internal
evidence gathering team will be on hand to answer any questions
you might have about the Inquiry, the evidence to date or about
any other c o n c e r n s . After viewing the video there will also be
an opportunity to visit the Town Kail to see the Inquiry in session.

If any officers are subsequently called who do not appear on the
list attached, then they will be provided with similar opportunities
prior to attending the Inquiry.  At the moment we are given less
than 24 hours notice of the calling of witnesses, so officers should
be prepared to attend the Inquiry at that kind of notice.

Would Divisional /Departmental Commanders please cause an individual
copy of this report to be handed to each of the named officers
by Monday 22 May 1989, and arrange for the bulletin to be brought
to the notice of other members of the force, who were involved at
Hillsborough on the 15 April 1989, at the earliest opportunity.
                                                                                         (4)



Please also elect a member within the Division/Department who will
arrange for all the named officers to attend one of the
presentations at Headquarters in the forthcoming week.   It would be
appreciated if details of those officers attending could be
communicated to Chief Inspector Bettison by telephone, Headquarters
extension 3457 between 5.30 pm and 6.3 0 pm any evening.


If any officer feels certain that he or she is likely to be called
bv the Inquiry for some r 0 2.Son but does not £.                   sr on t he ^ ^ s t , then
they should ccn tact Chis f 7 n.sp-ectc r Bettison per son allv b e "Cw e n the
above times.   7 t is r 6 06 a — a t-* t i-w rV« v s r / that C esc i r 3 fceinc ver y
involved in  the  inc idenc t yc U               unlikely t r*- be ca i 1 ^ c. unles c you
  :T c cms       uni;

     iv c m          wisn to avail tnerr.seives cz tne opportunity tc view
m e sS.LC vicec       nd ask questions about the Inquiry, the evidence or
the South Y o r k s h ire Foli ce case,  nen they are invited to telephone
Police Constable               n Heaccuarters extension 3470.  if  nere is
            demand. tnen this facility will be ma o a, available curing
the weekend 27-28 May 1989.         Please note that a   nuance at ____
                                                                   that
presentation will be in the officer's own time unless expressly
approved by the officer's individual Divisional/Departmental
Commander.    This presentation would be for officers' information and
interest only and would not serve the needs of the Inquiry.

As the picture unfolds before the Inquiry a subsequent update for
the Force will be prepared and distributed.  You should feel free to
contact the Inquiry Liaison Team on Headquarters extension 3457 if
you have any concerns whatsoever (albeit it is a very busy time for
the team at the moment).

No one at this time should feel that their individual actions on the
15 April 1989 are being critically scrutinized by either the Inquiry
or the internal evidence gathering team.

The South Yorkshire Police, as     w h o l e , will subsequently be
represented by those individuals called to give evidence but they
are supported in that individual responsibility by the whole Force.
The experiences of Hillsborough were, and continue to be, shared by
every South Yorkshire Police officer, Special Constable and civilian
colleague together with th e ir families.




Ass is        !hief Constable,       Staff Services


DISTRIBUTION

All Chief Superintendents
Superintendent Parker - Communications
Mr Stothard - Special Constabulary Commandant
              - Civilian Personnel Officer
Mr Middup -Police Federation
       assistant Chief Constable Mr Jackson
 J.1ZS— Superintendent Duckenrield            PC   1421 Guest
Chief Superintendent Mole                     PC   1674 Rich
Chief Superintendent Nesbit                   PC    159 Marsh
Superintendent        Marshall                PC   2316 Scott
Superintendent        Murray                  PC   2287 Grant
Superintendent        Greenwood               PC      42 Hooson
                                              PC   1863 Buxton
Superintendent        Marsh
Superintendent        McKay                   PC   1035 Ryan
                                              PC   3107 Pearson
Chief       Inspector     Eeal .              FC   1543 Aitken
Chief       Inspector     McP.cbbie           FC   2613 Lindsay
ch,-
   *clt     Jnsoscticir   Zcnuncscn           FC    278 Schc*£v
Chief       Inspector     Creaser             PC   3131 Lewi s
            Hand Da-                          PC   2554
 r . £ 0 3 C “ C IT
            Calvert                                1285 Smitri
                                              FC    700 Helliwell
Inspector Sewell
Instectcr   White                             FC   417 :[IIincworth
    ~                                         FC   2634 Ford
Inspector Sykes
                                              FC   3198 •Akred
Inspector "V*Q*y
                                              FC   3186 Wilson
Inspector Eennett
                                              FC   1177 Davis
Ir.sisectcr £13.is
Inspector Delaney                             FC   2191 Llewellyn
Inspector Eullas                              FC   2806 Eutler
Inspector Eeresfora                           FC   3023 Martin
                                              FC   1370 Bichard
Inspect Meek
                                              FC   2167 Frost
Inspector Woodward
Inspector Charles                             FC     12 Taylor
                                              PC   3211 Priestley
PS   952 Charlesworth                         PC   1368 McKenzie
FS   1341 Crawford                            PC   2185 Cooper
FS    758 Morgan (on behalf of Serial 18)     PC   2083 Packer
PS   2001 Burman                              PC   1453 Phillips
PS   1066 Higgins (on behalf of Serial 20)    PC    803 Tattershall
FS    323 Proctor (on behalf of Serial 19)
PS   1757 Burns (on behalf of Serial 15)      Mr Sanderson (Ccmmunicat ions'
PS   616 Goddard
PS   2379 Swift
FC   1288 Payne (on behalf of Serial 16)
FS    454 Chatman
FS    468 Whitlam (on behalf of Serial 17)
PS   2607 Eddison
PS   1829 France (on behalf of Serial 36)
FS   2822 Kennedy (on behalf of Serial 37)
PS    840 Wright (on behalf of Serial 13D)
PS   2235 Gutcher (on behalf of Serial 13D)
PS   1764 Thomas
                                                                          2 June 1989



THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - UPDATE III




The Inquiry is about to complete its third week and the South Yorkshire Police
have been giving evidence for eight days now.    The police witnesses to date
have been those senior orficers who haci, ror tne most pari., an o\e-v_^w Oi t^e
full secuence of events    that occurred at Hillsborough on I- April 1959, or
those who took critical    decisions curing that airernoon.  it is rair to say
      :heir evidence has  been scrutinised in great cetail ar.c vigorous-;* cross-
examined.   It is anticipated, however, that ruture witnesses w i n net
challenged to the sane degree.    These officers still to give evidence si_p_y
have a piece to add to tne emerging iigsaw.

It is difficult to determine who will and who will not be called to give
evidence.  The list of officers which was appended to Update I, and circulated
22 Mav 1939, remains the "best guess" in terms of likely witnesses, although
some Constables in those serials represented by Sergeants on the list will also
be called by the Inquiry.  The procedure of calling is as follows:

Treasury Solicitors (who act as "Clerks of Court") have now considerec many
statements made by South Yorkshire Police officers.  Daily they distribute
copies of several such statements to all parties represented at the Inquiry -
that is the first indication that an officer is "on notice" for future calling.
As soon as that first indication is given then the relevant officers will be
contacted by a member of the South Yorkshire Police Inquiry Liaison Team and
furnished with all necessary information and assistance.

Subsequently we are warned, sometimes with only 18 hours notice, that an
officer is likely to be called on a particular day.  Obviously the officer will
be notified of this fact as soon as possible and, at this time, arrangements
will be made for transport to and from the Inquiry by staff car.

I hope that these arrangements are clear, but if any officer has a query or
perceived difficulty then he or she is invited to contact the Liaison Team at
Force Headquarters, extension 3457.




The evidence thus far presented to the Inquiry has been extensive in both
quantity and scope.  Each day the Inquiry generates a transcript of evidence
which runs, on average, to 130 pages.  Confronted by this volume of material
the media have clearly been overwhelmed.  They are unable to report everything
and, sadly, have often opted for the simple and sensational.      For example,
"Liverpool goalkeeper saved my life" has been the sort of h e a d l i n e preferred by
certain news editors to the 101 other headlines that may have been run as a
result of a particular days evidence.

Whilst it is a fact that the Inquiry is not being conducted by the media and
thus any headlines should be treated accordingly, it is proper to highlight
just one newspaper item that accurately records a part of the evidence from day
                                     -   2   -




12 of the Inquiry.  This item, taken from the "Sheffield St ar” dated 1 June
1989, is attached for the information of all officers: the sentiments expressed
in this particular article have been echoed by other senior officers who have
given evidence to the Inquiry.  The sentiments are precisely those with wh ich I
would wish to be associated.




Distribution:

All Chief Superintendents
Superintendent Parker, Communications & Computers
PC Middup, Police Federation
Mr Stothard, Special Constabulary Commandant
              I Principal Personnel Officer

(Please ensure wide circulation for the information of all officers)
       '        " f e r a f c ' :




                            m


           Suet Roger Green-                    j
           wood, the police chief
           who began ths rescue                  '
           bid during the Hills-                 j
           borough Stadium clszs-                t
           ter, This a f t e r n o o n           j
           psssicr.ateiy defended                !
           his officers sgttins:                !
           criticism.            . —             '
              M r G m n - c o c tcic the         •
         ! pubiic in e u i r y in to th s
           tragedy that his officers            '
         [ had been “ heroic''.       __
            He laid that shcrtly after          T
        {'<!cx c a he realises’ there          '!
        [w a s a p r o b l e m a t t h e        ;
        ] Leppir.zs Lar.t er.d.         •       i
              M r C-ree.-.wccc. w i c          t
        I w a s t h e * ‘ g r o u r, d         j
        (c o m m a n d e r” fo r th e          ■
        1 match, said he icokrd over           >
        [the perim eter fer.ee ar.d             .
        I realised the first three or           .
        ( f o u r rows o f fans were
        I being squashed against the           !
        | fence.
                • Frustration                  j
             " I n my view airr.cst two- -
           thirds o f that crowd were
           w a tc h in g th e m a tc h ,
           unaware o f what was going
           on at the front.”
              H e h a d s t o p p e d th e
           match by running on to the
           pitch to contact the referee.
           Ambulances were ceiled . ..
            He described the
       g "frustration” o f poiice who
         c o u l d n o t re s c u e f a n s
         quickly because the gate in
         the perimeter fer.ee was so
         na rro w , a n d " j a m m e d ” *
         with the injured.
            M r G re e n w o o d m ade !
         c le a r his r e s e n tm e n t o f 1
         criticism that some o/Iicers ■
         had stood around doing
         nothing.

                   Admiration
                 I have turned it over in
            my mind a thousand times
           since, what could wc have
           done? W hat more could we
            have done?
               " I t s d iffic u lt to talK
           about it in this room here,
           extremely difficult.”
               “The police officers that
           worked by the fence —. I
           have the greatest respect
           and admiration for them. «
             i.*TTie heroics that they
           performed —.1 have been
           told by people who were
           unconnected with either
           N o ttin g h a m F o re st or
           L ive rpool t hat they
           deserved a medaL”             - -
             'M r G r e e n w o o d j a i d ;
           som e o ffid e rs h a d o n l y '
►T__       tbreeoVfour wcexj »pv>Ccj
                  ’ HEg g a W U . i ll m w M
                                SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


                                                           REF:          D&C/AMH/EMR

FROM:   Superintendent Hepworth                            DCU/DEPT:      Discipline & Complaints

TO:     Assistant Chief Constable Ian Daines               EXT:          3084
        Legal & Technical Services
        Headquarters                                       DATE:         15 October 1997




SUBJECT:      RESEARCH AND AUDIT TRAIL RE COACHING OF OFFICERS PRIOR TO
              THEM GIVING EVIDENCE TO LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INQUIRY


A search through non-indexed documentation in the Hillsborough Archive, i.e. documentation that
was not a part of the enquiry by South Yorkshire Police or W est Midlands Police that was recorded
on the HOLMES system, has revealed copies of four update bulletins about the Hillsborough
Inquiry that were given wide circulation throughout the force. Updates I and I I are unfortunately
undated, whilst I I I bears the date 2 June 1989 and IV 30 June 1989. Updates I and I I are signed
by the then ACC Staff Services, Stuart Anderson and updates I I I and IV, by the then
Chief Constable, Peter Wright.

In relation to the above, action updates I and I I I are relevant and copies are attached
hereto.    Update I, although undated, was obviously written after the Inquiry started on
Monday 15 May 1989 and prior to Monday 22 May 1989. It outlined the purpose of the Inquiry, the
setting in which it was taking place, the wide admissibility of evidence and what
South Yorkshire Police had done to gather evidence for the Inquiry.             The update listed
approximately 80 officers likely to be called to give evidence and encouraged and welcomed them
to visit Headquarters, to see the progress of the internal evidence gathering and to get a flavour of
the Public Inquiry. Officers responding to this invitation were to be shown a compilation video
lasting 2 hours; were able to pose questions about the Inquiry, the evidence to date, or about any
concerns to a member of the internal evidence gathering team; were given the opportunity to visit
the Town Hall and see the Inquiry in session.

Update I I I circulated to the force on 2 June 1989, after senior officers had given evidence to the
Inquiry, described how the Treasury Solicitors, acting as "Clerks of Court" circulate statements to
all parties to the Inquiry and this is the first indication that an officer is to be called. The update
goes on to say "relevant officers will be contacted by a member of the South Yorkshire Police
Inquiry Liaison Team and furnished with all necessary information and assistance.
(The underlining of these words is on the original memo and is not mine.)

These two documents were circulated throughout the South Yorkshire Police and indicate how
open the force was in assisting and preparing its officers to give evidence before
Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry, but that this assistance falls far short of coaching them to give
evidence. More detail of the process could be obtained if I were allowed to contact the two officers
who acted as liaison officers.          These are Chief Inspector Norman Bettison, now
Assistant Chief Constable, W est Yorkshire Police and Detective Chief Inspector Ron Brooke, now
retired. Brief statements from these two former South Yorkshire officers would support the
2 documents I have traced, clear up the question of coaching of officers once and for all and leave
no room for ambiguity in the mind of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.
I therefore request that you review your decision that I should not interview officers or former
officers in connection with the Scrutiny of the Hillsborough Enquiry and evidence to enable me to
be more proactive in responding to queries from Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and his team.




A M Hepworth
Superintendent
                               THE H I L L S B O R O U G H INQUIRY - U P - D AT E II

        TO:        Officers of the South Yorkshire Police s u bmitting evidence
                   to the West Mi dl a n d s Police in connection w i t h - t h e Public
                   inquiry into the di sa s t e r at Hxi^-soorou^n. S t aoium


H a mm o n d Suddards, Solicitors, are acting on behalf of the Solrth Yorkshire
Police in the preparation and pres e n t at i o n of evidence to be subm i t t ed to the
Inquiry,

As part of this process the firm initially requested that all officers
d i rectly concerned should, as soon as possible, prepare a note of their
recollections, in the form of a s t a t e m e n t i n c l u d i n g matters or comment and
impression, wher h e r or nc* this amounted to evidence.

These acccunts are cf immense value tc cur Counsel.

Subsequently, the South Yorkshire Police were advised by the West Midlands
Police chat, it would be appr e c i at e d if South Yorkshire Police officers, who
we re at Hillsborough, could e f fe c tively prepare their own factual statements
for submission to the Inquiry.       This was agreed and the obvious w ay of
proceeding was to look at the statements w h ic h had be en i n i t i a l ly prepared at
our request, on the basis that if matters of hearsay and comment -could be
removed, these would be suitable as the factual statements r e q u e s t ed by the
West Midlands Police.

Some officers have expressed concern about alterations being m ade to their
original statements prior to submi s s io n to the West M i dlands Police.

What must be kept in mind is that the statements for subm i s s io n to our own
Counsel were intended to have an entirely different purpose to those submitted
to the West Midlands Police.

The initial Reports      submitted contained a mixture of fact, c o nj e c t ur e and
opinion.    In editing them for use as a factual statement by the Inquiry it has
b e en necessary for the solicitors to remove conjecture and o p in i o n and to leave
o nly matters cf fact.

All statements w hich           are submitted to the Inquiry may be taken into account in
reaching conclusions,            w h ether or not th e ’officer making the statement is
called as a w i t n e s s .      It follows that the statements must c o n t a i n only direct
factual observations,            as'op p o se d to matters of impression.

No amended statement -will be submitted to the West M i dlands Po li c e u ntil it
has been seen, approved and signed by the officer ma ki n g it.




Assistant Chief Constable                              1
             fes)         .,

** D i s t r i b u t i o n :

    All Chief Superintendents
    SuptParker     - HQ C o mm u n i c a t i o n s & Computers
    PC Middup     - Secretary, Police Federation
    Mr Stothard    - Special C o n s t a b u l a r y Commandant
  1                h Civilian P e r s o n n e l Officer
                     THE HIL LS B OR O UG H INQUIRY - UP-DATE IV



The first phase of the Hillsborough Inquiry was concluded on 29 June 1989.
Oral evidence has been received from various parties including police and
civilian members of this F o r c e . A total of 55 South Yorkshire Police
representatives have given evidence to the Inquiry and each has performed
creditably.

The policy adopted by the Force, and employed by each of our witne sses , has
been one of openness and helpfulness towards the Inquiry.  The purpose of the
Inquiry is to examine all the facts relating to the Hillsborough disaster and
to make suitable recommendations to prevent any similar incident occurring in
the future. The South Yorkshire Police fully support those objectives and
have not sought to obscure any fact, for fear of embarrassment, that may serve
the very worthwhile aims of the Taylor Inquiry.

Neither the South Yorkshire Police nor Lord Justice Taylor have any control
over the press coverage of the evidence that has been given.       Members of the
Force can be assured, however, that the journalistic 's l a n t ' bears little
relation to the mountain of facts and claims that have been set before the
Inquiry.  The job of Lord Justice Taylor and his two assessors, now, is to
sift through that mass of evidence attaching weight to, and dismissing, that
which they see f i t .

All parties to the Inquiry^, including the South Yorkshire Police, are now
preparing written submissions to the Inquiry based upon their interpretation
of the evidence.

These submissions, and others from representative bodies such as the
Association of Chief Police Officers, the Superintendents1 Association and the
Police Federation, will be considered by Lord Justice Taylor prior to his
publication of an interim report in August 1989.

The Inquiry is to reconvene at Sheffield on 14 July 1989 for one day only.
The purpose of this arrangement is to enable counsel, for each party, the
opportunity to summarise the submissions they have made to the Inquiry.   In
essence, it may be little more than a press call with certain parties seeking
headlines.  These presentations should not, however, affect the serious
deliberations of the Judge and his assessors.

The South Yorkshire Police has done all that it has been permitted to do to
                                       of 15 April 1989.  Those police
                                       that case by giving evidence are
                                          jn iT   W 'lm T   tn r v r r i   t.t> i ^   v\-v* a   w r*   -v~r\A   -h   a u




                                              . Justice T a y l o r 's Inquiry, and
                                        hed in 1990.   The South Yorkshire
Police will reflect, conscientiously and professionally, upon any
recommendations that are relevant to the Force and move forward from the
trawriv t h a t tnnrhpd al 1 of US .
                                    -   2   -




As a postscript, the West Midlands Police continue to prepare a report for
HM Coroner who is to hold an inquest, in January 1990, into the 95 deaths.
The West Midlands officers may wish at some stage in the future to take
statements from members of the South Yorkshire Police who dealt with the
deceased.  When their intentions are more clear the relevant individuals will
be fully advised.




** Distribution:

   All Chief Superintendents
   Superintendent Parker   - HQ Communications & Computers
   Police Constable Middup - Secretary, Police Federation
                           -                           Special Constabulary Commandant
 t------------------ 1—    - Civilian Personnel Officer



  PLEASE ENSURE WIDEST CIRCULATION THROUGHOUT YOUR DIVISION/DEPARTMENT.
     Mr C Bone
     Hillsborough Scrutiny
     Room 1108                .      ■      '          Our Ref:       D&C/AMH/EMR
     Home Office
     50 Queen Anne's Gate                               Date:         8 October 1397
     LONDON
     SW 1H9AT




     RE: REQUESTS FOR INFORMATION FROM HILLSBOROUGH ARCHIVES

     During the visit of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, Chris Catherail and yourself to the
     Hillsborough Archives at Heeley on Wednesday 24 September 1997, you made a number of
     requests to us for information, which you agreed to put in writing. To. date we have not received
     these.

     Of the two requests we have already responded to, one on 24 September 1997 was to supply
     transcripts of the main and mini inquests and the other was the provision of copies of the plans of
     the Leppings Lane terrace reference C275 and C278, which we forwarded on
     30 September 1997,

     If my memory serves me correctly the other requests were:-

     Report on continued research into amendment of officers' recollections;

     Research and report on the suggestion that officers were coached to give evidence to
<    Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry

‘f   Research and report on the provision of video tapes to Yorkshire Television; .         .

^    Examine the copy video tape provided by        yourself via Trevor Hicks .
     various shots are from;                                                           '




                                                       The person dealing with this c
                                                       Superintendent Hepworth
                                                       (0114)298 3084        .        . ■       V
                                                      -2-




     Research any breach of the            law   by   Granada    Television   in   the   approach    to     a
     Hillsborough inquest Jury Member;

     Prepare a report on policy and procedure for the release of Hillsborough Documentation to
 /   interested parties;

f Q Report to Lord justice Stuart-Smith on a number of outcomes from the civil actions.

     Incidentally, neither Ken Greenway nor myself has sufficient knowledge, nor the information to
     supply the details which you are likely to request about the civil actions, particularly as most of
     them were confidential. The outcomes are not within the knowledge of the force solicitor,
     Alan Walker either, i therefore have in mind to write to Peter Metcalf of Hammond Suddards
     Solicitors at Empire House, 10 Piccadilly, Bradford BD1 3LR, who acted for
     South Yorkshire Police and our Insurers in these hearings, asking him if he will respond to your
     request once we receive it, unless of course you wish to write to him directly. I will not action this
     further until I hear from you.                                        .

     Work is progressing on the other requests and I shall soon be in a position to start responding.

     Finally, I believe there was a suggestion that Chris Catherail should revisit Heeley to examine the
     police officers' statements and the amendments made to them. Can you inform me if this is to
     take place and a likely date, please.




     A M Hepworth
     Superintendent




                                                        The person dealing with this correspondence i:
                                                        Superintendent Hepworth             T'- :;:/;
                                                        (0114) 296 3084                             :“ VT
