                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         IBHlliil


                                                                                       ssMlimSm%                                                                                                                                                                            iMliflli
                                                                         fl#sll§llS             3H @
                                         B iS S I                      wmm
                                  m am m

                                                                                                    W im M
    WsSsSsA


                                                siPiiis




                                                                 iSsK
                                                                    feffijJ
                                                              SlilllfilisS
                                                                                                                                             iMSfesSii
                                                          IP^®lOTliSP


                                               W M iw M   8

Ilfs®#!                                                                                                                       Wffl&si
II1 & M ;                    iSyi
                                ates!
                                 llilil
       ** ilil*l*I*                                                                                                                                                                       IfStelS
                                                                                                                         wmmm
                Sfee&i
               iirtiiiiilii       W W JM r-
                                              ;P®hf                                                    i« § s i® t


                lillflil                                                      $§8i§Rs®SWw
                                                                                                                                                                                                  fe®
                                                                                                                                                                                                    «5                                                                     iiillll
                                                                                                                t iii
                                                                                                                                   IfPiplI
                                                                                                                                  Si?®??
                                  8stlfs§i81
                                 a®2®                                                                                                                     fets®?®
                                                      tel8iiSl§

M B H S B i H ^ & a                                                                                                          ■H M H I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             •m s
                                                                                                                        ■IBISBI                                                                                                                          w iillt f M
                                                                                                                                       illilili
               IS liS I l
                                                                                                                        sttis
                                                                                                                              fiitlillll
                                                                              iiilW^IM^si#                                             ■M             IM            i
           ®©SsiSB!®Si
                                 WS0Mm
                            :fl5&l^€%lS*
                                     WmmmiKi                                                                  VHMRHI
    m m m m m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       liBiMlPi
                                                  ®f^t®
                                                      SS
                                                       §s
                                                       MI                                                                                    W0Mg$                          a m lm m li
                                                                               IlMl li®
                                                                                      litM                                                                                                                                                                       h h h         HI
                                              ?#|®i#te                            sssw
              infill®                                               WW0SSM%Lk
                                                                          IMSWS
                                                                                                                                                                   flsp ii
                                                                                                                                                                    SSlfiiS
I S ifil                 *imwi  ISifcillS                                                       ISfllSf                                $ai&£
                      Z^ii
                         Z
                         y
                         p_
                          ±
                          y'
                           z
                           ?
                           ; IfllStMiS
                                                                                                                                   m          s       ^   s    m        m         a       m
                             M%Sm^mM&                                                                         simmM
       iS I I B fill                            S S iil
                                                                                                                                        STS®              IllillJii
               mmsM                                                                                                m tik                                           tMMB.
               immmmmm                                                                                                                                              wm       m        m       M

                                f tN H M              H
                                                                                       ttfiilSiSi#                                                                                                                                                  s;            iPftiyiMi
                                                                                                               fiw ilS ii                                      ■taiisitiiiitw                                                                 iSB8Si#3                    SM I
                                                                                                              w M X m sm                                          ii§asssii
                         US®!                                                                                         mMM*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mmmm
      SSfellSIl
                                                   Mwl#                                                          i®8fe^p39l            w sSfiW l                                                                                                                   Wfffl®
                                                                                                                                                                           WMtmm
                                                                                                    IS S fl                                        ssiM ia              8fB8®§iiSI                                                  » » * # !
                                                                                                                         illl®               Ilfi^lgiS                                Sslllslfeli                                                                      Ifetillililf
                                                                                                                     W#lRllf|lll®
   wfilSilSISi                                                                       «s i ®i
           IlftfltliSlill                                                                           HBB                                     ik i §§s                                                                     ®S®il
      iflSii                      &?§§
                                                                                                M m m m m m m m m
       mW4m§                                      M§M0Mk
                                                                                                                                                                                                    WBmm
 mMMWmm                                                                               rM $m i                                                                                                                   &mffi
                                                                                                                                   8 i»
                                                                                                                                      iM3
                                                                                                                                                                                                     lllfili?
 S#I|#m|
;^Ci^W iw M t
      wm»m                                                                        ■>S'MiSk
                                                                                                                                        tef«
            fMMi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              wssm
                                mmmm                                                                                                                                                              wmm
                                                                                                                                        tm m m sm
                                                                                                                 iiiiiiiilil
                                                                                                                                                                                                                wmm
                                                                                                              iii                                                                                                     ■ISisSIw^^l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               :^M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ^/<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   iS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4<
                                                                                                                                                                                              a^ » i
                                                                                                ■      i                                          HM Bi
                                                                                                                                                                                 s s iiiisi                                         BiMm
                                      ISP®i
                                smmW^mMM
                                     mwM    mmSmmmmmm                                                  mimlgmmmm         ^    n    a    m         m        m       m                                                   &s’«ii
                                                     DCC/JEL
                                                     15 March 1991


NOTE FOR FILE;


HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER FUND


For previous information, please see 'Note for File1 dated 1 February 1991.

This date met Norman Adsetts for the second occasion. He informed me that
Mr Trevor Hicks is not now prepared to meet with either the Chief Constable,
myself, or both of us, until after the Inquest and residual matters have
been finalised; this decision having been taken on legal advice.

With regard to possible donations from the Fund being put towards police
purposes, I discussed with him the items set out on the appendix attached.

He thought the Committee would consider seriously making a donation towards
(i) welfare/counselling facilities, (ii) casualty bureau, (iii) convalescent
home, and, (iv) community projects - possibly by way of a trust to assist
us with some inner city projects which the police urban action scheme might
be involved in together with other agencies.

Mr Adsetts said he will up-date me further after the relevant meeting of
trustees has occurred and was grateful for the help we are providing him
in this regard.




Deputy Chief Constable
                                                                  Appendix


                      HILLSBOROUGH TRUST FOND

The  following   proposals  are   listed  for     consideration   of   a
contribution from the Hillsborough Trust Fund.

Football Ground - Football Rooms/Observation Control Rooms

The Police Rooms/Observation Control Rooms at the five football
grounds within the Force area are generally in a poor state of
repair and decoration.    The quality and quantity of furniture is
also below standard and the facilities are, in the main, inadequate.

Visitor Reception Facilities at Police Stations

The provision of improved visitor reception facilities at designated
police stations would enhance the professional image of the police
service.  In general, the public reception areas are stark, austere
places with no public access to toilets or drinks facilities.
Visitors can, and do, spend long periods of time in foyers of police
stations waiting, and improvements in them would increase the
public/police relationships.

Welfare/Counselling Facilities

There are still a significant number of police officers receiving
welfare and counselling advice as a direct result of Hillsborough.
Concern has been expressed on a number of occasions about the poor
facilities and lack of privacy for counselling sessions.

Provision of office accommodation with improved facilities with
nearby car parking would enhance the welfare service and reduce
any perceived or actual embarrassment of clients. The accommodation
that would be made available could be either in the city centre
or in its suburbs.

Casualty Bureau

Provision of additional equipment/facilities for the Casualty
Bureau:   items such as fax machine, improved lighting, blinds for
windows and appliances like radios, television and video for the
recreation of those employed in the Bureau.

Convalescent Home

The Police Service Convalescent Home at Harrogate would benefit
from    a   contribution  which  would  directly  enhance   the
medical/counselling service they provide to the police service
in general.

Occupational Health Unit

A contribution would assist with the creation of an Occupational
Health Unit for the Force.
Community Projects

The Force is regularly involved in various community projects.
Finance is a necessary requirement to enable some of the more
adventurous schemes to take place. A contribution to enable such
schemes to be commenced would directly provide the community with
activities that encourage and improve a better relationship with
the police by the younger element within South Yorkshire.

Hillsborough Youth Club

On the day of the disaster, the premises and facilities of
Hillsborough Youth Club were made freely available. Police, social
workers, relatives and friends of victims used the building and
both gas and electricity were used.      Perhaps a donation to the
Club funds would show the appreciation of all concerned and enable
the Club to purchase a useful piece of equipment or apparatus.

Other Proposed Schemes

- the provision of improved communications facilities at Don Valley
  Stadium

- new gymnasium equipment for police stations

- microwave ovens for police station kitchens

- provision of worthwhile gifts to police officers on sick leave

- redecoration of police houses to enable more of them to be let

- purchase of a holiday flat either in the UK or abroad for use
  of police officers and families
                                                      DCC/JEL
                                                      1 February 1991


NOTE FOR FILE:


HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER FUND


At the invitation of Norman Adsetts,   a trustee of the above Fund, we met
on Thursday 31 January 1991.

Mr Adsetts explained that there are four trustees who together have already
disposed of the majority of the fund to victims - a category which has been
very broadly defined and includes people from stewards at the gameto those
more distant who were affected psychologically.

The trustees are now dealing with residual money and the principle is to
dispose of this to other parties who were helpful at the time of Hillsborough
and who through facilities provided by additional funding could be better
equipped in future.

In this latter category are included bodies such as Church organisations,
St John Ambulance Brigade, the Hillsborough community, and, significant
to ourselves, the emergency services.

Some indications   of the sort of purposes   for which payment has been   made
are:-

   a. to improve church hall facilities; and,

   b. improved provision at local hospitals of waiting room and short
      term residential facilities    for relatives   of patients   in
      intensive care.

Regarding payment to the emergency services, this is still to be determined.

Whilst the Liverpool Steering Group has no direct control on the disposal
of the monies, they are a powerful pressure group and as a result direct
payment to the police would be a problem.   However, Mr Adsetts suggested
the following two possible avenues

   i. That the Chief Constable or possibly myself - or both - meet
      informally with the trustees and leading member(s) of the
      Steering Group (possibly Mr Hicks), to explain the difficulties
      experienced by many police officers involved after the tragedy;            '0"^-
      and,

 ii. to think through areas where monies could be utilised to benefit
     the police, particularly in terms of their response to disaster
     type activities.

     In this connection the possibilities are:-

     a.   the renting of office and waiting room accommodation      for
          the welfare staff away from Police Headquarters; or,
                                    - 2 -


      b.   improvements to the police room facilities at football
           grounds in South Yorkshire.

The need now is to brain-storm in order to identify other possibilities.




Deputy Chief Constable


copy to:   Chief Officers (for discussion at Senior Command 11.2.91)




                                                       i




                  Q.)


                                   fa-^Ur..-     -               .JA       j
                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                           Ref:            F/CID GM/M*

From :   Detective Superintendent McKay                    Station/Dept:   Ecclesfield

To   : Deputy Chief Constable                              npfr:     13 February 1991
________ Mr P Hayes      _____________


         SUBJECT.                         Hillsborough


          I refer to our telephone conversation of 12 February 1991 and your request
          for information in relation to ways in which money from the Hillsborough
          Fund might properly be distributed, and for recollections of the temporary
          mortuary which might be worth mentioning in an address on the subject of
          the disaster.

          Some person, I know not. who> during that Saturday afternoon put out a
          radio and television appeal for social workers to go to Hammerton Road
          Police Station.   My first reaction to this was one of horror that all
          these 'do-gooders' should be flocking to a police station already under
          siege. In the event it was an excellent move as the people who attended
          provided a buffer between the victims' friends and relatives and the
          police, and were able to offer inmediate assistance and comfort that the
          police on that afternoon could not have provided. This was done, first of
          all, at Hillsborough Youth Club.

          Hillsborough Youth Club (more correctly known as 393 Club, 393 Langsett
          Road, Hillsborough), stands on Langsett Road and backs on to Hammerton
          Road Police Station.   I would imagine it was built around the turn of the
          century and is a huge converted rambling terraced house.    In my youth it
          was recognised as the finest boys' club in the city and in recent years,
          girls have been admitted to its membership.  It is quite apparent that the
          organisation suffers from a lack of funds.

          On the afternoon of the disaster those premises were inmediately made
          available for social workers, relatives and friends of victims and police
          liaison officers. Although we moved our own telephones into that building
          the gas and electricity was used as part of the hospitality extended to
          us.

          Most importantly perhaps, the people of Hillsborough responded in their
          hundreds with offers of help.   These offers of help took the form of the
          use of private telephones being made available to friends and relatives of
          victims who needed urgently to reassure friends and families in Liverpool
          and elsewhere, mountains of food being supplied throughout the afternoon
          and night, and offers of transport and accaimodation to distressed
          Liverpool fans.

          To the best of my knowledge there has never been any public recognition in
          respect of these spontaneous acts of sympathy and generosity by the people
          of Hillsborough.

          If there is any way of making a public award to what is, after all, their
          youth club, it would perhaps be an appropriate way of showing our
          collective thanks to the people of Hillsborough and the youth club
          officials.

          Temporary Mortuary

          As the senior CID officer on duty at the ground it fell to me to organise
          the temporary mortuary in the gymnasium.
I have to say at the outset that there was no planned organisation; we
were overtaken by the events and had to rely on initiative and
improvisations.

There were many problems throughout the afternoon and night but taken
overall, I believe that there were few improvements that could have been
made.

The following comments are made with the benefit of hindsight and perhaps
might be helpful in any lecture you give to senior officers who might find
themselves in the unfortunate position of having to deal with large
numbers of bodies at a disaster such as this.

As the first body was brought into the gymnasium I personally held back
one of the officers who brought the body in and gave that officer
instructions in relation to his responsibilities to that body.    Officers
with me recognised the value in what I was doing and between us we ensured
that each of the bodies brought into the gymnasium had a police officer
remain wi th it.

When I later discussed the general situation with Detective Chief
Superintendent Addis he told me that, in his view, whilst no harm had been
done by this action it perhaps, under the circumstances, had not been
necessary for the purpose of identification as many of the officers had
helped only to carry the body and were unaware of the victim's location in
the crowd where death occurred.

However, in the subsequent enquiry, placing an officer with each victim
proved to have been an invaluable move in that relatives' fears that their
loved ones had been dumped and abandoned in a hall were able to be refuted
and indeed it could be shown that a huge measure of care and attention had
been given to each victim until such time as death was certified by a
doctor.

Other problems in the hall included difficulties of access; hoardings had
been torn from around the ground and used as improvised litters to bring
victims to the mortuary.   On arrival at the door these proved to be too
wide to be carried through the door and were invariably dumped there and
the victims carried in by hand.   It wasn't long before severe congestion
occurred at   the door caused by more and more of these boards being
abandoned there.

Public order in the hall became a problem with grieving relatives and
friends (seme of wham were the worse for drink) venting their frustrations
on police officers and police photographers whom they mistook for members
of the press. It was necessary to monitor access into the gymnasium at an
early stage.

I was fortunate at the time of having at my disposal Detective Sergeant
McSloy who is undoubtedly the finest exhibits officer we have in this
force.    I asked him to form a team     to assist with body numbering,
completing description forms and body identification and property. I had
not realised at that early stage what an immense task I had given this
officer and his team.
                                                                     3


Following identification of the bodies he and his team continued to
itemise and catalogue each item of property found on the terraces, (a huge
collection in itself), each item of property found on the victim, each
item of clothing belonging to the victims and exhibits in relation to the
enquiry itself e.g. photographs, videos, documents. Once started the task
was too complex to be handed over and each of the officers worked solidlj
14 hours a day for the next 7 days. It is to their immense credit that no
single fault was found in any of the work that they did.

It had been the practice at Hillsborough for several years to photograph
the crowds on the terraces so that in the event of a murder on the
terraces there would be a starting point to trace witnesses etc.    These
photographs were invaluable in the enquiries that followed in relation to
positioning the victims in the crowd prior to the disaster.

These are initial and perhaps haphazard thoughts on the subjects you have
asked me to recall and I have no doubt that had I had more time I could
have been much more expansive.

I would be very grateful for an opportunity to listen to any address yew
may make on the subject of Hillsborough.




G McKay
Detective Superintendent
Chief Insp Donnelly

Re. suggestions for Trust money:-

                       £> C-CvpevHo
1. First choice - OHU facilities

2. Purchase of some sort of holiday flat - either home
   or abroad - for use by police officers and families
   (thinks some other Forces have done a similar thing)
    'C' Division

    Trust money

    1.     Refurbishment of facilities at football grounds -       in closed
           season Millmoor will be having built a new control       room and
           the existing control room facilities will be taken       into use
    'S     as a police room - could do with hot drinks dispenser   machines,
           chairs, decorations, etc.


    2.    Counselling facility at Harrogate - monies from the Fund could
          facilitate this as distinct from just within South Yorkshire.


    3.    Police houses in Rotherham Division - decorations, etc. - might
^         encourage officers to live in places where otherwise they might
          not want to live.


    4.    Community project - towards a scheme which might involve
          police/football supporters/clubs - with emphasis on football
          and educating supporters (especially young people).
'D' Division


Trust money:-


1.    Foyer at 'Dl' need brightening up, decorating etc.


2.    Improving communications system at Don Valley Stadium.


3.    Gymnasium equipment - exercise bikes, etc. at 'Dl' and   'D2


4.    Microwave/ovens always being requested at Section Stations


5.    Could provide better gifts to officers on sick leave
       (currently this is funded from the Sports & Social Club)
       perhaps could provide joint gift.


6.    Provide monies for the Convalescent Homes.


7.    Provide better accommodation for the welfare officer
       (separate to PHQ).
Focus on Youth 1991

In August 1990 'F' Division ran a Focus on Youth project which involved taking
up to 100 young people aged 14 - 17 years on a wide variety of activities
over a two week period. The aim was to improve relations between young people
and the Police    and give the youngsters ideas as to how they might make better
use of their    spare time.   The 1990 project was considered a success and a
further one is   planned for 1991 y t h o u g h on a reduced scale dueto commitments
with the World Student Games. / / 0 0 0 , Q q

Bowsen Barn

This cruick barn, which has origins dating back to the 14 th century is
situated in High Bradfield and overlooks Agden Reservoir.   It is currently
in a poor state of repair with part of the roof missing.  A Trust is being
formed including police officers, which will manage the resotration of the
building for use as an outdoor pursuit centre by young people.   The design
will enable it to be used by the handicapped.

The barn could hardly be better placed for such use and it is anticipated
that a number of voluntary Government Training Groups, police officers and
young people will be involved in the restoration.     The costs involved in
the restoration will be large - present estimate £50,000.   Any donation will
be most appreciated. A portfolio of photographs showing the present condition
of the barn is available should anyone wish to view.
TELEPHONE:           SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
SHEFFIELD (0742)[     POLICE HEADQUARTERS
TELEX: 547996           SNIG HILL
FAX: (0742) 523243       SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


P WRIGHT CBE
CHIEF CONSTABLE
'E' Division


Trust Money



Nothing to add other than DCC mentioned
with Chief Supt Seller when discussing
on 1phone.

Sorry - no new ideas.
A/Supt Hepworth


Re. Trust Monies


For use by Casualty Bureau

1.   Fax machine

2.   Improve lighting   (cost £1,600)

3.   Blinds for windows (cost approx.£1,000)

4.   Need for radio/television and video player
      to enable Bureau to keep up-to-date with the incident information
      and secondly for rest and recreation for officers in Bureau


These are in order of priority
                                      SOUTH YO R K S H IR E POLICE
                                                                     Ref:         WEL/KJT/GM
        From:                  Principal Welfare Officer             Station/Dept: HQ/Welfare

    To:         Deputy Chief   Constable                             Dat®:        8 February 1991



                SUBJECT:        WELFARE REQUIREMENTS FOR PRIVATE ACCOMMADATION


                 The staffing levels at the moment are two welfare officers - Principal
                 Welfare Officer and Deputy Welfare Officer plus a Clerk/Typist.

                 In rented accommodation the welfare Officers would each need an office
                 of approximately 16 square metres. This would provide space for a
                 desk and chair and allow for a more informal area for counselling,
                 consisting of a coffee table and chairs. The clerk/typist would need
                 a reception and clerical area of about 12 square metres. There would
                 also be a need for a waiting room of about the same size.

                 As well as this office space we would abviously need kitchen and
                 toilet facilities.  Depending how far the office is from headquarters
                 it would be preferable to have parking space nearby as both welfare
                 officers need to use cars for work. However, if we were near to
                 headquarters we could continue to use the current car parking space
                 provided there.

                 There would also be the obvious need for telephone facilities in each
                 office and for the usual items of office furniture - desks, chairs,
                 coffee tables, filing cabinets etc. We may however be able to take
                 some equipement from our current office accommodation.

                 We could also make use of a computer system for record keeping and
                 statistics. This would be new to all of us, so training would need
                 to be provided.




                 Kevin Tobin
                 Principal Welfare Officer




Gen/2
                       SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                    Ref:      Fl/NB/RK

   From :   Superintendent Bettison                             StattoijjfeBgpt: Hamnerton Road

   To   :   Chief Superintendent Nesbit- 'F' Division           Date.         g February 1991


            SUBJECT:         donation to south Yorkshire   police
                             BY HILLSBOROUGH TRUST FOND


            Further to our telephone conversation on the 8 February 1991, I propose
            two areas in which the South Yorkshire Police might properly ask the
            above trustees to contribute.

            The first is the Police Room at Hillsborough Football Ground which is
            in a poor state of repair.

            I have attached a report from Sergeant Long giving broad details of
            what is required, however the room is the responsibility of the
            Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and the police would therefore be
            deriving no benefit from such a contribution.

            I therefore propose a preferred option that if funds are available then
            Hammerton Road Police Station, which was used as a reception area for
            friends and relatives of those who died in the disaster, should
            benefit. It ought to be a public area in the police station and I
            therefore recommend that we ask for funds to refurbish the enquiry desk
            area with a modern counter and comfortable seating for visitors to the
            station.

            This would be a fitting contribution to the day of the disaster when
            the enquiry office was a waiting area for many who were touched by the
            disaster. As a rough figure, I would suggest £2,000 might be
            sufficient.




            Superintendent


            -   2-
            Deputy Chief Constable

            Sir

            Forwarded for your consideration is a report from Superintendent
            Bettison identifying areas whereby monies from the Hillsborough Trust
            Fund could be utilised within this Division.




GEN/2
                                SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                                                                    Ref:

    From :                                              (f*S (f                                   ,                 Station / Dept:

   To    :                                                                   Ay                                     Date:                                     •




             SUBJECT

                           ^ ' T 1-              W«Lb         tiUUnJhJ                        "4o          ~fc*              jxffia           J ^ ~


              ^            jJkoJk*-                     ]*"&,            1 > ^ 1 0                         -Lth-le                    m ) ~         LaSL

              5!b=c                    d m t M U )            Cs*~M                   ^

             ^ x&   jl         Vi£M A            ^aJfr»C           (/el ($-}*              ix-        Kt^Jvk^./                  /a^u, h ' ^ - ^ )

              iiv        /^o       ~ f% h i< iP        kJ jsxsk ^ •                                                              ^


              6k                                   <J? **£         (M >a)U*-                          jG
                                                                                                       ^            J' <**>
                                       J7                                                         k   ) W      g   L w ^ e                ^


              6 k ^             cJ^r<\A, IgJ q (j ?                                  -l w u ^ '                    9                 ^ U-Jl

              j9 & lu d jp         1        ^G G A&d KJOh-^jSaJ                  j         (M -J ^a A & a s * o e                     0£^-.

                               <        W    ^         ^ j ^ u C U M A A                              W | , k * j                     w   e     w     ^


                                       AYca        IcUats              h J U A                                             ' ^ 5 ^~

                                   ^ U ^ i s ^ v jU ^                                                               O O b / ' IrA


               i ^ e            4*v^oU.                                                                    o    k                                   ^      K -


                                                                                      "^eH'CjP                                                      C t X lk iQ


                    ^vtsuA^                                 4 h ~ j p -                       &                                      M>wlc»


               A c t ' M t w > ,                   ^              U L i U O l .                       fa               A       v f e ^ o

               f o 'k C                            C M ^ O J . /             ^                        W     W          - i       4     « / * - < » ■


              ^kn,              <bta<xbK<^                  k m        w ^            tL          c^o'tflwo,                          ierer*~J>

              v a   sl     Si          Q *c u & c c j              d   / h       a        t                                      A * 4*


               B^VWg-                                   ^
GEN/2
                       SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                               Ref:
   From ‘     Chief Superintendent Thompson                    Station   / Dept    A DHQ

   To   :     Deputy Chief Constable                           Date:              13.2.91



            SUBJECT:

              I refer to our telephone discussion and report as follows

              A)   Police room at Belle Vue Football Ground

                   The existing facilities are deplorable and as a consequence do
                   little to enhance any feeling of well being either in police
                   officers, or members of the 'football' public.    There is a total
                   lack of comfort, space, privacy, equipment and toilet facilities.
                   It is lacking in furniture and basic decoration.      The floor is
                   below ground level, and in wet conditions gathers water through
                   natural external drainage.     It once had a wooden floor which
                   subsequently rotted, and users now are on the concrete sub floor.
                   A recent validation exercise report had to say "This ground has the
              J    poorest equipment in the Force".

                   Required:   A permanent building sufficient to provide facilities
                   for police officers and public with toilets, along with landline
                   communications   and  small  storage   facilities.    Additionally,
                   accommodation is required for two secure rooms sufficient to house
                   up to four persons each, for a limited duration (detention rooms).


              B)   Police Observations/Control Room

                   The existing facilities are a small wooden constructed shelter 8' x
                   6' , housing close circuit television apparatus and it is amazing
                   that it has not been subject to criminal entry or damage.       The
                   football ground is currently under consideration of substantial
                   changes which remove but do not substitute, this post.

                   Required:    Brick or breeze block built, sufficient to provide high
                   visibility to all forward and side areas of the ground, secure to
                   hold    close   circuit   TV  monitors   and  other   equipment   for
                   communication purposes/control, estimated value £50,000.    This room
                   to be of sufficient size to house the Match Commander and three
                   others.


              C)   Visitor Reception, Facilities at Designated Police Stations

                   Policing is for change in the 1990's and we need to market a better
                   image.    This Division in 1991 has an objective for 'quality
                   service' and one aspect of that is to improve the work place,
                   thereby raising the police officer's happiness with resultant
                   equanimity when serving the public.    Police buildings are stark,
                   and austere places.   We have to make them more user friendly which




GEN/2
in turn, I am sure, will lead to a greater understanding and less
conflict.   Commerce has for years, transgressed this way, and we
need to pick up the building blocks.

Require: The provision of a room adjacent to public areas at all
designated police stations, that room to be decorated and furnished
to a high comfortable standard, with the provision for immediate
supply of liquid beverage (tea/coffee).
