                  Sheffield Archives Ref: f a - |^ 111I> 1&0                                       M IR .15
                                                                                                                                CD y8 o
OTHER DOCUMENT FORIVL                          H a t e a n d t im e ra ised       \SU_S                            Number



Title
(Include source and anyaocum ei


                                          Yes/I t
                                   tion — Yes/No
Receiver's instructions — urgent action                              <5p                   ^
                                                                                                                                    Receiver
        C a jtv            usv—                     tSdWy- ---1gjxc^4^\iI!DU vn
                                                                                                                   r              , Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised    f \    |
                                                                                                                                 >% Q>
                                                                                                                                Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions                                      &        -    /   ^   g u & g j& c b
                                                                                                                                 S T& if
                                                                                                                                       Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

                                                                                                                                O /M         SIO
Examined - further action to be taken



                                                                                                            ig e   hm

                                                                                                                                       Indexer
Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                                                                                            1
                                                     GJD/AMS



                                                     Zh April 1989




Dear Sir


M s HIUSBOHOOGH - 15 APRIL 19S9


I am grateful to you for writing and the information that you included
in your letter will be of great interest to ay Investigative team.

It nay be that we shall be in touch with you again to take up the point#
that you have made.

Thank you very auch for writing.


fours faithfully




Chief Constable
                                                                          /* A .




20 April 1989


Mr Geoffrey J Deere
Chief Constable West Midlands Police
West Midlands Police H Q
P 0 Box 52
Lloyd House
Colmore Circus Queensway
Birmingham
B4 6NQ


Dear Sir

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - 15 APRIL 1989

I only feel it is right to record the details of the sequence of events from
the way I saw them on the day.

Firstly, I must say that I have been a Liverpool supporter for many years and
have travelled to see them play in numerous forms and sizes of stadium, both
seated and standing, in this country and throughout Europe. I am 26 years of
age and since 1984 have left my native Merseyside to live and work in
Reading.

I travelled to Sheffield from my parents hone in Widnes, Cheshire, with a
friend, leaving at approximately 12.40 pn, a later start than was anticipated,
due to a problem with the car and intending to travel into Sheffield by using
the A57 snake pass route, therefore avoiding traffic on the troubled M62, Ml
route. However, we were to be held up for quite sane time in both Stockport
and Glossop en route. In Sheffield, sane 2 miles away from the ground,
roadside Police Officers, having questioned us as to which team we were
supporting, directed us to park approximately X
                                              A mile away from the ground in a
side street adjacent to a park. I closed the door of the car and checked my
watch - it was 2.55 pm.

Already, we could hear the cheers from inside the ground. We made our way
down a steep road, past an old school building and the crowd was gathering
into fairly large numbers and walking quite briskly towards the Leppings Lane
end of the ground. I was confronted, along with everybody else, by a line of
six Police horses, positioned nose to tail as a barrier adjacent to the open
iron gates before the, terracings "fOieri'STIL£S>

While waiting for the menacing task of passing between one horse's mouth and
another's backside, I checked the time - it as 3.02 pm and fans were scaling
the wall adjacent to the turnstiles and were left alone by the Police and
ground Officials.




                                                                                   «>
                                    -   2   -




It was at this point, to my utter amazement, that a large blue sliding folding
door to the left of the turnstiles slid open - this was also witnessed by my
friend. A large number of people passed through the gate, including fans with
tickets who had left their queues for the turnstiles, obviously to get in more
quickly (just like the new till being opened at the Post Office).

Having passed through the ordeal of the horses, I, along with my friend, made
my way to the third turnstile from the left, everybody around me had tickets.
It was crowded but there was no crush. The Police located between the horses
and the turnstiles were silent. No indication was given as to the condition
of the crowd inside the ground and from the moment I reached the close
proximity of the ground, right up until the turnstile, I did not see a ground
Steward, nor did I receive any direction to a position on the terrace. I did
not hear anything over the P.A. system.

Once through the turnstile, not a single Police Officer, Steward or any other
ground Official offered advice as to the situation inside the ground or any
alternative direction for passageway onto the terraces. My friend and I had
to make our own choice. A natural route to follow was into the central tunnel
beneath the main stand at the Leppings Lane end.

More than half way into the tunnel, I   suggested that we went into the left
hand entrance onto the terrace. Both    entrances onto the terrace were crowded
and very tight with people. The game    was still in play and crowd surges
forced my friend and myself apart. I    was thrown quickly to my left and
managed to stay upright.

At this point I must say that crowd surges in the initial stages of a football
match are normal and socn after kick-off, normally, people find their own
 (limited) space and remain comfortable for the rest of the game.

The game had been stopped and Police Officers (3 no.) were gesturing with
their arms for the crowd to push back - their voices could not be heard and
none of the 3 Officers on the wall at the bottom of the terrace or anybody
else on the pitch did not have a 'loud hailer' type, hand held loudspeaker.
Because of the noise of the crowd, I could not hear the announcements made on
the Public Address system.

My position at this point was 6 - 1 0 people deep, right of centre of the
terrace. The crowd surged forward again and I became held up against a
barrier. I held off another surge that frightened me because my hips were
tightly pressed against the barrier and I began to get distressed.

I am a level headed, rational person and realised the situation was
dangerous, only at this point because of previous ground experience. The
Officers on the wall at the front of the terrace were still offering silent
gestures of "get back". I, along with countless others, replied with "we
can't move". There was nipwhere to move. Another surge meant I was pushed
further left and I was becoming anxious about getting out and also about the
whereabouts of my friendj




                                                                                  4
                                      -   3   -




At this stage, I, quite out of desperation, was shouting at a solitary
Officer, positioned above and behind me in the stand above the terrace. My
desperate cries of "Hey!     Hey! Sort this out now!      Cane on, sort it
out!..." were ignored. No radio reports were made. The Officer did not do
anything. I will be able to identify this Officer if called upon to do so.

Fans around me at this time were becoming increasingly aware of the situation
and cries and calls of "Somebody is dead down there" were heard by a man in
his early twenties standing on a wall about 1.8 m high, adjacent to the
entrance to the terrace.

The Officer in the stands had now disappeared and fans, not Officials or
Police, were lifting people out from the terrace below up onto the stands
above. In desperation, I too tried to be lifted out but I was too far down
the terrace.

Still no indication as the scale of the problem. Due to the successful
operation made by fans of lifting people out to the stands, the intense
pressure on myself was relieved sufficiently to enable me to move of my own
free will back towards the entrance from which I came and to find my friend.
Police Officers were stood at the end of the entrance/exit tunnel while fans
were shouting "Get out, there are people dead down there!!"

I found my friend and told him that we should get out. At this point, a tail
W.P.C., with blond hair and a short pony tail, rushed onto the terrace, just
under the end of the tunnel. It was then and only then for the first time I
received sound advice from a Police Officer. She called "Cone on lads, get
out! Get out!" I will be able to identify this Officer if called upon to do
so.

We made our way back   along the tunnel to be warned away by Police Officers
hauling bodies along   the tunnel and out to lay them out in survival position
on the ground in the   space between the back of the stand and the turnstiles
from which my friend   and I entered.

Between this time, now 3.15 pm, and the time the Emergency Services arrived,
fifteen minutes later, I witnessed P .C .    standing around offering no
resusitation to any of the injured or any words of assurance or comfort to the
now extremely distressed and angry fans, sane of which had already seen their
dead relatives and friends.

A sudden stream of "water" came from behind sane of the steel cladding, high
above at the back of the stand. This cascaded onto a number of people, some
of which were Police Officers, obviously unknown to the person relieving
themselves. It was fifteen minutes before the Emergency Services arrived.
While I was waiting behind the stand, for the first time, I heard a request
for Doctors inside the ground to cane forward. I witnessed the Police as
being silent and evidently subdued. The Ambulancemen took hold of the
situation more positively.

I left the ground because it was as much as I could take.

Just for the record, I believe we left in good time because my friend had been
to the previous year's semi-final. I did not drink any alcohol because I was
driving. Everything in this statement is, to the best of my knowledge, true,
and these events did happen as I saw them.
The Police video made at the ground will reveal my position, time and sequence
of events as recorded.



                                                                                 5
                                    -   4   -




En route to the ground from the car, I did not see any football supporters
intoxicated, any scenes of tension or any Nottingham Forest supporters.

I am of sound body and mind and I am in good health. I hold no prejudice
against the Police Force and have found them both helpful and courteous in
previous difficult situations.

Yours faithfully




                                                                             6
