                                                                                               M IR .15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                    Date and tim e raised                 Uh.M                  Num ber



T itle
                               ' 6 u \ie i
(Inclu d e source an d a n y dodukient     num ber H leievm n j     —                           I KSrf-l           . f.

Receiver's instructions - urgent action - Y es/N o (_ jj            Wh A'                    tA jf&f -J
  A                    fcft/s                                        fc^lg        i i i d u A J iql''              _                Receiver



                                                                                                                                  7^sQ. Indexer
D ocum ent registered/jjauloiegrl as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                                Statement Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions                                             'h   (

                                                                                                                                        Indexer
 Indexed as indicated

 No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                                 0 /M         SIO
 Examined - fu rth er action to be taken                          <>4-fc>^            ryjL                cM j t   ^ T fk   (
                                                                                                                   rH(


                                                                                                                                   &?Th$exer
 F urther action No(s)


 When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other Do cu m ent Master N um ber Form
                                        U\\&                 ________


.Jear
         I write to yon concerning the tragedy that occurred at Hillsborough last
Saturday afternoon.I have watched television,read ne'vspapers and listened to the radio.
         From the great sadness and anger that my wife and I felt as we walked from
Lepping Lane at 4 o'clock,we must now add bewilderment.lt seems that a number of people
are doing their best to deflect criticism.Factors have been brought into the arguments
which are totally irrelevant.Firstly,that the problem was caused by fans without tickets,
this is completely false,the fact is that the fans outside arrived late,probably through
no fault of their own,but having arrived they were not directed or controlled with safety
in mind.The police say that the fans would not accept direction,the problem was that the
   ice tried to direct the fans,hundreds of them,when they got to the turnstiles or within
ten yards of the turnstiles.They should have,for safety sake,have controlled the fans
further away.They were aware that people were arriving late - 4,000 fans do not just
anpear ,they could easily have been directed had the controlling body had decent
communications and decent organisation.If this had happened the whole situation would
never have occurred.
         To say that drink was a major factor,again is an attempt to pass the buck.There
isn't a match in the country were those who go to support don't have a drink of some kind.
■There was only one Pub open within miles of the ground,The Fox on Fox Hill Road.If you
asked the Landlord his opinion of the fans who came to his premises you would be proud
of them 91 was .My wife and I walked a mile to the Ground and with my hand on my heart I
can honestly say I saw no drunkeness or rowdy behaviour.
         I listened in horror to the remarks made by a so-called intelligent man,a man
who is a member of the Government o£ this country .Mr Irving Patnick,Conservative M.P.
for Sheffield Hallam6What is this man trying to do?Why is it that,as the only Conservative
K.P. in Sheffield,he was singled out by persons unknown to be priwy to this information.
I was there,he wasn't,I Know it didn't happen,he is merely passing on hearsay and he
should have more responsibility than that.
         Given that the police are in control of the crowds,how can they disclaim
responsibility for Saturday's disaster.800 uniformed officers,and they failed in their
duty .Many of them stood across the pitch at half-way and watched the tragedy unfold -
anc5. did nothing.They were,of course,ordered to d? so because those in charge,maybe Mr.
Dukinfield who had had the job for less than four weeks,had positioned them there because
he thought there was a pitch invasion.They stood there - hundreds of them for the best
part of an h^ur - doing nothing.Communication between the police inside and those outside
seems to be a major factor .Especially if the Nottinghamshire journalist who was with the
police communications experts is to be believed,he spoke of utter confusion and chaos .We
hear that a message to delay the start of the game was simply not passed on, even though
the safety of the fans outside was at stake .Mr. Marshall, who ordered the gate to be opened,
 opened/
i *
,did so with the "best intentions;but the problem was already formed because of the lack
 of organisation away from the turnstiles.This problem did not occur last yearIMr.Marshall
 could not have been in contact with those inside the ground or 3urely he would have had
 the rushing fans ushered to the areas on the Lepping Lane 3nd Terrace where there was space
 This of course was not done.
        It is clear to all and all to® clear to tl^e who were there on Saturday that the
 fences killed 95 innocent fans,remember that these fences were erected to control the
 fans,no thought was given to the safety of the fans;However the initial problem which
 caused the situation must be 3et at the door of the organisation of the 800 South
 Yorkshire Police#
        I find it so hard to write this letter,my memory holds nothing but Saturday
 afternoon,my thoughts are concerned with little else.Isit and weep for lost friends,my
 w' ' sits by the fire and weeps almost constantly.lt has had a profound affect on us both.
 Guilt is the worst thing,each thing we do,even having a meal,we are beset by guilt,
 because there are many who we saw die who cannot do these simple things we all take for
 granted.
                                                         *
            I was there,I know what I saw,Iknow where the fatilt lies,but I know there will be
 a dissipation of ‘blame and I know where the blame will be passed to .If it hadn’t been for
 the Liverpool ’animals* many more would have died.
        My thanks go out to all those who share the sadness of Saturday’s tragedy,we are
 not moronic drunks that rob our dead as Paul Middup would have you believe .Until fans
 are treated with dignity and looked upon as people who need to be considered when safety
 is thought of,the police will always view us as the enemy,people to be controlled as one
 would control cattle.




 c.Co Bt. Hon. Mrs. M. Thatcher,Prime Minister
      Rt<, Hon. Mr, C. Moynihan,Minister for Sport.
      P.t. Hon, Mr. J, Greenway,Member of Parliament for Ryedale
      The Yorkshire 2vening Press
      The Mai ton Gazette and Herald
      The Sheffield Star
      The Liverpool Daily Post and 3cho,
                                                                   York,


Sear $ r                                                             ---------
        /
           I vrrite to you concerning the tragedy that occurred at Hillsborough last
Saturday afternoon.I have rratehed television,read newspapers and listened to the radio.
           Prom the great sadness and anger that my vrife and I felt as we walked from
Lepping Lane at 4 o’clock,we must now add bewilderment.lt seems that a number of people
are doing their best to deflect criticism.Factors have been brought into the arguments
which are totally irrelevant.Firstly,that the problem was caused by fans without tickets,
this is completely false,the fact is that the fans outside arrived late,probably through
no fault of their own,but having arrived they were not directed or controlled with safety
in mind.Tne police say that the fans would not accept direction,the problem was that the
police tried to direct the fans,hundreds of them,when they got to the turnstiles or within
ten yards of the turnstiles.They should have,for safety sake,have controlled the fans
further away.They were aware that people were arriving late - 4»000        fans do   notjust
appear,they could easily have been directed had the controlling body had       decent
communications and decent organisation.If this had happened the whole situation would
never have occurred.
           To say that drink was a major factor,again is an attempt to pass the buck.There
isn11 a match in the country were those who go to support don* t have a drink of some kind.
There was only one Pub open within miles of the ground,The Fox on Fox Hill Road.If you
asked the Landlord his opinion of the fans who came to his premises you would be proud
of them, I was .My wife and I walked a mile to the Ground and with my   hand on      my heart I
can honestly say I saw no drunkeness or rowdy behaviour.
           I listened in horror to the remarks made by a so-called intelligent man,a man
who is a member of the Government of this country .Mr Irving Patnick, Conservative M.P.
for Sheffield Hallam.What is this man trying to do7T7hy is it that,as the only Conservative
M.P. in Sheffield,he was singled out by persons unknown to be priwy to this information.
I was there,he wasn't,I Know it didn't happen,he is merely passing on hearsay and he
should have more responsibility than that.
           Given that the police are in control of the crowds,how can they disclaim
responsibility for Saturday’s disaster.800 uniformed officers,and they failed in their
duty .Many of them stood across the pitch at half-way and watched the tragedy unfold -
arid did nothing.They were,of course,ordered to do so because those in charge,maybe Mr.
Dukinfield who had had the job for less than four weeks,had positioned them there because
he thought there was a pitch invasion.They stood there - hundreds of them for the best
part of an hour - doing nothing.Communication between the police inside and those outside
seems to be a major factor.Especially if the Nottinghamshire journalist who was with the
police communications esroerts is to be believed,he spoke of utter confusion and chaos.\7e
hear that a message to delay the start of the game was simply not passed on, even though
the safety of the fans outside was at stake.Mr. Marshall,who ordered the gate to be opened,
opened/

did so 'sd.th the best intentions;but the problem was already formed because of the lack
of*organisation away from the turnstiles.Thi? problem did not occur last yearlISr."arshall
could not have been in contact with those inside the ground or surely he would have had
the rushing fans ushered to the areas on the Lepping Lane 3nd Terrace where there Tras space.
This of course was not done.
          It is clear to all and all tco clear to tlfse who were there on Saturday that the
fences killed 95 innocent fans,remember that these fences were erected to control the
fans,no thought was given to the safety of the fans;Eowever the initial problem which
caused the situation must be set at the door of the organisation of the 800 South
Yorkshire Police 0
          I find it so hard to write this letter,my memory holds nothing but Saturday
afternoon,my thoughts are concerned with little else.Isit and weep for lost friends,ay
wife sits by the fire and weeps almost constantly.lt has bad a profound affect on us both.
'
<Guilt is the worst thing, each thing we do,even having a meal,we are beset by guilt,
because there are many who we saw die who cannot do these simple things we all take for
granted.
           I was there,I know what I saw,Iknow where the fault lies,but I know there will be
a dissipation of "blame and I know where the blame will be passed to.If it hadn't been for
 the Liverpool ’animals’ many more would have died.
          My thanks go out to all those who share the sadness of Saturday's tragedy,we are
 not moronic drunks that rob our dead as Paul Middup would have you believe .Until fans
 are treated with dignity and looked upon as people who need to be considered when safety
 is thought of,the police will always view us as the enemy,people-to be controlled as one
 would control cattle.




 c.c« Rt. Hon. Mrs. M. Thatcher,Prime Minister
      Ht0 Hon. Mr. C. Moynihan,Minister for Sport.
      P-t. Hon. Mr. J. Greenway,Member of Parliament for F.yedale
      The Yorkshire Evening Press
      The Malton Gazette and Herald
      The Sheffield Star
      The Liverpool Daily Post and 3cho.
J MERVYN JONES M Sc                                               FURNIVAL HOUSE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                         Furnival Gate
                                                                  Sheffield S1 4QN
 H IL L S B O R O U G H IN Q U IR Y T E A M
                                                                  Telephone: 0 7 4 2 727599

WEST M IDLANDS POLICE HQ                                          SM ITHDOW N LANE POLICE STATION
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                            Liverpool L7 3PR
Colmore Circus Queensway                                          Telephone: 051 -7 09 7190/7231
Birmingham B4 6NQ
Telephone: 0 21 -2 36 5000, extn. 202 5                           Your Ref:

NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
                                                                  Our Ref:    JMJ/DMD
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA
Telephone: 0 21 -3 59 333 2                                       Date:       5 July 1989




Dear

I have received your letter from the Liverpool Echo concerning the tragic
events at Hillsborough on Saturday 15 April 1989.

The contents of your letter have been of great interest to ray investigation
team.

If you have any further information please do not hesitate to contact my
investigation team at Nechells Green Police Station. Alternatively you may
write to the Secretary of the Inquiry below:-

    Mr R M Whalley
    Secretary to the Inquiry
    50 Queen A n n e ’s Gate
    London SW1H 9AT

Yours sincerely




J M Jones
Assistant Chief Constable




                                              Nechells Green Police Station
     PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
