                                                              PoL/y7j2/i\i

                                                                     R389




DENNIS ANTONY CERRONE



Detective Constable 2076



I am a Detective Constable in the South Yorkshire Police, presently

stationed at Woodseats Police Station.

At 8.00am (0800) on Saturday 15 April (15.04.89) I commenced duty at

Woodseats Police Station in uniform.     I was transported to the

stadium where upon arrival I attended the briefing in the North

Stand.    My duties were to work with serial 16 at the Leppings Lane

end of the ground.    After the briefing I saw Inspector Purdy to whan

I was responsible at the Leppings Lane end of the ground where he

outlined to the serial how the area would be policed.    The time was

about 11.15am.    For the next few hours I accompanied Inspector Purdy

in his supervisory inspections of the turnstiles at this end of the

ground.    (He instructed other officers to work in pairs).   We also

stepped and searched fans who were attending at the ground and

helped others with ticket and direction enquiries.

The fans attending were at this point good natured, offering sweets,

chips, pop etc and a good atmosphere prevailed.

During this period I had thought that more fans would be arriving

and it surprised me that greater numbers were not attending.        At

about 2.35 - 2.40pm (1435 - 1440) greater numbers did start to

attend and at this time I was standing inside the railings near to

Turnstile G.     The pressure started to build up in this area to G

between the railing and a blue concertina type door opposite me.         As

a result of this I was pushed up against the railing.     This caused

considerable discomfort and I slid underneath losing the railing to
protect myself from the pressure.     It was obvious that people were

in great distress in the crowd which continued to swell rapidly.

Inspector Purdy climbed on the railings and appealed to the crowd to

step pioshing as people were being crushed.    They either disregarded

him or did not hear him.     In any event the pressure continued to

mount.   People were shouting from the crowd to the Police to do

something.     I pulled people from the crush and as they came out they

said the same things "People are dying in there - do something."

They were gasping for air and holding their chests.     I began to fear

they were right and that people were not merely being injured and

frightened but crushed to death up against the turnstiles and the

gate opposite.

A young boy was passed over the top to the edges, I thought he was

dead, his arms were dangling like a doll's.     Fortunately, on taking

hold of him with other officers I saw signs of life and he was taken

to a First Aid Post.

People continued to cry for action saying "do something, do

something - people are dying 1"    I saw one elderly man just out of

arm's reach.     He appeared in great distress and was being swept

along in the tide of people.     The mood of the crowd was now

aggressive and fearful.     The situation was extremely dangerous.

People were also climbing over the gates and walls.

Near to the railing a young boy was being crushed against it with

his neck.     His face was red and he was crying and obviously

frightened.     I tried to take hold of him to pull him from the press.

His father shouted at me aggressively, "Fuck off - you’re not

ciiucking him out."    I tried to tell him his son was in danger and he

just said "Fuck off, we 're going in there."    He was agitated and
aggressive, his son was in great distress and I could not believe he

didn't want to come out from the press.    He must have seen the young

lad passed over earlier.

The pressure was still mounting, the people caning in the late rush

appeared to be the stereo-type 'beer swilling fan' obviously just

turned out of the pub.

At sane point I looked to ray left and saw Inspector Purdy, he was

making his way through the crush towards the outside gates.     He

signalled me to follow him.     I did but could not catch up with him

due to the great numbers of people and Police horses.     I saw him

talking to another nan.     I did not recognise him but saw his gold

braid on his hat.

After this, the gate to the side of the turnstile and at right

angles to them was opened.     I was thankful for this because I knew

it vrould relieve the pressure outside.   People ran towards this gate

to get in.     I pulled people out from the crush area and directed

them to the gate.    Almost all of them made the same ccrments -

"people are dying in there/people are being crushed in there.        Do

something, do something."     The pressure rapidly eased and I moved in

front of the gate shouting at people to walk in, not run.     After a

short while the gate was closed again and the pressure was greatly

eased.   I looked in to the crush area for any sign of injured people

but could see nothing.     At the outer gates people continued to

stream in.     It looked like it could build up again.   The gate at the

side was re-opened but this time barriers and a mounted policeman

were in position.     I again started to pull people out of the crush

area and direct them to the gate but this time they were entering in

single file.     They were more orderly but still complaining that
people ware being crushed.    They held their tickets aloft as they

went through the gate.     I do not know if the counterfoils were

taken.

It was at this time, which I think was around 3.00pm (1500) that I

saw the gate opposite open up.     I did not see any sudden rush

through the gate, but the area was still packed.      I looked into the

area inside the turnstiles between the gates and the stand

entrances.     I do not recall seeing masses of people.   I then heard a

message over saneones radio saying "all personnel to the playing

area, all personnel to the playing area."      I saw Policemen running

to the right of the stand to a passage which leads on to the pitch.

When I went on to the pitch I saw people sitting on the pitch, my

inmediate reaction was that it was a pitch invasion in protest at

the conditions outside.

As I walked to the goalmouth a Policeman said to me "There are

people dead down there."     I was shocked.   I could not believe it.

As I approached I could see people being pulled through the gates at

the front.     I could not get to the front of the fence to assist

because of other officers.     An officer shouted, it appeared to be

anyone who was listening "Go round the back to the tunnel and get

the crcwd out."     I went along with other officers to the entrance

tunnel.   I saw Inspector Sykes there and other officers, I went to

the front of the terraces and took hold of a large man on the

ground.   He appeared to me to be dead, it was a shock.      New I had to

accept the worse.

With other officers and fans I carried him back to the gate at

Leppings Lane where I saw an ambulance.       I do not know who the

officer was.     I took him to the crew and left him in their car and
returned to the terraces.    I recovered another body with other

officers, to the Leppings lane end again.

Whilst moving one of the bodies, a fan pushed his face to mine

whilst I was holding the body, waving a ticket around and shouting

"I want my fucking money back.    What about that."   He was hysterical

and extremely aggressive the way he was shouting.     I ignored him and

carried on with the body.    He was so selfish and insensitive - the

type who I believe caused the disaster.

I returned again and went through the gate at the front, on to the

pitch to assist with the injured.     I saw men and women laid out on

the pitch in various states - dead, dying, injured.     They all had

officers or ambulance men with them.     I decided to clear the area of

walking wounded and others who were not injured to make room for

ambulances which were starting to arrive.

The fans on the pitch were in a mixed state of shock, anger,

frustration, grief and most disturbing was a number who were looking

to start fights with the Police.    Again I thought they were the kind

who caused this.    These were to a large extent restrained by their

cwn people.

The stewards I saw before the disaster appeared to be doing a normal

job.     However, I have not worked a big football match for several

years.     The bodies I handled were both taken frcm the Leppings lane

terrace to the exit near to Turnstile G.     The bodies were left with

an ambulance crew whilst I returned to the terraces.

One of these bodies was a white male with a moustache, about 30'ish

with a large beer belly.     I cannot describe the other body.

My recollection of seme of my actions and those who were around me,

is sometimes vague because after realising the enormity of the
disaster I appeared to be drifting in and out of reality.      I could

not believe the rows of bodies were really there and that things

would soon be back to normal.     Then it would hit me that it was real

and I would try to assist the injured and those helping them.

Shouts frcm the fans of "Will the match be played" and "What will

happen new."     "They're not all dead are they?"   added to the

unreality.     I was angry with the ones who appeared to be thinking

only of themselves or the match being played, or blaming the Police,
                    »


or blaming people without tickets - anyone but themselves and their

own actions.     These were the same type of person who had arrived

late outside.    My instincts told me they were the type of people

whose attitude was "I'm going to drink in the pub until the last

minute.   I'm going to get in without queuing.      I'm going to stand

exactly where I want.     Hard lines for anyone else."

In my opinion the decision to open the gates was a correct one and I

am sure it was correctly arrived at.     Whoever took the decision was

right to take it.

If it had not been taken I am convinced that there would still be an

inquiry taking place, this time to see why people were killed

outside the ground.

People who attend situations like football matches or any other

activity, must accept responsibility for their own actions.        They

cannot merely say "Why didn't we have the kop end?"       "Why weren’t

there more gates?"      "Why wasn't the match delayed?"   "Why weren't

the Police there to step me?"     or any other excuse.

I later attended the de-brief and was ordered back to Woodseats with

my colleagues.
