OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                Date and time raised   _   n/i /9o             Number
                                                                                                           /D

Title
                                                                                                IfliACi^               |/^(r// ^
(Include source and any document number if relevant)                                                  ~T~. tu f^L cJck


Receiver’s instructions - ■ ^jrgent action - Y ^ N o
                                                                                                                    Receiver
_______________ V                       V   Q-^Uo      IamSL   Cft_jJl
_______________£L            (x^r
                                                                                                                    Indexer
Document registered/jpeWxed as irfdieatSa

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                    Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined     further action to be taken




Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
           VG*a > —
                                      s-*\«*»«.,   {
                                       CJ ^




                                                       I M

      'l\L ^

                 ^ A H ,^




      \ ^*t£Lhsx~£.—      f'~G__'\•                    v :




:i;
        V i ! * v V . Vl^flVx




                                                             C l" t ' v
                                                                  l+M?P
0           LfLS~ Oxy^       ^ OT-aj




< ©   Cs&~&>    A > 0 ejf.   \"o

      Cc_      S .'ff.

£> WLe          .
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY


17 NOVEMBER 1989




REPORT OF THE CHIEF CONSTABLE


ACTIONS OF THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE FOLLOWING THE
PUBLICATION OF LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INTERIM REPORT


1.    Introduction

1.1   In the wake of the disaster which occurred at Hillsborough Stadium,
       Sheffield, on 15 April 1989, a Public Inquiry was commissioned to enquire
       into the events and to make recommendations about the needs of crowd
       control and safety at sports events.     The Inquiry was chaired by Lord
       Justice Taylor and it sat from 15 May until 1A July 1989.

1.2   Lord Justice Taylor published his Interim Report on A August    1989,  in
       which he made A3 interim recommendations.  He emphasised that these were
       designed to prevent overcrowding and crushing on terraced areas in the
       short term, and that long term recommendations fell to be considered in
       his Final Report. A copy of the recommendations is appended.


2.     Implementation of Recommendations

2.1   The recommendations contained in Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report
       included many which were already identified as necessary in the light of
       the events at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989.   The South Yorkshire Police
       were therefore well prepared to ensure that they were swiftly implemented
       at the five football league grounds in the County.

2.2    The Chief Constable nominated Mr P Hayes QPM LLB MA,        Deputy Chief
      Constable, to liaise personally with the management of each football club
      and with each local authority concerned in respect of future crowd
      safety.   Mr Hayes met with directors and secretaries of all five South
      Yorkshire   football   league   clubs on 2A August      1989    and  with
      representatives of the four local authorities on 18 September 1989.

2.3    To progress the recommendations of the Taylor. Report the Deputy Chief
      Constable appointed an 'Implementation Team' which included the local
      ground commanders who have a responsibility for policing each of the five
      football league clubs in the County,       and officers with specialist
      knowledge in such areas as communications,   CCTV and training.   The team
      has met under the Deputy Chief Constable's chairmanship on seven
      occasions since A August 1989 and each of the recommendations which
      places a responsibility with the police has been implemented at all
      football league grounds.   Those recommendations which were asterisked by
      Lord Justice Taylor,     signifying their immediate need,       were each
      implemented by 18 August - just two weeks after the publication of the
      Taylor Report and before the start of the current league programme.
      Furthermpre,  it is pleasing to be able to report that, with the positive
      co-operation   of   the football clubs,      signed   written   agreements
                                         -   2   -


7
          between   the clubs and the police,       setting out    their   respective
          responsibilities for crowd safety, have been drawn up.

    2.A   The   South   Yorkshire  Police have also addressed      the remaining
          recommendations for which they are not directly responsible. A report
          concerning these matters has been forwarded to each of the local
          authorities who have a responsibility for safety certification at
          football grounds.

    2.5   A copy of each written agreement together with a summary of the action
          taken on all relevant recommendations in relation to that football ground
          is appended.


    3.    The Responsibilities of the Local Authorities for Safety at
           Sports Grounds                                                     - •

    3.1   Any local authority within whose area there exists a sportsstadium
          designated under the Safety at Sports Grounds Act 1975 (as amended) is
           responsible for the issue of a Safety Certificate in respect of that
           stadium.   Each of the local authorities of Rotherham,      Barnsley and
           Doncaster have a responsibility for one football league ground, Sheffield
           has a responsibility for two.

    3.2   The certifying authorities are called upon by the Taylor Report        to
           immediately review each Safety Certificate,    ensure that the operative
           conditions of the Certificate are complied with,  then add or substitute
           any condition shown to be necessary by the findings and recommendations
           of the Taylor Report.

    3.3   The centrally directed police 'Implementation Team1 has achieved as much
           as it can by independent action.       The local authorities in South
           Yorkshire, which each have a responsibility under the Safety of Sports
           Grounds Act,   have been provided with a comprehensive report of what the
           police have so far achieved.     Where it has not been possible    for the
           South   Yorkshire   Police   to fully     implement   any   recommendation
           unilaterally,   proposals are offered to the responsible certifying
           authority of how the recommendation might be progressed.


    A.    Increased Costs for Policing Football Matches

    A .1 Several of the recommendations in the Interim Report of Lord Justice
         Taylor impose additional duties upon the police at football matches.   For
          example,  (i) the deployment of police officers,     to each gate in a
          perimeter fence,  authorised to decide whether or not to allow spectators
          through a gate to relieve overcrowding;      (ii) the deployment of a
          reserve of police officers to each match who are not committed to any
          specific duty and are therefore able to deal with any unforeseen
          difficulties which arise inside or outside the ground;   and,  (iii) the
          deployment of a sufficient number of skilled operators in the police
          control room to enable all radio transmissions to be received,  evaluated
          and answered and to enable all the results of CCTV recording outside and
          inside the ground to be monitored and interpreted.

    A.2 It is obvious from the implementation of these three recommendations
         alone that the cost of policing football matches will be greater than
         ever before.




I
                                      - 3 -

A.3    Members will be aware that a proportion of policing costs is met by the
       football clubs themselves.     At present the financial contribution is
       determined by reference to a sliding scale of charges agreed annually
       between the Police Authority,  the Chief Constable and each of the clubs,
       based upon a prior estimate of crowd size for a particular game.   In the
       two seasons   1987/88 and 1988/89 the total cost of policing the five
       football clubs in South Yorkshire,  both inside and outside the grounds,
       amounted to some £1.83 million and, of this figure, the clubs contributed
       £398,000 which amounts to 22% of the overall cost.

A.A    In the light of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations many Police
       Authorities are now reassessing the charges levied on football clubs for
       special police services.

A.5    The facility to charge for police officers in these circumstances is
       provided by Section 15 of the Police Act 196A, which enables the -Chief
       Constable,  at his discretion,  to provide,  on request, special police
        services at any premises or in any locality in the police area.    The
        section further empowers the Police Authority to charge for these
        services.

A.6    There is no precise definition of the term 'special police services'  but
       the case of Harris -v- Sheffield United Football Club 1986 held that the
       Chief Constable is not, as part of his normal policing responsibility,
       obliged to provide officers to react to potential breaches of the peace
       where the owner of private property creates such a risk on his property.

A.7    It would seem,  therefore, that officers provided to meet such a risk, as
       in the case of a football match, are within the meaning of special police
       services and can be charged for.      Indeed,  Police Authorities have a
       fiduciary duty to the ratepayers of their area to make such charges.

A.8    The Harris case,    however, does not fully resolve which officers can be
       regarded as performing special police services.     It held that the fact
       that officers were deployed on private property was significant in
        tending to show their provision amounted to special police services, but
       did not deal with the question of officers deployed to perform duties
        outside the ground - duties that arise directly from the event which is
        occurring inside the ground.   Legal opinion has,  therefore, been sought
        for clarification as to which duties performed by police officers at
        football matches can properly be regarded as 'special police services'

 A.9 Notwithstanding the question of payment for police deployment outside
      football grounds it is submitted that the level of contribution from the
      clubs presently falls significantly short of the actual cost of officers
      inside the ground, and that the shortfall is set to widen in the light of
      the Taylor recommendations which necessitate an increase in the number of
      police officers deployed at football matches.


 5.    Criminal Investigation of South Yorkshire Police Officers

 5.1    During   thecourse of the Hillsborough Inquiry          the question of
        manslaughter by the criminal negligence     of SouthYorkshire Police
        officers was    raised by counsel for the bereaved, Mr Benet Hytner Q C .

 5.2    Because this matter was not dealt with in the Report of the Hillsborough
        Inquiry the Chief Constable,  on the morning of the Report's publication,
        referred it   to the Director of Public Prosecutions,     asking for his
decision on the question of criminal liability of any member of the South
Yorkshire Police.    It was considered appropriate,   at that time,    to
suspend from duty the police commander of the Hillsborough event, Chief
Superintendent David Duckenfield,  pending the outcome of the Director's
deliberations.   Mr Duckenfield remains suspended.

On 15 August 1989, the Director wrote to the Chief Constable setting out
his view that the matter should be subject of a full            criminal
investigation.   The West Midlands Police had already done considerable
work in gathering evidence for Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry.  It seemed
sensible,  therefore,  to invite Mr Geoffrey Dear QPM DL LLB, Chief
Constable of the West Midlands Police Force,         to undertake   this
investigation.   His report,   in due course, will be submitted to the
Director of Public Prosecutions.


Matters of Complaint and Discipline

Additionally, the Chief Constable has asked that if, during the course of
their investigation,   the West Midlands Police officers discover any
matters which might suggest that offences were committed against the
Police (Discipline) Regulations, of a non-criminal nature, those offences
should be brought to his attention and, where appropriate, be enquired
into by the West Midlands Police on behalf of the South Yorkshire Police.
This is agreed.

There  are currently seven matters of public complaint about the actions
of South Yorkshire Police officers,      arising from the Hillsborough
incident.

Three   of these matters have been raised by a single complainant.    Two
relate to the actions of the senior officers in command of the policing
operation at Hillsborough on the day and these are being supervised by
Captain E Noel Taylor of the Police Complaints          Authority.    The
investigation of these complaints is being conducted by Mr Geoffrey Dear,
Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police,    along with the criminal
matters. The third complaint is of incivility and is being investigated,
unsupervised by the Police Complaints Authority, by Superintendent Ashton
of the South Yorkshire Police.

A fourth complaint is that an officer at the perimeter fence contributed
to the death of the complainant's son by his failure to open the fence
gate in good time.

A fifth complaint is that the failure by South Yorkshire Police officers
to open perimeter fence gates caused the complainant to sustain injury.

A sixth complaint is made by a man who alleges that he was assaulted by a
police officer whilst attending the football match.

These  latter three cases are again to be investigated by Mr Dear's team
and are likewise being supervised by Captain E Noel Taylor of the Police
Complaints Authority.

There is a seventh complaint of corruption,   namely of police officers
offering to allow fans into the ground on payment.   This complaint is
being investigated by Superintendent Carlisle of the Greater Manchester
Police.
                                     - 5 -

7.    Coroner's Inquest Regarding the 95 Deaths Which Arose

7.1   The    gathering of evidence on behalf of HM Coroner,          Dr   Stefan
      Popper LLB      BMedSci BM BS MRCGP, in relation to the 95 deaths     that
       occurred at Hillsborough, is continuing by the West Midlands Police.

7.2   The Coroner opened the inquests on 19/20 April 1989, and adjourned them
       to a date to be fixed.      He had set aside three months to hear the
       inquests beginning in January 1990.     I understand, however, that the
       Director of     Public Prosecutions has recently written to Dr Popper
       requesting that the inquests be deferred until after the results of the
       on-going criminal investigation are concluded.


8.    Civil Actions

8.1   To date eight writs have been served upon the South      Yorkshire Police
       alleging negligence by its officers on 15 April 1989,   leading to loss,
       injury, damage and, in two cases, death.

8.2   The writs are to be defended by the Police Authority's insurers,
       Municipal Mutual Insurance Company.  It is understood that three of these
       actions will be representative actions.

8.3   The presiding Northern Circuit Judge, Mr Justice Rose, has taken personal
       charge of the interlocutory proceedings.      At a Directions Hearing on
       26 October 1989 at the High Court in Manchester Mr Justice Rose set the
       date for commencement of the civil actions for     June 1990.    At that
       hearing Mr    Justice Rose expressed     his satisfaction regarding thework
       done by all parties to the claims to achieve a state of readiness     for
       trial.


9.    The Effects of the Hillsborough Disaster on the Health
      and Welfare of the Force

9.1   Twenty-three officers reported injuries sustained in the rescue of people
      from the Leppings Lane terraces.  These injuries were, in the main, minor
      strains and bruising to backs and limbs.

9.2   A total of 58 officers subsequently took sick leave which was directly
      attributable to the disaster in the weeks which followed the event,
      mainly due to the effects of shock and stress. As a result, 356 working
      days were lost.

9.3   Two officers remain on sick leave, suffering from stress, one of whom may
      well retire from the Force on the grounds of ill-health in the near
      future.

9.A   During week ending 23 April 1989 - the week immediately following the
      disaster - only 92 officers had taken sick leave,   compared with 101 in
      the corresponding week in 1988.     The figure rose to a maximum of 1A3
      officers taking sick leave during week ending 30 April 1989, compared
      with 107 in 1988.    By week ending 21 May 1989,  however,  the number of
      officers taking sick leave had fallen to 105 which corresponded,
      identically, with the same period in 1988.

9.5   Any effects that the Hillsborough disaster had upon the health and
      welfare of the Force appear, largely, to have been short lived. It is
                                    -   6   -




      thought that this is, to a significant extent, due to the efforts of the
      Force Welfare Officer and our Consultant Counsellor who started their
      work at the ground within hours of the tragedy occurring.   The memories
      of the disaster,   and the emotions evoked by it, will remain with many
      officers for a long time.   The Force as a whole, however,  has adjusted
      w el l.


10.   Recommended

10.1 The   Police   Authority note the efforts made       to   implement   the
     recommendations of the Interim Report of Lord Justice Taylor,  insofar as
     they relate to the police.

10.2 The Police Authority accept,  in principle,  the need to review in detail
     and, if necessary,    re-negotiate the basis for recovering the costs of
     providing special police services to the football clubs in South
     Yorkshire.

10.3 The Police Authority note that the relevant       local authorities are
     responsible for the implementation of any outstanding recommendations,
     and for the enforcement of new or existing conditions of the Safety
     Certificate issued in respect of each football stadium.

10.A The Police Authority note the progress of the on-going         criminal
     investigation,  the civil litigation and the Coroner's Inquiry arising
     from the disaster at Hillsborough. Further reports will be submitted in
     due course.       ;




P Wright
Chief Constable
        D O C U M E N T    ( 1)




COPY OF CHAPTER 24 OF THE TAYLOR REPORT

          THE RECOMMENDATIONS
                                   C H A P T E R 24- T H E R E C O M M E N D A T I O N S

  315. T h e re c o m m endations which follow are the m in im u m necessary' to ensure that existing football
grounds can for the present be safely used, based upon the evidence which 1 have heard at Sheffield and other
inform ation 1 have received. They c o m plem ent the re c om m endations which M r Justice Poppie'.vell set ou;
after his inquiry at Bradford.

   316. T hose which are asterisked should be carried out before the 1989/90 season starts. T he rest should be
started forthwith a n d com pleted as socn as possible.

M axim um Capacities for Terraces
★        1. W here a viewing terrace is divided into pens or areas which are self-contained, the Safer)- Certificate
       should specif}' the maximum number of spectators to be admitted to each such pen or area.

       A pen or area is to be deemed “ self-contained’'' notwithstanding th at it has a gate or gates affording access to
       another pen or a re a a n d w hether such gate or gates be open or shut.                                      *- •

★       2. Each figure for maximum capacity should be assessed in accordance with C hapter 16 of the Green
       Guide (“ the Green Guide figure” ) subject to the following qualifications:-

       (a) in arriving at "th e Green Guide figure", proper and realistic allowance must be made for all factors
           which should reduce the permissible densirv in accordance with the range of maximum figures specified
           in paragraphs 221 and 222 of the Green Guide:

       (b) after assessing “ the Green Guide figure", a deduction of 15?'o shouid be made to improve the safety
           margin.

★        3. A rrangem ents should be m aae:-

       (a) to limit the number of spectators entering each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capaciry
           figure assessed in accordance with Recommendation 2 above either electronically, mechanically, by a
           ticketing arrangem ent, by counting or otherwise, and

       (b) to close off further access to sucn pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.


Filling and Monitoring Terraces
★     4. There should be a written agreement between the club and the police setting out their respective
       responsibilities for crowd saferv and control and in particular for the filling of each self-contained pen or
       other terraced area and the monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding. Any
       variation of the agreem ent in respect of an individual match should be agreed in writing in advance.

★      " 5. At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained pen or other terraced
       area, a steward (if the club is monitoring th a t area) or a police officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose
       sole duty is to check crowd conditions in th a t area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the
       period the area is occupied by spectators. W hoever is so appointed should be in addition to any other steward
       or police presence. H e should have ready access to the police officer authorised under Recommendation 9
       below, and by radio to the control room.


    Fences and Gates
         6.     All police officers and stewards w-ith duties in relation to the terraced areas and especially those with
       duties under Recommendation 5 above, should be fully briefed and trained with regard to the recognition of
       crowd densities, to the recognition of signs of distress and to crowd dynamics. T raining should include
       dem onstrations at the ground and photographs, designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise
       different crowd densities.

★        7. All gates in radial or perimeter fences of pens or other self-contained areas should be painted in a
       different colour from the rest of the fence and marked “ Emergency Exit” .
★             8. W here there are perimeter fences, all pates to the pitch should he kept fully open during the period
            w hen spectators are on the terrace.

★             9. T here should be in respect of each gate in a perimeter fence (or group of pates if they are close together)
            a police officer authorised to decide whether or not to allow spectators throuph a pate to relieve overcrowding.
            The officer so authorised in respect of each gate should be identified for each match and know n to be so by all
            stewards and police officers in that vicinity. H e should be able to make radio contact with the control room
            either himself or via an officer close at hand.

★             10. Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be provided by the clul> at each ground where there
            are perimeter fences to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release numbers of spectators if
            necessary. Agreement should be reached as to whether the equipment should be used by police, the fire
            brigade or stewards. Whoever is to use it should be trained to do so. W hether to use it should be a decision of a
            nominated senior police officer at the ground.


    Crush Barriers
    ★          11. All crush barriers should be visually inspected immediately for signs of corrosion. Any harrier found
            to be affected by a significant degree of corrosion should he repaired or replaced.

    ★         12. T he layout of barriers in each pen or terraced area should be reviewed immediately to ensure that it
            complies w ith the criteria contained in C hapter 9 of the Green Guide. If it does not. the assessment of the
            maximum capacity figure for that pen or terraced area, in accordance with Recommendation 2 above, should
            reflect the fact.


    Safety Certificates
              13. T here should be an immediate review of each Safery Certificate hy the responsible local authority,
            which should consult the club in respect of which the Certificate is issued, the police, the fire service, the
            ambulance s e n ice and the building authority. Such a review should include an inspection of the stadium. Its
            object should be to ensure that the operative conditions of the Certificate are complied with and to add or
            substitute any condition shown to be necessary as a matter of urgency following the Findings and
            recommendations in this report.

               14. Any local authority within whose area there exists a sports stadium designated under the 1975 Act for
             which no Safety Certificate has yet been issued should proceed forthwith to remedy the situation.

               15. Every Safety Certificate should be reviewed by the local authority at least once annually and each
             Certificate should require to be renewed annually.


                16. Each local authority should review its arrangem ents for issuing, monitoring, enforcing, review ing,
             amending and renew ing Safety Certificates. Such review should require th at there exists or is provided an
             accountable administrative structure whereby the functions of the local authority are regularly and
             effectively supervised by senior officers and elected members and decisions are properly taken in accordance
             with the local authority's rules.

                17. To assist the local authority in exercising its functions, it should set up an Advisory Group consisting
             of appropriate members of its own staff, representatives of the police/of the fire and ambulance services, of
             the building authority, of the club and of a recognised supporters' club. T he Advisory Group's terms of
             reference should encompass all matters concerned w ith crowd safety and should require regular visits to the
             ground and attendance at matches. T he Advisory Group should have a chairm an from the local authority,
             and an effective procedure. Its resolutions should be recorded and it should be required to produce regular
             written reports for consideration by the local authority.


        Duties of each Football Club
        ★       18. Each turnstile should be inspected and its potential rate of flow measured. Thereafter, regular
              inspections should be made to ensure th a t each turnstile rem ains capable of admitting spectators at the rate
              anticipated.
★         19. T he correlation between each viewing area in the stadium and the turnstiles serving it should be such
        as to ensure that all the spectators intended to be admitted to th a t viewing area can pass through the
        turnstiles within one hour. If th at cannot be done, the capacirv of that viewing area should be reduced
        accordingly.

★         20. Turnstiles should be closed when the permitted capaciry of the area served by them is about to be
        reached and arrangem ents should be made to ensure quick and effective communication with turnstile
        operators for this purpose.

          21. Closed circuit television should be so installed as to enable crowd densities outside the ground, within
        concourse areas and in pens and other standing areas, to be monitored before and throughout a match.

★         22. All signposting for spectators both outside and inside the ground should be comprehensively
        reviewed. It should, in relation to the arrangem ents for each match, be unambiguous, eye-catching, simple
        and clear and should be designed to ensure the rapid movement of spectators to their appropriate viewing
        area.

          23. Information on tickets should be unambiguous, simple and d e a r and should correlate absolutely with
        the information provided in respect of each match both outside and inside the ground. Retained ticket stubs
        should contain information necessary to guide spectators once inside the ground.

★        24. Information on tickets requesting spectators to be in position by a particular time snouid be reviewed
        by clubs in conjunction with the police to ensure th at it corresponds with the planned arrangem ents for
        admitting spectators to the ground.

          25. Each club should consult with a recognised supporters' club as to the provision of pre-match
        entertainm ent aimed at attracting spectators to the ground in good time.


Police Planning
    ★    26. T he C hief Constable of each police force in whose area there is one designated stadium or more
        should nominate a chief officer to liaise with the management of each football club and local authority
        concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.

    ★     27. The O perational O rder for each match at a designated stadium and the pre-match briefing of all
        officers on dun- there should alert such officers to the importance of preventing any overcrowding and. if any
        is detected, of taking appropriate steps to remedy it.

    ★    28. T h e O perational O rder for each match at a designated stadium should enable the police to cope with
        any foreseeable pattern in the arrival of spectators at a match and in their departure. It should provide for
        sufficient reserves to enable rapid deployment of officers to be made at any point inside or outside the ground.

    ★    29. T he option to postpone kick-off shouid be'in the discretion of the officer in command at the ground.
        Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration in deciding whether to exercise it.
                                                                     >
           30. T here should be available in the police control room the results of all closed circuit television
        monitoring outside and inside the ground and the record of any electronic or mechanical counting of numbers
        at turnstiles or of numbers admitted to any area of the ground. Officers in the control room should be skilled
        in the interpretation and use of these data.


    Communications
          31. T here should be sufficient operators in the police control room to enable all radio transm issions to be
        received, evaluated and answered. T he radio system should be such as to give operators in the control room
        priority over, and the capacity to override, others using the same channel. Additional channels should be
        used, where necessary, to prevent overcrowding of the airwaves. Consideration should be given to
        sound-proofing the control room against excessive crow d noise.




                                                            59
           3_. To complement radio communications, there should be a completely separate sy stem of land lines
         with telephone links between the control room and key points at the ground.

           33. N\ithin the control room, there should be a public address system to communicate with individual
         areas outside and inside the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole ground. Important
         announcements should be preceded by a loud signal to catch the attention of the crowd despite a high level of
         noise in the ground. T his arrangem ent should be prominently advertised on everv programme sold for even
         match.

                Use should be made where possible of illuminated advertising boards to address the crowd.
         Consideration should also be given to the use by police officers of a simple code of hand signals to indicate to
         the control room the existence of certain emergencies or requirements.


    Co-ordination of Emergency Services
    ★     ^ 35. T h e policc. fire and ambuiance services should maintain through senior nominated officers regular
         liaison concerning crow d safety at each stadium.

    ★     36. Before each m atch at a designated stadium, the police should ensure that the fire service and
        ambulance service are given full details about the event, including its venue, its timing, the number of
        spectators expected, their likely routes of entry and exit, and any anticipated or potential difficulties
        concerning the control or movement of the crowd. Such details should be readily available in tbe control
        rooms of each of the emergency services.

★               Contingency plans for the arrival at each designated stadium of emergency vehicles from all three
        services should be reviewed. They should include routes of access, rendezvous points, and accessibility
        w ithin the ground itself.

★         38. Police officers posted at the entrances to the ground should be briefed as to the contingency pians for
        the arrival of emergency services and should be informed when such services are called as to where and whv
        they are required.


First Aid, M edical Facilities and Ambulances
★         39. T here should be at each stadium at each match at least one trained first aider per 1.000 spectarors. Tbe
        club should have the responsibility for securing such attendance.

          40. T here should be at each stadium one or more first aid rooms. The number of such rooms and the
        equipment to be m aintained within them should be specified by the local authoriry after takin c professional
        medical advice and should be made a requirement of any Safery Certificate.

★         41. The club should employ a medical practitioner to be present at each match and available to deal with
        any medical exigency at the ground. H e should be trained and competent in advanced first aid. H e should be
        present at the ground at least an hour before kick-off and should remain until half an hour after the end of the
        match. H is whereabouts should be known to those in the police control room and he should be im m eaiateh
        contactable.

★         42. At least one fully equipped ambulance from the appropriate ambulance authoriry should be in
        attendance at all m atches with an expected crow d of 5.000 or more.

          43. T he number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches w here larger crowds are expected should
        be specified by the local authoriry after consultation with the ambulance service and should be made a
        requirement of the Safety Certificate.




                                                           60
                ACTION TAKEN BY

          THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE PO L IC E

IN RESPECT OF SHEFFIE LD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB

       FOLLOWING THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF

              THE INTERIM REPORT

                        OF

              LORD J U S T IC E TAYLOR
  .s document is a written agreement between South Yorkshire Police (hereafter

referred to as   '^he Police') and Sheffield   Wednesday Football Club (hereafter

referred to as   'The Club').




This agreement signed on behalf of both parties is created in pursuance of

recommendation   four of the Interim Report of the Inquiry held by   The Rt Hon

Lord Justice Taylor   into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster of 15   April 1989.




The agreement between The Police and The Club is as follows:-




Maximum Capacities for Terraces

The Club will be responsible for limiting the number of spectators entering

each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity figure assessed in

accordance with recommendation two of the Interim Report.




The Club will do this by means of the computerised system which records the

number of persons passing through each turnstile.




The Club will inform the police control room when a particular pen or area is

approaching capacity.   The Club will be responsible for closing off further

access to a per. or area when its maxinrjr capacity is about to be reachec.       The

Police accept The Club may on occasions have difficulties in this regard,

therefore. The Police will provide assistance if necessary.




The Police accept that denial of access to any part of the ground may create

public order problems in respect -of spectators so excluded and The Police will

prepare contingency plans to deal with such situations.




Pilling and Monitoring Terraces

The Club will provide on the perimeter track a steward for each pen or

terraced area during such times that there are spectators m      that pen or
 r erraced   area.    The sole duty of these stewards, who will be in addition to

 any other stewards employed by The Club, will be to check crowd conditions in

 the pen or terraced area to which they are assigned for possible overcrowding

 or distress.        The Club will provide The Police with a plan of the ground

  showing where the stewards with this responsibility will be situated.




  The Police will provide in respect of each gate in the perimeter fence (or

  group of gates if they are close together) police officers authorised to              „ .

  decide whether or not to allow spectators through .a gate to relieve

     overcrowding.


••   All police officers deployed at perimeter gates which will be kept fully open

     at all times when spectators are on the terraces, will be authorised as above

     Each will be in possession of a police radio in direct contact with police

     ground control and will be identifiable by a distinctive coloured tabard.




     The stewards checking the crowd for overcrowding or distress will not be

     issued with police radios but the police officers on the gates and per-meter

     track will communicate to police ground control any relevant matter brought to

     their attention by these stewards.




     Cutting Equipment

      The Club will provide and make readily available suitable and s u f n c i e n t

      cutting equipment to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release

      numbers of spectators if necessary.      This cutting equipment will be operated

      by employees of The Club who will be trained in its use.        The use of such

      equipment will be at the discretion of the nominated senior police office* who

      will be the officer in charge of policing the event.
    Before each match both parties to this agreement will liaise in respect of the

    following matters:-

         i)   the anticipated number of spectators expected having regard

               to the separate supporter groups;




        ii)   the method of crowd segregation (if any) intended to be used;




       iii)   any information in relation to crowd problems;




       .iv)   the number and location of turnstiles to be made available
   >
               to each group;




         v)   an estimation of the time it will take each group to pass

               through the turnstiles;




        vi)   where tickets are used,    that the information on those tickets

               corresponds with the planned arrangements for admitting

               spectators to the ground.



*^ • Postponement
       -          of kick-off is at the discretion o: the police oificer in command

    at the ground.    It is therefore essential The Club provide a telephone link

    between the referee's room and the police control room.'




    The Police have prepared contingency plans for the event of emergency services

    being called to the ground.   These include routes of access, rendezvous

    points,   accessibility within the ground and routes of egress.   The Police will

    liaise with The Club concerning these arrangements whenever these plans are

    amended or as otherwise appropriate.
    Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police has nominated his Deputy

Mr peter Hayes QP.M LLB HA, as the Chief Officer with responsibility fo

liaison with the management of each football club and local authority

concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.




Any variation of this agreement in respect of a particular match will

agreed by the parties in advance in writing.




SIGHEI                            . on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday
                                    Football Club




SIGNED                            on behalf of South Yorkshire Police




DATE     Mo   - -a -   \°'-zscn
RBCOMENDATION 1


It    is noted    by the police that        the current     Safety Certificate for

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club has been amended to reflect the new

capacities of all standing areas as follows


Spion Kop                                      16,800

North West Terrace - Upper Level                2,300

North West Terrace - Lower Level                  680


(It is further noted that the Safety Certificate prohibits spectators

from standing on the West Stand, Leppings Lane, terraces.)



RECCMyiENDftTICM 2


The     calculation        for   maximum      capacities,     proposed      by      this

recommendation, has been followed in determining the figure for each

terraced area recorded above.



RECOMMENDATION 3


(a) An electronic counting system is in place at              Sheffield Wednesday's

      ground     whereby   the   number    of spectators      entering    each   self-

      contained area is contemporaneously recorded.



      The club has undertaken          (see written agreement) to monitor this

      counter and to limit       the number of spectators entering any self-

      contained     area    to   the     maximum capacity     figure     assessed    in

      accordance with Recontnendation 2 above.




(b) i<he d u b will achieve this by closing off the relevant turnstiles

      to prevent further access to such an area when its maximum capacity

      is about to be reached.          The police have agreed to assist the club

      in this regard, if requested so to do.
REXX^MENDATION 4

A written agreement, setting out their respective responsibilities for crc**}
safety and control, has been approved and signed by representatives of South
Yorkshire Police and Sheffield Wednesday FC.

A copy of that agreement is attached at document (6).


RECOWENDATION 5




At each match at Sheffield Wednesday's ground there are stewards

situated on the perimeter track at the Spion Kop end of the ground

whose sole duty is to check crowd conditions in that area for possible

overcrowding        or distress.          The   stewards regularly perform the same

duties,   as do the police officers authorised under Reccmrendation 9

below.       The    parties    are   therefore        familiar to each other,           and the

 stewards have ready access to these police officers who each have a

 radio giving them contact with the police control rocm.



 RECOrtEHDATION 6



 All   police      officers    and   stewards         (not    just    those authorised under

 Recommendations       5       and   9)    are fully         briefed with      regard    to     the

 recognition       of crowd densities           and    to the recognition         of    signs   of

 distress.         All officers      and stewards have been issued,                as an aide

 memoire, with a laminated card which identifies the signs of distress.



 Stewards are each            issued with a copy of written                  instructions, bythe

 club, which detail           their duties. The senior stewards are               briefed by a

 police     inspector,         before     each match,         on     the   responsibilities     of

 stewards    for     crowd safety and control and their duties                     in case of

 emergency evacuation.           The senior stewards are expected to brief the

 more junior stewards.



 Police officers are briefed by a Senior police officer before each
match on their complementary responsibilities and duties. The ccrmander

of each sector of the ground is responsible for further briefing his or

her officers on their specific duties within that sector.



The    South   Yorkshire    Police    are   presently   preparing   visual   aids,

designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise different crcwd

densities, to recognise signs of distress, and to understand a little

more about crowd dynamics.           The    aids will consist of a) Albums of

photographs    depicting the various         sections   of Sheffield Wednesday's

ground with different numbers of spectators therein, and b) A video

tape   film which highlights         crowd densities,    distress and   dynamics.

When completed these photographs and film will be shown to the Safety

of Sports Ground Advisory Group.



The Certifying Authority are asked to ensure that the club undertakes

and continues to undertake its own reponsibilities for staff training

as set out in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds - 'The Green Guide'

- paras, 26, 177, 195 and Annex B to the Guide.



RECOMMENDATION 7




All gateways in radial or perimeter fences at Sheffield Wednesday PC

are painted     white      which is a different colour from the rest of the

fence.    Each is clearly identified by a sign which proclaims 'Bnergency

Exit'.



RECOMMENDATION 8




All the gates in the perimeter fence at Sheffield Wednesday's ground
remain open while ever spectators are on the terrace.



RBCOMEUDftTION 9



There is, in respect of each gateway in the perimeter fences, at least one

officer whose sole duty, whenever spectators are on the terraces, is to

decide whether or not to allow spectators through that gateway to relieve

overcrowding.    Such police officers are to be identified by means of a lime

green tabard.    The officer is familiar to all stewards in that area (see

Recommendation 5 above), is known by them to be authorised to relieve

overcrowding, and is able to make radio contact with the police control

room.



RBCEMMENDATION 10



Two sets of metal cutting equipment have been provided by Sheffield

Wednesday FC and are stored in boxes, adjacent to the fence, at either end

of the ground.     It has been agreed that, in case of need, employees of the

club trained in its use will be readily available to operate the equipment.



All stewards have been trained in its use and will respond to instruction

fran police control (many of the stewards are in radio contact via the

club's radio system).



RECOMMENDATIONS 11 a n d 12



It is understood that City Council representatives on the Safety of Sports

Ground Advisory Group have carried out an inspection of all crush barriers.
RECOMMENDATIONS 13 - 17



Safety Certification         is obviously a matter           for Sheffield City

Council.        In respect of Recamendation 17, the South Yorkshire

Police await notification of the constitution of the Advisory

Group.        It is the Police view, however, that this group should

supplement, and not replace, the existing Officer Working Group.



RECOMMENDATIONS 18 AND 19




It is understood that each turnstile has been inspected and its

potential rate of flew measured and that the maximum capacities

of     each    viewing     area   can     be   admitted     via   the   respective

turnstiles in less than one hour.



RECOMMENDATION 20



(See Recommendation 3b).              When the capacity of any viewing area

is   15%      below    the maximum      permitted, the figures displayed on the

electronic monitor in the Club secretary's office begin to flash.The

secretary, or his agent, will imnediately pass a message via the

club     radio    system     to   a    steward   at   the    relevant    bank   of

turnstiles.           The turnstiles will be closed off and the police

informed by club radio or telephone to police control.



 RECOMMENDATION 21



Sheffield Wednesday PC currently have five CC TV cameras
installed around the ground.              A survey of the installation was

carried    out   by    a   trained   police     CC    TV   operator   (no   expert

knowledge    is professed) and his report is attached at document

(3).




For your further information the General Purposes Ccmmittee of

the Association cf Chief RiLioe Officers has convened a working group

to consider,     nationally,        the use    of CC TV to promote          public

safety at football grounds.             The group anticipate that it may be

possible to provide a            'package' of equipment for use as a test

for a conmon minimum standard of performance.                  They will report

back in due course.



RECOMMENDATION 22



Signposting for spectators both inside and outside the ground has

been   reviewed       by   the   City     Council    Safety   of   Sports   Grounds

Advisory Group.            The   police   are generally satisfied with the

signposting.      Signposting at the West, lappings lane, end of the

ground will require revision in the light of any new turnstiling

 arrangements which are proposed by Sheffield Wednesday PC, at

 this end of the ground.



 RBCCMMENDATIONS 2 3 AND 2 4




 The South Yorkshire Police have had liaison with the club on the

 quest ion of ticketed matches.            The police are satisfied with the

 arrangements and will ensure that the information on any ticket

 corresponds     with      their plans      for admitting spectators        to the

 ground.
RECOMMENDATION    25



There is no regular pre match entertainment at football matches

at Sheffield Wednesday.          Police have no knowledge of whether the

club has held discussions with the recognised supporters club on

this matter.



 RBOCMffiUDftTION 26



The South Yorkshire Police Chief Constable nominated his Deputy,

Mr Peter Hayes, OPM, LLB, MA, to liaise with the management of

each football club and local authority concerned in respect of

the   safety   and     control    of   crowds.   Mr   Hayes   has   met   with

Directors or      Secretaries of all five football league clubs in

the county,    including Mr Mackrell of Sheffield Wednesday PC, on

24 August 1989.      He met with representatives of the four relevant

local authorities,      including Messrs Ward and Bcwnes of Sheffield

City Council on 18 September 1989.          A copy of the minutes of that

meeting are attached at document (7).



RBOCMMEMDRTION 27



Both the Operational Order and            the pre match briefing of all

officers on duty at each match at Sheffield Wednesday PC alert

officers to the dangers of overcrowding, and if any should be

detected, of taking irrmediate and appropriate steps to remedy it.
The    proposed   training   by   way   of   photographs   and   video   (see

Reconmendation 6 above) will further emphasise these messages.



KEXXMMEHDATION 28



The operational planning for each match at Sheffield Wednesday PC

is intended to enable the police to cope with forseeable patterns

in the arrival at, and departure frcm, any match by spectators.



The following scenarios are each catered for by way of police

contingency plans at Sheffield Wednesday PC:-



a) All ticket, or otherwise restricted, matches.

b) Early arrival of spectators.

c) Unexpected and joint arrival of large numbers of spectators.

d) Individual section of ground approaching capacity.

e) Whole ground approaching capacity.

f) Late arrival of spectators.

g) Emergency opening of external gates            (or forcing of external

      gates), thereby allowing an influx of spectators.

h) Early departure of spectators frcm ground.

i) Qrergency evacuation.



The police retain a reserve of officers at the ground to enable

rapid deployment      to   any difficulty which may arise         inside or

outside the ground.
The certifying authority may, however, wish to satisfy themselves

that    the      club    have       made     contingency      plans        to   deal    with     a

situation vdiere the available entrances might prove insufficient

to stop unduly large crowds gathering outside the ground.                                  Such

contingency plans are required                      by paragraph46 of the Guide to

Safety at Sports Grounds - 'The                     Green Guide'. ■



REXXW ENDftTION 2 9




The police officer in carmand at Sheffield Wednesday PC is aware

of   the    option       to    delay       kick-off,      and discusses         this matter,

before     each game,          with    the match          officials.        The    option was

utilised        on      the    30     August         1989,     when thepolice           chief

superintendent           asked      for     the     kick-off, at thematch              between

Sheffield Wednesday and Evertor> to be delayed for 15 minutes to

ensure     the    safety       of the       crowd    still trying to get into the

ground at 7.15 pm.               The crowd was notified of the delay by the

public address system.



To enable instant contact with the match referee vdien considering

kick-off        delay,    the       police    request       that     the    club   install a

telephone link between the police control roan and the player's

tunnel. (See also Reccnmendation 32 below).



RBCOWENDATION 30



There      is    available       in    the    police       control     roan at      Sheffield

Wednesday        PC,     the    results       of    the    closed     circuit      television
monitoring     conducted by      the police        both outside and inside the

ground.     There are, however, fifteen other CC TV cameras belonging

to the club which monitor turnstiles and areas behind turnstiles

throughout the ground.          These are currently monitored in the club

control room and the results of this filming are not available in

the police       control rocm.       The    certifying authority are asked to

ensure    that    this recarmendation         is   ccnplied with.     There    is a

computer      terminal   in    the   club    control    roan which displays * the

record of the electronic counting of spectators into the ground.

The police have requested that the club make this same information

 available in the police Control Room.              The certifying authority are

 asked to ensure that this recommendation is ccrrplied with.



 Police officers who perform duty in the control roan are skilled in

 the use and interpretation of the results of CC TV filming.                    Each

 of these officers is to attend a CC IV operator's course which is

 run by the Greater Manchester Police.



 RBQOM^ENDftTION 31



 There are sufficient operators enployed in the police control roan

  to   deal    with    radio   communications.          New police   corrmunications

  equipment      has   recently been        installed    at   Sheffield Wednesday's

  ground.     The equipment consists of a two-bay radio set with a spare

  station in case of radio failure on the primary station.                    It also

  has battery back-up in case of power failure.                    This system also

  gives operators in the control roan priority over, and the capacity

  to override, others using the same channel.



  The police ground conmander has the option of utilising, when

  he feels its necessary, an additional radio channel which provides
exclusive      communication        between      himself     and     other     sector

corrmanders.     This    executive      channel      would   be    utilised    in    an

emergency when the primary channel may become overcrowded.



The police control room at Sheffield Wednesday PC                       is inadequate

in terms of size and facilities.              The club have been made aware of

the police dissatisfaction.with the present accomodation.                           The

certifying     authority      are     asked     to   oversee      the    design     and

construction of a new control roam at the ground.



RBCtM^ENDATION 32



A survey of Sheffield Wednesday's ground has identified twenty key

points where     the    police would wish to see dedicated telephone

points    to   enable direct        ccnrnunication with      the    police    control

rocm.



Attached, at document (4), is a plan showing the location of those

points, together with an equipment specification prepared by the

South Yorkshire Police Conmunications Department.                   The Certifying

Authority are asked to oversee its installation.



RBCCMMENDATION 33



There is in existence at Sheffield Wednesday PC                    a public address

system.        The   police   survey of the system has identified the

requirements for at least five further loud speakers as follows:-
a) A speaker outside turnstiles 77 to 88.

b) A speaker at the rear of the North Stand near to the police

   roan.

c) A speaker adjacent to Gate B.

d) A speaker adjacent to Gate C.

e) A speaker on the North West elevated section to service the

   Leppings Lane terraces.



The plans at (5) show the existing system and the proposed siting

The Certifying Authority are asked to oversee the installation of

an adequate public address system to ensure that it canplies with

effective.    In so doing, the Certifying Authority will wish to pay

regard, also,   to paragraph 194   (iii) of the Guide to Safety at

Sports Grounds - 'The Green Guide' -     which lists the requirements

of an effective public address system.



The police have asked the club to ensure that the use of a loud

signal to precede important messages be advertised in the club's

programmes.




RBCCMMENDATION 34



The illuminated advertising board at Sheffield Wednesday's ground

is presently out of commission and there are no plans to repair

it.
A    series     of    hand     signals   for   use   by    police    officers   in    an

emergency is presently being, formulated, nationally, by a working

group of the Association of Chief Police Officers.                       The results

are awaited.



RECOMMENDATION 3 5




The South Yorkshire Police maintain regular liaison with the South

Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service and the South Yorkshire

Fire       Service    concerning      crowd    safety     at   Sheffield Wednesday's

stadium.

At     a    force     level,    the    Chief   Superintendent       (Operations)     has

regular meetings with senior officers from the other services.                        At

a local level the police match commander meets with the ambulance

liaison officer at most if not every match.                    The fire service have

also had a liaison officer at at least one match this season where

he met with the police match corrmander.



RECOMMENDATION 3 6




    In advance       of   each match at Sheffield Wednesday's ground,                the

South Yorkshire Police forward to the South Yorkshire Fire and

Ambulance Services full details about the forthcoming event.



    REOOMENDATION 37



    Contingency plans for the arrival of emergency police, fire and

    ambulance    vehicles       at    Sheffield   Wednesday's       ground   have    been

    reviewed and prepared.            The contingency plan forms part of the
police operational order.



The Certifying Authority will wish to consider whether the club

have taken adequate account of paragraph                               29(v) of the Guide to

Safety    at      Sports        Grounds      -     1The    Green       Guide 1    - which    tasks

management         with        the       responsibility          for     preparing       emergency

contingency          plans        in     consultation           with    the      three   emergency

services.



RECOMMENDATION 38




The   police       operational           order for any event held at                     Sheffield

Wednesday's ground contairs information,                           for officers deployed to

entrances       to the          ground,     as     to     the    contingency plans         for the

arrival of the emergency services.



RECOMMENDATION 39 - 43



These     r e c c n r n e n d a t ions   concern    First       Aid    and Medical       facilities

 and, as such, are outside any police remit.                              Under Recctrmendation

 41, however, the police control at Sheffield Wednesday's ground is

 told the identity and whereabouts of the 'club' doctor before each

 match.     He is readily contactable.
              ACTION TAKEN BY

         THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE PO LIC E

IN RESPECT OF SH EFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB

      FOLLOWING THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF

             THE IN TERIM REPORT

                       OF

             LORD JU S T IC E TAYLOR
This document is a written agreement between South Yorkshire Police (hereafter

referred to as   'The Police') and Sheffield United Football Club (hereafter

referred to as   'The Club').




This agreement signed on behalf of both parties is created in pursuance of

recommendation four of the Interim Report of the Inquiry held by The Rt Hon

Lord Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster of 15 April 1989.




The agreement between The Police and The Club is as follows:-




^laximum Capacities for Terraces

The Club will be responsible for limiting the number of spectators entering

each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity figure assessed in

accordance with recommendation two of the Interim Report.




The Club will do this by means of the computerised system which records the

number of persons passing through each turnstile, f The Spion Kop is divided

into two pens.    One pen is entered via turnstiles in John Street, the other by

turnstiles in Shoreham Street.     The Club will provide stewards to prevent a

cross flow of spectators from one pen to the other. ^

>
The Club will inform the police control room when a particular pen or area is

approaching capacity.    The Club will be responsible for closing off further

access to a pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.        The

Police accept The Club may on occasions have difficulties in this regard,

therefore. The Police will provide assistance if necessary.




The Police accept that denial of access to any part of the ground may create

public order problems in respect of spectators so excluded and The Police will

prepare contingency plans to deal with such situations.
Filling and Monitoring Terraces

The Club will provide on the perimeter track a steward for each pen or

terraced area during such times that there are spectators in that pen or

terraced area.    The sole duty of these stewards, who will be in addition to

any other stewards employed by The Club, will be to check crowd conditions in

the pen or terraced area to which they are assigned for possible overcrowding

or distress.     The Club will provide The Police with a plan of the ground

showing where the stewards with this responsibility will be situated.




The Police will provide in respect of each gate in the perimeter fence (or

group of gates if they are close together) police officers authorised to

decide whether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve

overcrowding.



All police officers deployed at perimeter gates which will be kept fully open

 at all times when spectators are on the terraces, will be authorised as above.

 Each will be in possession of a police radio in direct contact with police

 ground control and will be identifiable by a distinctive coiourec tcbard.




 The stewards checking the crowd for overcrowding or distress will not be

 issued with police radios but the police officers on the gates and perimeter

 track will communicate to police ground control any relevant matter brought to

 their attention by these stewards.




 Cutting Equipment

 The Club will provide and make readily available suitable and sufficient

 cutting equipment to permit the immediate removal of enough fenc_ng to rel

 numbers of spectators if necessary.     This cutting equipment will be operated

 by employees of The Club who will be trained in its use.     The use of such

 equipnent will be at the discretion of the nominated senior police officer who

 will be the officer in charge of policing the event.
     Liaison

     Before each match both parties to this agreement will liaise in respect of the

     following matters:-

          i)   the anticipated number of spectators expected having regard

               to the separate supporter groups;




         ii)   the method of crowd segregation (if any) intended to be used;




        iii)   any information in relation to crowd problems;




••       iv)   the number and location of turnstiles to be -made available

               to each group;




          v)   an estimation of the tine it will take each group to pass

               through the turnstiles;




         vi)   where tickets are used,   that the information on those tickets

               corresponds with the planned arrangements for admitting

               spectators to the ground.



••   Postponement of kick-off is at the discretion of the police officer in command

     at the ground.   It is therefore essential The Club provide a telephone link

     between the referee's room and the police control room.




     The Police have prepared contingency plans for the event of emergency services

     being called to the ground.   These include routes of access, rendezvous

     points, accessibility within the ground and routes of egress.    The Police will

     liaise with The Club concerning 'these arrangements whenever these plans are

     amended or as otherwise appropriate.
The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police has nominated his Deputy,

Mr Peter Hayes QPM LLB MA, as the Chief Officer with responsibility for

liaison with the management of each football club and local authority

concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.




Any variation of this agreement in respect of a particular match will be

agreed by the parties in advance in writing.




SIGNED                           on behalf of Sheffield United Football Club




SIGNED                         . on behalf of South Yorkshire Police
                           APPENDIX 'A' " AMENDMENTS



CURRENT PR O V ISIO N                              AMENDED PRO V ISIO N

Under the heading                                 The amended provision
Maximum Capacities for Terraces                   Maximum Capacities
                                                  for Terraces
The Club will do this by means of the
computerised system which records the             The Club will do this by means
number of persons passing through each            of the computerised system which
turnstile.  The Spion Kop is divided into         records the number of-persons
two pens.  One pen is entered via turnstiles      passing through each turnstile.
in John Street, the other by turnstiles in
Shoreham Street.  The Club will provide
stewards to prevent a cross flow of spectators
from one pen to the other.
RECOMMENDATION 1



It is noted by the police that the current Safety Certificate for

Sheffield United Football Club has been amended to reflect the new

capacities of all standing areas as follows



Spion Kop                               14,550

Bramall Lane end                         5,660

John Street Terraces           West     '1,340

John Street Terraces           East      2.050



However,    following an Inspection Meeting,               at the ground, involving

the    South    Yorkshire      Fire   Brigade,   it     is    recommended      that   the

capacity for the Spion Kop terrace be revised dcwnwards frcm 14,550

to    11,040-     If    this    recommendation     is      agreed   by the     licensing

authority then the Safety Certificate requires further amendment.



RECOMMENDATION 2



The      calculation      for     maximum   capacities,           proposed     by     this

 reccnmendation, has been followed in determining the figure for each

terraced area recorded above.



 RBOCMMENDATION 3



 a) An     electronic     counting     mechanism      is     in   place   at   Sheffield

      United's ground whereby the number of spectators entering each self-

      contained area is contemporaneously recorded.
   The club has undertaken (see written agreement) to monitor this

   counter and to limit the number of spectators entering any self-

   contained      area    to    the    maximum     capacity       figure    assessed   in

   accordance with Reccnmendation 2 above.



b) The club will achieve this by closing off the relevant turnstiles

   to prevent      further access        to   such     an    area when      its   maximum

   capacity    is about        to be    reached.     The police have agreed to

   assist the club in this regard, if requested so to do.



RBOOMMBPATION 4



   A written agreement, setting out their respective responsibilities

   for crowd safety and control,              has been approved and signed by

   representatives of South Yorkshire Police and Sheffield United

   Football Club.        A copy of that agreement is attached as document (6 J



RECCMMaOATION 5



At each match at Sheffield United's ground there are six stewards

(two   to   the    Spion       Kop,    John   Street        and   Bramall    Lane   ends

respectively) whose sole duty is to check crowd conditions in those

areas for possible overcrowding or distress.                  The stewards regularly

perform the same duties, as do the police officers authorised under

Reccrrmendation 9 below.         The parties are therefore familiar to each

other, and the stewards have . ready access to these police officers

who each have a radio giving them contact with the police control
RECOMMENDATION 6



All police officers and stewards                  (not just those authorised under

Reccnmendations           5 and    9)   are    fully    briefed    with   regard   to   the

recognition of crowd densities and to the recognition of signs of

distress.          All officers and stewards have been issued, as an aicb

memoire,      with    a     laminated     card    which    identifies     the   signs    of

distress.



Stewards are each issued with a copy of written instructions, by the

club, which detail            their duties.         The stewards are briefed by a

police inspector, before each match, on their responsibilities for

crowd    safety and        control      and   their duties    in case of        emergency

evacuation.



Similarly, police officers are briefed by a Senior police officer

before     each     match     on   their      complementary       responsibilities      and

duties.



The   South    Yorkshire Police          are     presently preparing visual         aids,

designed      to    enable    stewards and       officers to recognise different

crowd densities, to recognise signs of distress, and to understand a

little more        about     crowd dynamics.           The aids will consist of a)

albums of photographs depicting the various sections of Sheffield

United's ground with different numbers of spectators therein, and b)

a video tape film which highlights crowd densities, distress and

dynamics.      When completed these photographs and film will be shown

to the Safety of Sports Ground Advisory Group.
The     certifying    authority        are    asked    to    ensure     that    the   club

undertakes and continues to undertake its own responsibilities for

staff training as set out in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds -

'The Green Guide'         - paras 26,        177,   195 - 199 and Annex B to the

Guide.



KBCOMBJDftTION 7



All gateways in radial or perimeter fences at Sheffield United are

painted in the international             safety colour -white             - which is a

different    colour       frcm   the   rest    of   the     fence.     Each    is   clearly

identified by a sign which proclaims 'Emergency Exit'.                         Furthermore,

a notice is displayed on the electronic scoreboard, beforeeach game

ccntnences, asking all spectators to identify their nearest emergency

exit.



RECOMMENDATION 8




All the gates in perimeter fences have been removed at Sheffield

United's ground.



RECOMMENDATION 9



There i^ in respect of each gateway in the perimeter fences, at

least one police officer whose sole duty whenever spectators are on

the     terraces,    is   to decide      whether      or    not   to   allow    spectators

through that gateway to relieve overcrowding.                     Such police officers

are to be identified by means of a lime green tabard. The officer
is familiar to all stewards in that area                        (see Recommendation 5

above),     is    known      by     them    to    be   authorised      to     relieve    over­

crowding,    and      is     able    to    make     radio    contact    with     the    police

control rocm.



KBOOfrMENDftTION 10



Four sets        of   metal       cutting        equipment    have     been    provided      by

Sheffield United Football Club.                    It has been agreed that, in case

of need, employees of the club trained in its use will be readily

available to operate the equipment.                     T w d operatives are deployed

to either end of the ground and are in radio contact, via the

club's radio system, with both the club safety officer and the

police control room.



A test of the ability of the operatives to muster and make the

equipment        ready      for   use      was    performed    by    the      police    ground

commander        at   the    Sheffield       United     vs    Hull     City    match    on   23

September 1989.          He was satisfied with the response.



RBCCMMENDATICINS 11 AND 12



It is understood that City Council representatives of the Safety

of Sports Ground Advisory Group have carried out an inspection of

all crush barriers.



RBCXMffiaCftTICHS 13 - 17



Safety Certification is obviously a matter for Sheffield City Council.

In respect of Recommendation 17, the South Yorkshire Police await
notification of the constitution ofthe Advisory Group.                         It is the

police view,      however,      that this Group should supplement,                  and not

replace, the existing Officer Working Group.



RBCXM4ENDATI0NS 18 AND 19



It   is   understood      that    each     turnstile      has    been     inspected,    its

potential rate of         flow measured and that the maximum capacities of

each viewing area         can be admitted via the respective               turnstiles in

less than one hour.



RECOMMENDATION 20



(See Recommendation 3b ) When the capacity of any viewing area is                        *0%

below     the   maximum    permitted,      an   alarm     sounds at       the electronic

monitor     in the Club         Secretary's     office.         The    secretary,    or his

agent, will immediately pass a message via the club radio system to

a steward at the relevant bank of turnstiles.                         The turnstiles will

be closed off and the police informed by club radio or telephone to

police control.



RBOOMMEtPATION 21



Sheffield United          Football Club         currently         have fourCC TV cameras

 installed      around    the    ground.    A   survey    of     the    installation was

carried out by a trained police CC TV operator (no expert                       knowledge

 is professed) and his report is attached at document (3).
Since        tha t    survey      was           compl e t e d ,      the     club       have       applied         to

the    Football         Ground          Improvements                 Trust        for    funds         to    expand

the CC        TV     system,      to e n s u r e         c o m p l i a n c e w i t h this p a r t i c u l a r

recommendation.                  Ho wever,              the    T rust      have         declined            to   fun d

such     expansion              until           the      fin al        Rep o r t        of     Lord         Justice

Taylor        is p u b l i s h e d .



For y o u r        further      information                the G e n e r a l P u r p o s e s C o m m i t t e e

of    the     Association              of    Chief        Po l i c e    Officers             has       convened      a

working         group      to    consider,              na ti onally,             the    use       of CC T V        to

promote            public       safety            at      football           grounds.                  The       group

anticipates            that      it m a y          be    possible          to p r o v i d e        a    'package'

of    equipment          to us e        as a te st            for a c o m m o n m i n i m u m s t a n d a r d

of p e r f o r m a n c e .      They will report back                         in due cours e.



RECOMMENDATION 2 2



Signposting              for     spectators                   both     inside           and        outside         the

ground         has      b een     reviewed               by    the      City        Council            Safety       of

Sp o r t s      Grounds         Advisory                Group.             Th e     police             have       made

certain            suggestions             to     the     clu b      which        they       hav e      agreed      to

 implement.             and           thus            en s u r e       compliance                  with           this

 Recommendation.



 RECOMMENDATIONS 2 3                   and       24



 The    South         Yorkshire             Police        have       had     liaison           with      the      clu b

 on     the        question           of        ticketed           matches.              The         police        are

 satisfied            with      the        arrangements              and     will        ensure          that      the

 information            on     an y    ticket           corresponds           with           t heir     pla ns     for

 admitting spectators                       to the        ground.
RB0CM4EMJATION 25



Following     discussions      with     Sheffield     UnitedFootball           Club    it    is

understood       that   the    club     will   make       provision      for    pre     match

entertainment after consulting with the recognised Supporter's Club

at those matches which are considered appropriate.

RBOCMMENDftTION 26



The South Yorkshire Police Chief Constable nominated his Deputy, Mr

Peter Hayes, QPM,        LLB, MA, to liaise with the management of each

football club and local authority concerned in respect of the safety

and    control     of crowds.      Mr    Hayes      has    met   with    Directors          and

Secretaries        of all     five football        league     clubs     in    the     county,

including Messrs Dooley and Capper of Sheffield United PC, on 24

August 1989.       He met with representatives of the four relevant local

authorities,       including Messrs Ward            and Bownes        of Sheffield City

Council, on        18 September 1989.          A    copy of      the minutes of             that

meeting are attached at document (7 ).



RECOMMENDATION 27




Both    the   Operational       Order    and   the        pre-match     briefing       of    all

officers on duty at each match at Sheffield United FC alert officers

to the dangers of overcrowding and, if any should be detected, of

taking iirmediate and appropriate steps to remedy it.



The    proposed     training      by    way    of    photographs        and    video        (see

Recanmendation      6   above) will further emphasise these messages.
RBCCMMENDATION 28



The operational planning for each match at Sheffield United PC is

intended to enable the police to cope with forseeable patterns in

the arrival at and departure frai) any match by spectators.



The    following    scenarios    are   each   catered       for by way       of   police

contingency plans at Sheffield United PC:-



a) All ticket, or otherwise restricted, matches.

b) Early arrival of spectators.

c) Unexpected and joint arrival of large numbers of spectators.

d) Individual section of a ground approaching capacity.

e) Whole ground approaching capacity.

f) Late arrival of spectators.

g) Bnnergency     opening   of   external     gates   (or     forcing   of    external

      gates), thereby allowing an influx of spectators.

h) Early departure of spectators frcm ground.

i) Emergency evacuation.



The police retain a reserve of officers at the ground to enable

rapid deployment to any difficulty which may arise inside or outside

the ground.



The certifying authority may,          however, wish to satisfy themselves

that the club have made contingency plans to deal with a situation

where the available entrances might prove insufficient to stop unduly

large crowds gathering outside the ground.                  Such contingency plans

are    required    by   paragraph   46 of     the   Guide    to Safety at         Sports

Grounds - The 'Green Guide'.
RECOMMENDATION 29



The police officer in ccmmand at Sheffield United FC is aware of the

option to delay kick-off     and discusses this matter,     before each

game,   with the match   officials.   The   option was   utilised on 12

August 1989, when the police superintendent asked for the kick-off

at the match between Sheffield United and Sheffield Wednesday to be

delayed for fifteen minutes to ensure the safety of the crowd still

trying to get into the ground at 2.45 pm.    The crowd was notified of

the delay by the public address system.



To enable instant contact with the match referee when considering

kick-off delay, the police request that the club install a telephone

link between the police control roan and the referee's roam.       (See

also Reccrrmendation 32 below).



RECCEM3g»TI0N 30



There is available in the police control rocrn at Sheffield United

the results of all closed circuit television, monitoring outside and

inside the ground.   There is also a computer terminal which displays

the record of the electronic counting of spectators into the ground.



Police officers who perform duty in the control roan have attended a

CC TV Operator's Course run by the Greater Manchester Police.      They

are therefore skilled in the use and interpretation of the results

of CC TV filming.
RBOOMM0BATION 31



There are sufficient operators employed in the police control roan

to   deal   with   radio ccmnunications.         New   police   carmunications

equipment has been commissioned, and is about to be installed at

Sheffield United's ground.



The equipment consists of a two—bay radio set with a spare station

in case of radio failure on the primary station.                   It also* has

battery back-15 ) in case of power failure.            This system also gives

operators in the control roan priority over, and the capacity to

override, others using the same channel.



The police ground coitmander has the option of utilising, when he

feels it necessary,         an additional   radio channel which provides

exclusive      comrtunication     between    himself      and    other     sector

carmanders.        This    executive   channel   would    be    utilised   in   an

emergency when the primary channel may become overcrowded.



The police control room is to be replaced by Sheffield United FC

 in the near future       The club is aware of the requirements of sound­

 proofing etc.      The certifying authority are asked to oversee the

 construction of this new control roan.



 RECOMMENDATION 32



 A survey of Sheffield United's ground has identified twenty eight

 key points where the police would wish to see dedicated telephone

 points to enable direct comminication with the police control roan.



 Attached, at document"(4), is a plan showing the location of those

 points, together with an equipment specification prepared by the

 South Yorkshire Police Comminications Department.
Sheffield    United   FC have       subsequently agreed to fund,    using a

Football Trust      grant,    a network of telephones.       The certifying

authority are asked to oversee its installation.



RECOMMENDATION 33



There is in existence at Sheffield United              FC a public address

system.     Howaver, at a meeting between the police and the club on

5 August 1989,      it was agreed that there was a need for a more

efficient system to enable effective communication with individual

areas both inside and outside the ground.



Sheffield United PC have cotmissioned a new public address system

and work     is   progressing.       The plan at document    (5)   shows the

existing    system and       site   of   new loudspeakers.   The certifying

authority are asked to oversee the installation of this public

address system to ensure that it complies with this recamendation

and that it is effective.           In so doing, the certifying authority

will wish to pay regard, also, to paragraph 194 (iii) of the Guide

to Safety at Sports Grounds - The 'Green Guide' - which lists the

requirements of an effective public address system.



The police have asked the club to ensure that the use of a loud

signal to precede inportant messages be advertised in the club's

programmes.



RBCOM ENDATION 34




The illuminated advertising/score board at Sheffield United's gromd
is utilised by the police to broadcast safety messages to the crowd.

An   example   is    'identify   your    nearest   emergency     exit'    which   is

displayed   before    the   start   of   each game.         The advertising/score

board cannot be seen by every spectator in the ground and so it is

treated very much as a secondary medium for camtunication.



A series of hand signals for use by police officers in an emergency

is presently being formulated, nationally, by a working group of the

Association of Chief Police Officers.          The results are awaited.




RECOMMENDATION 35



The South Yorkshire Police maintain regular liaison with the South

Yorkshire Metropolitan       Ambulance    Service     and    the South Yorkshire

Fire Service concerning crowd safety at Sheffield United's stadium.



At a force level      the Chief Superintendent (Operations) has regular

meeting with senior officers fran the other services.                    At a local

level the police match canmander meets with the ambulance liaison

officer at most if not every match.          The fire service have also had

a liaison officer at at least one match this season where he met

with the police match canrander.



RBCCMMENDftTION 36



In advance of each match at Sheffield United's ground,                   the South

Yorkshire Police forward to the South Yorkshire Fire and Ambulance

Services full details about the forthcoming event.
RECOMMENDATION 37




Contingency plans         for the arrival     of emergency police,             fire and

ambulance vehicles at Sheffield United's ground, have been reviewed

and   prepared.      The    contingency     plan     forms    part    of    the   police

operational order.         On   20 August     1989 the three services held a

practise exercise.        The contingency plans worked well.



The certifying authority will wish to consider whether the club have

taken adequate account of paragraph 29 (v) of the Guide to Safety at

Sports Grounds — The 'Green Guide' — which tasks iranagement with the

responsibility      for     preparing     emergency        contingency       plans    in

consultation with the three emergency services.



RECOMENDATION 38



The   police   operational      order   for    any    event    held    at     Sheffield

United's   ground    contain     information,        for   officers        deployed   to

entrances to the ground, as to the contingency plans for the arrival

of the emergency services.



RBCCMMaJDATIOMS 39 - 43



These reccmnendations concern First Aid and Medical facilities and,

as such, are outside of any police remit.              Under Reccmnendation 41,

however, the police control at Sheffield United's ground is told the

identity and whereabouts of the 'club' doctor before each match.                      He

is readily contactable.
          ACTION TAKEN BY

    THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE PO LIC E

IN RESPECT OF BARNSLEY FOOTBALL CLUB

 FOLLOWING THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF

        THE INTERIM REPORT

                  OF

        LORD JU S T IC E TAYLOR
This document is a written agreement between South Yorkshire Police (hereafter

referred to as          'The Police') and Barnsley Football Club (hereafter referred to

as .'The C l u b ’ ).




This agreement signed on behalf of both parties is created in pursuance of

recommendation four of the Interim Report of the Inquiry held by The Rt Hon

Lord Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster of 15 April 1989.




The agreement between The Police and The Club is as follows




^ximutn Capacities for Terraces

The Club will be responsible for limiting the number of spectators entering

each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity figure assessed in

accordance with recommendation two of the Interim Report.




The Club will do this by means of a mechanical number recorder fitted to each

turnstile.       The figures recorded will be carried by a runner to a central

point where      they will be collated by an employee of The Club.




     Club will inform the police control         room when a particular pen or area is

approaching      capacity.      The Club will be responsible for closing off further

access to a pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.              The

Police accept The Club may on occasions have difficulties in this regard,

therefore, The Police will provide assistance if necessary.




The Police accept that denial of access to any part of the ground may create

public order problems in respect of spectators so excluded and The Police will

prepare contingency plans to deal with such situations.
Filling and Monitoring Terraces

The Club will provide on the perimeter track a steward for each pen or

terraced area during such times that there are spectators in that pen or

terraced area.    The sole duty of these stewards, who will be in addition to

any other stewards employed by The Club, will be to check crowd conditions in

the pen or terraced area to which they are assigned for possible overcrowding

or distress.     The Club will provide The Police with a plan of the ground

showing where the stewards with this responsibility will be situated.




The Police vill provide in respect of each gate in the perimeter fence (or

group of gates if they are close together) police officers authorised to

decide whether or not to allow spectators through 4 gate to relieve

overcrowding.



 All police officers deployed at perimeter gates which will be kept fully open

 at all times when spectators are on the terraces, will be authorised as above.

 Each will be in possession of a police radio in direct contact with police

 ground control and will be identifiable by a distinctive coloured tabara.




 The stewards checking the crowd for overcrowding or distress will not be

 issued with police’radios but the police officers on the gates and perimeter

 track will communicate to, police ground control any relevant matter brought to

 their attention by these stewards.




 Cutting Equipment

 The Club will provide and make readily available suitable and sufficient

 cutting equipment to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release

  numbers of spectators if necessary.    This cutting equipment will be operated

  by employees of The Club who will be trained in its use.    The use of such

  equipment will be at the discretion of the nominated senior police officer who

  will be the officer in charge of policing the event.
        Before each match both parties to this agreement will liaise in respect of the

        following matters:-

             i)     the anticipated number of spectators expected having regard

                     to the separate supporter groups;




            ii)     the method of crowd segregation (if any) intended   to be   used;




           i ii )   any information in relation to crowd problems;




    ^       iv)     ' the number and location of turnstiles to be made available

^                    to each group;




              v)     an estimation of the time it will take each group to pass

                     through the turnstiles;




             iv)    where tickets are used, that the information on those t-ckets

                     corresponds with the planned arrangements for admitting

                     spectators to the ground.




         Postponement of kick-off is at the discretion of the police officer in command

         at the ground.     It is therefore essential The Club provide a telephone link

         between the referee's room and the police control room.




         The Police have prepared contingency plans for the event of emergency services

         being called to the ground.     These include routes of access, rendezvous

         points, accessibility within the ground and routes of egress.      The Police will

         liaise with The Club concerning these arrangements whenever these plans are

         amended or as otherwise appropriate.
Tne C h i e f C o n s t a b l e o f S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e h a s n o m i n a t e d h i s D e p u t y ,

Mr Peter Hayes QPM LLB MA, as the Chief Officer with responsibility for

liaison with the management of each football club and local authority

concerned in respect of the safety and control of crouds.




Any variation of this agreement in respect of a particular match will be

agreed by the parties in advance in writing.




SIGNED                                          ... on behalf of Barnsley Football Club                             A-'TO

            Z

SIGNED                                  rgf....        on behalf of South Yorkshire Police




DATE
RB0CM4EUDATI0N 1



Barnsley Football Club has several viewing terraces at its ground which

are each self-contained with              fixed capacities.         The existing safety

certificate does not, at this time, reflect the maximum capacities.




RBOOM ENDATION 2




The     calculation          for     maximum     capacities,        proposed       by    this

reconmendation,        has   been     followed in determining a           figure for each

terraced area as follows:-



Pontefract Road End                                 8,670

Brewery Stand                                       7,500

Main Stand Terrace           North                  3,315

Main Stand Terrace           South                  3,145

Spion Kop                                           5,250

 (Pre Taylor, the capacity of the Spion Kop was 7,500, calculated upon a

density factor of 54 persons per 10 square metres.                        In reducing that

 figure by 15%, as reconmended by Taylor, the Spion Kop area can safely

hold 6,375.         However,       on the basis of the correlation between this

 viewing area and the turnstiles serving it, only 5,250 spectators can

 be accarmodated on the Spion Kop within one hour — calculated at 750

 per turnstile per hour.             (See Recorrmendation 19). )

 Th e   c e r t i f y i n g a u t h o r i t y are asked to r e - e x a m i n e   the c a p a c i t y of

 M a i n S t a n d T e r r a c e North.      On 17 October 1989 before the match between

 Barnsley and SheffieldUnited, the club secretary at Barnsley PC closed off

 access to the Terrace in the interests of the safety of those spectators

 occipying the terrace.            The collated count frcm the turnstiles in that area

 indicated that only 2402 spectators had entered - seme 913 below permitted o p
RBCOMENDftTION 3



(a) Barnsley PC has a mechanical counting system in respect of each

    turnstile.     The club undertook to check the counting mechanism of each

    turnstile at 15 minute intervals and to relay that information to the

    police control room at the ground.     To date, however, the club have not

    performed such checks in relation to the whole of the ground.     The club

    state that they are not in a position to do so, in the whole of the

    ground, because of the inadequate mechanical counting system on the

    turnstiles and insufficiency of staff.     The club did in fact experiment

    at one game with the Brewery Stand but the trial was unsuccessful.



    It is the police view that, unless the club meet the responsibility to

    count ths spectators entering the ground, there is a real danger of

    this recartnendation being breached.    It is noted, that at a meeting of

    the Officer Working Party held on the 10 August 1989, the club

    undertook in the long term to install an electronic monitoring system.

    Notwithstanding this commitment, the Certifying Authority are asked to

    ensure inmediate compliance with this recommendation.



(b) In the written agreement between South Yorkshire Police and Barnsley

    PC, (see Recommendation 4), the club undertook to close off the

    relevant turnstiles to prevent further access to any viewing area when

    its maximum capacity is about to be reached.     The Certifying Authority

    are asked to ensure that the club continue to meet their

    responsibilities in this regard.
RBCXJMENDATiaN 4



A written agreement, setting out their respective responsibilities for

crowd     safety      and   control,            has   been     approved        and   signed       by

representatives of South Yorkshire Police and Barnsley PC.                                A copy of

that agreerrent is attached at document (6 ) .                   Whilst there have been no

variations to this agreement since it was signed by the club on the                               22


August 1989, it is clear that the club are failing to canply with the

agreement. (See Recamendation 3 above).



RBCOME*PATION 5



Barnsley PC claim that there are a number of stewards, deployed to each

side of the ground, whose sole duty is to check crowd conditions in

those areas for possible overcrowding or distress.                        However, despite an

undertaking in the written agreement with the South Yorkshire Police,

and nuirerous subsequent requests made to the club secretary, the club

have    not   yet     provided    a      plan    of   the    ground     indicating        where   the

stewards, who have this responsibility, will be situated.



There are at each match, a number of stewards who appear to be under­

taking these        responsibilities and the stewards have ready access to

police officers, authorised under Recamendation 9 below, who each have

a radio giving them contact with the police control roan.

 RBCCMMEHDATION 6



 All    police   officers     and     stewards        (not    just    those    authorised under

 Recorrmendat ions      5   and     9)    are     fully      briefed    with    regard       to   the

 recognition     of    crowd densities           and to the          recognition     of    signs of
distress.     All   officers and     stewards have been issued,       as an    aide

memoire, with a laminated card which identifies the signs of distress.



Stewards are each issued with a copy of written instructions, by the

club, which detail their duties.           The chief stewards are each briefed

by a police inspector, before each match, on the responsibilities of

stewards    for crowd    safety and control and their duties           in case of

emergency evacuation.      The chief steward is expected to brief the other

stewards.



Police officers are briefed by a Senior police officer before each

match on their complementary responsibilities and duties.



The   South   Yorkshire     Police   are    presently   preparing    visual    aids,

designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise different crowd

densities, to recognise signs of distress, and to understand a little

more about    crowd dynamics.        The aids will consist of a)           Albums of

 photographs depicting the various sections of Barnsley s ground with

 different numbers of spectators therein, and b) A video tape film which

 highlights   crowd     densities,   distress   and dynamics.       When   completed

 these photographs and film will be shown to the Safety of Sports Ground

 Advisory Group.




 The Certifying Authority are asked to ensure that the club undertakes

 and continues to undertake its own reponsibilities for staff training

 as set out in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds - 'The Green Guide'

 - paras, 26, 177, 195 and Annex B to the Guide.
RECOMMENDATION 7



All gateways in radial or perimeter fences at Barnsley FC are painted

in    the    international       safety colour    — green — which is a different

colour frcm the rest of the fence.                  Each is clearly identified by a

sign which proclaims 'Emergency Exit'.



RBOCMMaTOATION 8




Only the Spion Kop end of the ground has a perirreter fence.                      The three

gates in this perimeter fence have been removed and easily-broken tape

has    been    placed   across     the   openings    in   the    fence.     This tape     is

respected by the spectators, who have not made any attempts to invade

the pitch, but would be no barrier in case of emergency.

RECOMMENDATION 9



There is, in respect of each gateway in the perirreter fence, a police

officer       whose sole duty, whenever spectators are on the terrace, is to

decide      whether   or   not    to   allow   spectators   through       the   gateway   to

relieve overcrowding.             Such police officers are to be identified by

means of a lime green tabard.              The officers are regularly deployed to

such duties and are therefore familiar to all stewards in that area,

(See Recommendation 5 above), are known by them to be authorised to

relieve     overcrowding,        and   are able   to make       radio contact with the

police control roan.




     RECOMMENDATION 10




  A set of metal cutting equipment has been provided by Barnsley

  FC.        It has been agreed that, in case of need, an                 employee of
the club trained in its use will be readily available to operate the

equipment.      An operative is deployed imnediately adjacent to the police

control roan.        He is readily to hand should the need arise.



REOOMEMDATIOHS 11 AND 12



It is understood that Barnsley Borough Council representatives on the

Safety of Sports Ground Advisory Group, have carried out an inspection

of all crush barriers.



RECOMMENDATIONS 13 - 17



Safety    Certification       is   obviously     a   matter    for   Barnsley        Borough

Council. ^At a meeting of the Officer Working Party on the 9 August

1989, it was decided to review the Safety Certificate in due course and

thereafter conduct an annual review of the certificate.



In    respect   of   Reccnmendation      17,   the   South Yorkshire      Police await

notification of the constitution of the Advisory Group at Barnsley.                        It

is the police view, however, that this Group should supplement, and not

replace, the existing Officer Working Group.



RECOMMENDATIONS 18 AND 1 9



It is understood that each turnstile has been inspected and its

potential rate of flow measured.           The correlation between each

v i e w i n g are a of the s t a d i u m and the t u r n s t i l e s s e r v i n g    it

has   been c a l c u l a t e d and,   as a result,        the c a p a c i t y of the
Spion Cop terrace has been reduced to 5250 because there are only

seven turnstiles to service this part of the ground.

Similarly the. capacity of the Brewery Stand terrace has been reduced

to 7500 because there are only 10 turnstiles to service that part of

the ground.

KBOOMENDftTION 20



This     recommendation   is   linked   directly   with   Recommendation   3

above.      It is suggested that Barnsley PC do not have adequate

arrangements for monitoring the number of spectators entering the

ground and for limiting further access when capacities have been

aai are about to be reached.          The Certifying Authority are asked

to ensure compliance with this recommendation

RBCCMMEHDATION 21



Barnsley PC currently have tvro CC TV cameras installed at the

ground and proposals to install a further two cameras.            A survey

of the installation has been carried out by a trained police CC

TV operator (no expert knowledge is professed) and his report is

attached at document (31

For your    further information the General Purposes Committee of

the Association cf Chief M i o e Officers has convened a working group

to   consider,   nationally,    the   use   of   CC TV to promote   public

safety at football grounds.       The group anticipate that it may be

possible to provide a      'package' of equipment for use as a test

for a common minimum standard of performance.             They will report

back in due course.
RECCMMETCATION 22



Signposting for spectators both inside and outside the ground has

been reviewed by the Barnsley             Borough Council Safety of Sports

Grounds     Advisory    Group.     The     police    are    satisfied     with   the

signposting.



RECXM4ENDATI0NS 23 AND 24



The South Yorkshire Police have had liaison with the club on the

question of ticketed matches.            The police are satisfied with the

arrangements and will ensure that the information on any ticket

corresponds     with     their   plans    for   admitting       spectators   to the

ground.



RBCCMMENDATION 25



At Barnsley FC there is no pre match entertainment and the club

do    not    recognise     any   supporters        club    as    representing     the

interests of the spectators in general.

REXXMMENDATION 26



The South Yorkshire Police Chief Constable nominated his Deputy,

Mr Peter Hayes, QPM, LLB, MA, to liaise with the management of

each football club and local authority concerned in respect of

the   safety    and    control    of     crowds.      Mr   Hayes    has   met    with

Directors and Secretaries of all five football league clubs in

the county, including Messrs Dennis and Spinks of Barnsley PC, on

24 August 1989.        He met with representatives of the four relevant
local     authorities,     including     Messrs    Harper      and    Jackson    of

Barnsley Borough Council on 18 September 1989.                   A copy of the

minutes of that meeting are attached at document (7) .



RBDOfffiiCftTION 27



Both the Operational Order and the pre match briefing of all

officers on duty at each match at Barnsley PC alert officers to

the dangers of overcrowding, and, if any should be detected, of

taking immediate and appropriate steps to remedy it.



The     proposed   training   by   way   of     photographs     and   video     (see

Recommendation     6   above) will further emphasise these messages.



RECOMMENDATION 28



The     operational    planning    for   each     match   at   Barnsley    PC    is

intended to enable the police to cope with forseeable patterns in

the arrival at, and departure from, any match by spectators.



The following scenarios are each catered for by way of police

contingency plans at Barnsley PC:-



a) All ticket, or otherwise restricted, matches.

b) Early arrival of spectators.

c) Unexpected and joint arrival of large numbers of spectators.

d) Individual section of ground approaching capacity.

e) Whole ground approaching capacity.

f) Late arrival of spectators.
g) Elrergency opening of external gates         (or forcing of external

   gates), thereby allowing an influx of spectators.

h) Early departure of spectators frcm ground.

i) Emergency evacuation.



■phe police retain a reserve of officers at the ground to enable

rapid deployment     to any difficulty which may arise          inside or

outside the ground.



The certifying authority may, however, wish to satisfy themselves

that   the   club   have   made   contingency   plans   to   deal   with   a

situation where the available entrances might prove insufficient

to stop unduly large crowds gathering outside the ground.              Such

contingency plans are required by paragraph 46 of the Guide to

 Safety at Sports Grounds - 'The Green Guide'.



 RECOMMENDATION 29




 The police officer in caimand at Barnsley PC is aware of the

 option to delay kick-off, and discusses this matter, before each

 game, with the match officials.        To enable instant contact with

 the match referee when considering kick-off delay, the club have

 installed a telephone link between the police control rocm and

 the referee's roan.



 RBCCMMEUDATION 30



 There is available in the police control rocm at Barnsley PC, the

 results of all.. closed circuit television monitoring outside and
inside the ground.        Police officers who perform duty in the

control roan are skilled in the use and interpretation of the

results of CC TV filming, and are to attend a CC TV operators

course which is run by the Greater Manchester Police.



KBOCMMaPATION 31



There   are    sufficient   operators    employed    in the police

control    roan to deal with radio carrnunications.             New police

ccrrnunications     equipment   has     recently     been   installed    at

Barnsley PC's ground.



The equipment consists of a two-bay radio set with a spare

station in case of radio failure on the primary station.                  It

also has battery back-up in case of power failure.              This system

also gives operators in the control roan priority over, and the

capacity to override, others using the same channel.



The police ground ccmmander has the option of utilising, when

he   feels    it   necessary,   an    additional    radio   channel    which

provides      exclusive   camrunication    between    himself    and   other

 sector cottmanders. This executive channel would be utilised in

an emergency when the primary channel may become overcrowded.



 The police control roan is purpose built and was only recently

 completed.     The sound-proofing is adequate.



 REXXMffiNDATION 32



 A survey of Barnsley EC's ground has identified sixteen key points
where the police would wish to see dedicated telephone points to

enable direct cctrtnunication with the police control roan.



Attached, at document (4) , is a plan showing the location of those

points, together with an equipment specification prepared by the

South Yorkshire Police Cocimunications Department.              The Certifying

Authority are asked to oversee the installation of this telephone

system.




RBCXMMENDATION 33




There is in existence at Barnsley FC a public address system.

However, a survey of the system has identified the requirement for

 six additional speakers, all of which would be utilised to address

 spectators    waiting    to    gain   admission   to   the   ground.      It   is

 recamended at the speakers be positioned as follows



 a)Adjacent to    Gate 12.

 b)     Adjacent to   Gate9.

 c)     Adjacent to   Gate8 .

 d)     Adjacent to   Gate5.

 e)     Adjacent to   Gate3.

 f)     Adjacent to   Gate2.



 The plan at (5)      shows the existing system and the proposed site

 for new loud speakers.           The Certifying Authority are          asked to

 oversee the installation of any public address system to ensure

 that     it   complies   with    this   recommendation       and   that   it   is
effective.     In so doing, the Certifying Authority will wish to pay

regard,    also, to paragraph 194              (iii) of the Guide to Safety at

Sports Grounds - 'The Green Guide' -                  which lists the requirements

of an effective public address system.



It is noted that the club have equipped the public address system

with the facility to precede any messages with a.loud signal.                        The

police     have     asked   the   club    to    ensure      that   this   facility    is

advertised in the club's programmes.



RBCOMEHDATION 34



There is no illuminated advertising/score board at Barnsley PC.



 A    series   of    hand     signals    for    use    by   police   officers   in    an

 emergency is presently being formulated, nationally, by a working

 group of the Association of Chief Police Officers.                        The results

 are awaited.



 RBCCMMEHDATION 35




 The South Yorkshire Police maintain regular liaison with the South

 Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service and’the South Yorkshire

 Fire Service concerning crc**d safety at Barnsley PC s stadium.

 At    a   force     level,    the   Chief      Superintendent       (Operations)     has

 regular meetings with senior officers fran the other services.                        At

 a local level the police match ccrrmander meets with the ambulance

 liaison officer at football matches tield at Barnsley FC.
RECOMMENDATION 36



In advance of each natch at Barnsley's ground, the South Yorkshire

Police forward to the South Yorkshire Fire and Ambulance Services

full details about the forthcoming event.



RECOMMENDATION 37



Contingency plans for the arrival of emergency police, fire and

ambulance vehicles at Barnsley's ground         have been reviewed at a

meeting held at Barnsley Police Station on the 14 August 1989,

with the other emergency services.          The contingency plan prepared

as a result of that meeting forms part of the police operational

order.

The Certifying Authority will wish to consider whether the club

have taken adequate account of paragraph 29(v) of the Guide to

Safety   at   Sports   Grounds   -   'The   Green    Guide'    -   which   tasks

management    with     the   responsibility    for     preparing      emergency

contingency    plans    in   consultation     with    the     three   emergency

services.



RECOMMENDATION 38



The police operatioral order for any event held at Barnsley PC's

ground contains information, for officers deployed to entrances to

the ground, as to the contingency plans for the arrival of the

emergency services.
RECOMMENDATION 39 - 43



These recamendations     concern   First      Aid   and Medical   facilities

and, as such, are outside any police remit-             Under Recamendation

41, however, the police control at Barnsley PC's ground is told

the   identity and whereabouts     of   the    'club'    doctor before each

match.   He is readily contactable.
              ACTION TAKEN BY

        THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

IN RESPECT OF ROTHERHAM UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB

     FOLLOWING THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF

            THE INTERIM REPORT

                     OF

            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR
    This document is a written agreement between South Yorkshire Police (hereafter

    referred to as ’The Police') and Rotherham United Football Club (hereafter

    referred to as 'The Club').



    This agreement signed on behalf of both parties is created in pursuance of

    recommendation four of the Interim Report of the Inquiry held by The Rt Hon

    Lord Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster of 15 April 1989.




    The agreement between The Police and The Club is as follows




    Maximum Capacities for Terraces

^The     Club will be responsible for limiting the number of spectators entering

     each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity figure assessed in

     accordance with recommendation two of the Interim Report.




     The Club will do this by means of the computerised system which records the

     number of persons passing through each turnstile.



     The Club will inform the police control room when a particular pen or area is

     approaching capacity.   The Club will be responsible for closing off further

^     access to a pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.     The

      Police accept The Club may-on occasions have difficulties in this regard,

      therefore, The Police will provide assistance if necessary.




      The Police accept that denial of access to any part of the ground may create

      public order problems in respect of spectators so excluded and The Police will

      prepare contingency plans to deal with such situations.




      Filling and Monitoring Terraces

      The Club will provide on the perimeter track a steward for each pen or

      terraced area during such times that there are spectators in that pen or
terraced area.    The sole duty of these stewards, who will be in addition to

any other stewards employed by The Club, will be to check crowd conditions in

the pen or terraced area to which they are assigned for possible overcrowding

or distress.     The Club will provide The Police with a plan of the ground

showing where the stewards with this responsibility will be situated.




The Police will provide in respect of each gate in the perimeter fence (or

group of gates if they are close together) police officers authorised to * •

decide whether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve

overcrowding.




All police officers deployed at perimeter gates which will be kept fully open

at all times when spectators are on the terraces, will be authorised as above.

Each will be in possession of a police radio in direct contact with police

ground control and will be identifiable by a distinctive coloured tabard.




The stewards checking the crowd for overcrowding or distress will not be

issued with police radios but the police officers on the gates and perimeter

track will communicate to police ground control any relevant matter brought to

their attention by these stewards.


                            ✓
Cutting Equipment

The Club will provide and make readily available suitable and sufficient

cutting equipment to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release

numbers of spectators if necessary.     This cutting equipment will be operated

by employees of The Club who will be trained in its use.     The use of such

equipment will be at the discretion of the nominated senior police officer who

will be the officer in charge of policing the event.
Liaison

Before each match both parties to this agreement will liaise in respect of the

following matters

        i)   the anticipated number of spectators expected having regard

             to the separate supporter groups;




       ii)   the method of crowd segregation (if any) intended   to be used;




      iii)   any information in relation to crowd problems;




^      iv)   the number and location of turnstiles to be made available

             to each group;




        v)   an estimation of the time it will take each group to pass

              through the turnstiles;




       vi)   where tickets are used, that the information on those tickets

              corresponds with the planned arrangements for admitting

              spectators to the ground.




    Postponement of kick-off is at the discretion of the police officer in command

    at the ground.   It is therefore essential The Club provide a telephone link

    between the referee's room and the police control room.




    The Police have prepared contingency plans for the event of emergency services

    being called to the ground.   These include routes of access, rendezvous

    points, accessibility within the ground and routes of egress.   The Police will

    liaise with The Club concerning these arrangements whenever these plans are

    amended or as otherwise appropriate.
      The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police has nominated his Deputy,

      Mr Peter Hayes QPM LLB MA, as the Chief Officer with responsibility for

      liaison with the management of each football club and local authority

      concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.




      Any variation of this agreement in respect of a particular match will be

      agreed by the parties in advance in writing.




      SIGNED ..                       on behalf of Rotherham United Football Club


> •
      SIGNED                          on behalf of South Yorkshire Police



      DATE
RECOMMENDATION 1


It is noted by the police that the existing Safety Certificate for

Rotherham      United    Football    Club     was    issued    in   1984    by    the    South

Yorkshire County Council.           Capacity figures for the various sections of

the   ground    are     therefore    out     of   date.      New capacities       have    been

calculated and the certificate requires updating.



RBCCWEBDftTION 2



The    calculation           for    maximum        capacities,      proposed       by     this

recarmendation, has          been   followed       in determining a figure          for each

terraced area at Rotherham United's ground.                  The maximum capacities are

as follows:-



Tivoli End                                           5,129

Railway End                                         4,508

South West Corner                                     394

Grandstand Terrace                                  2,298




RBOOMEUDftTICW 3



 (a) An electronic counting mechanism is in place at Rotherham United's

      ground    whereby       the   number    of    spectators      entering      each   self-

      contained area is contemporaneously recorded.



      The club has undertaken              (see written agreement)         to monitor this

      counter and to limit the number of spectators entering any self-

      contained       area    to    the    maximum     capacity     figure       assessed   in

      accordance with Reccmrendation 2 above.
(b) The club will achieve this by closing off the relevant turnstiles

   to prevent further access to such an area when its maximum capacity

    is about to be reached.     The police have agreed to assist the club

    in this regard, if requested so to do. It is considered that the

    club would be better able to undertake this task if the stewards

   with the      responsibility for closing off access v*ere issued with

    radios providing direct contact with the club control rocsn.             The

    police have asked the club to consider this suggestion.



RECOMMENDATION 4



A written agreement, setting out their respective responsibilities for

crowd   safety     and   control,   has   been   approved   and     signed    by

representatives of South Yorkshire Police and Rotherham United PC.             A

copy of that agreement is attached at document (6 ) .



RECOMMENDATION 5



At each match at Rotherham United's ground there are four stewards (two

to the Tivoli end,       and one at the Railway end and in front of the

Grandstand respectively) whose sole duty is to' check crowd conditions

in those areas for possible overcrowding or distress.             The stewards

regularly perform the same duties, as do the police officers authorised

under Recommendation 9 below.       The parties are therefore familiar to

each other and the stewards have ready access to these police officers

who each have a radio giving them contact with the police control roan.
RECOMMENDATION 6


All   police    officers      and   stewards        (not    just    those    authorised       under

Recommendations       5   and    9)    are     fully       briefed    with    regard     to     the

reccar.ition of       crowd   densities       ana    to     the    recognition   of    signs     of

distress.       All   officers      and   stewards         have   been issued,    as an aide

nemoire, with a laminated card which identifies the signs of distress.




The club has been asked to issue each steward with a copy of written

instructions which detail their du&es.Th& chief stevHEds ctre each briefec

bv a police inspector, before each match, on the responsibilities of

stewards    for   crcwd    safety      and    control       and their duties       in case of

emergency evacuation.           The chief steward is expected to brief the other

stewards.



Pclice officers        are briefed by a Senior police officer before each

match on their complementary responsibilities and duties.



The     South   Yorkshire       Police       are    presently       preparing    visual       aids,

 designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise different crowd

 densities,     to recocnise signs of distress, and to understand a little

 more    about crowd dynamics.            The      aids will       consist of    a) Albums of

 pnotograDhs depicting the various sections of Rotherham United's ground

 with different numbers of spectators therein, and b) A video tape film

 which    highlights       crowd      densities,       distress       and    dynamics.         When

 completed these photographs and film will be shown to the Safety of

 Sports Ground Advisory Group.




 The Certifying Authority are asked to ensure that the club undertakes

 and continues to undertake its own reponsibilities for staff training
as set out in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds - 'The Green Guide'

- paras, 26, 177, 195 and Annex B to the Guide.



RECOMMENDATION 7



All   oateways   in radial or perimeter fences at Rotherham United are

painted yellow, which is a different colour frcm the rest of the fence.

Each is clearly identified by a sign which proclaims 'Emergency Exit1.



RECOMMENDATION 8



All perimeter gates to the pitch,          at Rotherham United's ground,           are

keDt fully ooen at any time when spectators are on the terraces.




RECOMMENDATION 9



There is, in respect of each gateway in the perimeter fences (or group

of gates where these are close together and where only a small number

of sDectators are occupying the terrace behind these gates), at least

one   police officer whose sole duty,        whenever spectators are on the

terraces, is to decide whether or not to allow spectators through that

gateway   to     relieve   overcrowding.    Such   police   officers    are   to    be

 identified by means of a lime green tabard.        The officer is familiar to

 all stewards in that area        (see Recommendation 5 above),        is known by

 them to be authorised to relieve overcrowding,             and is able to make

 radio contact with the Police Control Roan.




 RECOMMENDATION 10



 A set of rretal catting equipment has been provided by Rotherham United
     FC.     It has been agreed that, in case of need, an                        employee of the

club    trained       in    its    use will    be     readily     available      to operate     the

ecuicment.        An ODerative           is deDloved to Railway end of                 the ground

immediately adjacent to the police control rccm.                          Ke is readily to hand

should the need arise.

RECOMMENDATIONS 11 AND 12



It is understood that Rotherham Borough Council representatives on the

Safety of Sports Ground Advisory Group have carried out an inspection

of all crush barriers.                  The capacity for the terrace in front of the

main       grandstand        has     been    reduced         to   its    present      figure    (See

Recommendation 2) as a result of this inspection.




RECOMMENDATIONS 13 - 17



Safety      Certification          is    obviously       a    matter     for   Rcthernam   Borough

Council. The Council are reminded, however, that the Safety Certificate

issued in 1984 by South Yorkshire County Council, does need updating at

a very early stage.



In     respect    of       Recommendation     17,     the      South Yorkshire        Police   await

notification          of    the    constitution     of       the Advisory Group referred to

 therein.        It    is    the    police    view,      however,       that   this   Group should

supplement, and not replace, the existing Officer Working Group.



 RECOMMENDATIONS 18 AND 19



 It is understood that each turnstile has been inspected, its potential

 rate of flow measured and, even at a rate of only 500 per hour, the
maximum capacities of each viewing area can be admitted via the

respective turnstiles in less than one hour.



RECOMMENDATION 20



(See Recommendation 3b).             When the capacity of any viewing area

is   10%     below   the    maximum    permitted,     an   alarm sounds      at   the

electronic      monitor      in     the     Club    Secretary's    office.        The

secretary, or his agent, will irrmediately pass a message to the

steward at the relevant bank of turnstiles.                 The turnstiles will

be closed off and the police informed by telephone or personal

messenger to police control.                The club are encouraged to acquire

a    radio    system   to    enable    immediate     contact   with   all    parties

should capacities be about to be reached.

RECOMMENDATION 21



Rcuherham United FC currently have three CC TV cameras installed

around the ground.          A survey of the installation was carried out

by a    trained      police CC      TV operator       (no expert    knowledge      is

professed) and his report is attached at document (3).



For your further information the General Purposes Coimuttee of

the Association c£ Chief Ftolioe Officers has convened a working group

to   consider,       nationally,      the   use    of CC TV to promote       public

safety at football grounds.               The group anticipate that it may be

possible to provide a             'package' of equipment for use as a test

for a cairoon minimum standard of performance.                    They will report

back in due course.
 RECOMMENDATION 22



 Signposting for spectators both inside and outside the ground has been

 reviewed       by   the    Rotherham      Borough      Council       Safety of     Sports      Grounds

 Advisory Group.           The police are satisnec with the signpostina.                          Worthy

 Oi   particular mention            is the colour cooing of sions — red for home

 supporters, blue for away supporters — this is eye-catching, simple and

 clear.



RECOMMENDATIONS 23 AND 24



The     South     Yorkshire    Police       have       had    liaison    with the        club   on      the

question        of   ticketed matches.             The       police     are   satisfied     with        the

arrangements         and    will    ensure       that        the   information      on    any     ticket

corresponds with their plans for aamittmc spectators to the ground.



RECOMMENDATION 25



There has been,tc ci?re, no pre match entertainment at Rotherham United

PC apart        from records        played       over   the public        address     svstem.        The

police     have      no    knowledge       of    any    liaison       between   the      club     and    a

recognised supporters club.



RECOMMENDATION 26



The   South Yorkshire Police               Chief Constable nominated his Deputy,                        Mr

Peter     Hayes,     QPM,    LLB,    MA,    to    liaise       with    the management        of    each

football club and local authority concerned in respect of the safety

and control of crowds.             Mr Hayes has met with Directors and Secretaries

of all five football league clubs in the county, including Mr Darnillof

Rotherham United PC, on 24 August 1989.                       He met with representatives of

the four relevant local authorities, including .Messrs Crosby and Daley
of    Rotherham Borough Council      on 18 September   1989.       A copy of the

minutes of that meeting are attached at document (7).



RECOMMENDATION 27



Both the Operational Order and the pre match briefing of all officers

on duty at each match at Rotherham United PC alert officers to the

dangers    of   overcrowding,   and if any should be       detected,      of     taking

immediate and appropriate steps to remedy it.



The       proposed     training by   way   of   photographs      ana     videc     (see

Reccrrmendation   6   above) will further emphasise these messages.



RECOMMENDATION 28



The     operational    planning for each match    at Rotherham         United    FC   is

intended to enable the police to cope with forseeable patterns in the

arrival at, and departure frcm, any match by spectators.



The      following    scenarios are each   catered   for    by    way     of     police

contingency plans .at Rotherham United FC:-



a) All ticket, or otherwise restricted, matches.

b) Early arrival of spectators.

c) Unexpected and joint arrival of large numbers of spectators.

d) Individual section of ground approaching capacity.

e) Whole ground approaching capacity.

f ) Late arrival of spectators.

g) Emergency opening of external gates (or forcing of external gates),

      thereby allowing an influx of spectators.
h)   Early departure of spectators frcm ground.

i)   Emergency evacuation



The police retain a reserve of officers at the ground to enable rapid

deployment   to   any difficulty which may arise     inside   or outside   the

ground.



The certifying authority may, however, wish to satisfy themselves that

the club have made contingency plans to deal with a situation where the

available entrances might prove insufficient to stop unduly large crowds

gathering outside the ground.        Such contingency plans are required by

paragraph    46 of   the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds      -   'The Green

Guide'.



RBCX>MENDATION 29



The police officer in ccnmand at Rotherham United PC is aware of the

option to delay kick-off, and discusses this matter, before each game,

with match officials.



To enable instant contact with the match referee when considering kick-

off delay,    the police request that the club install a telephone link

between   the police    control   room and the referee's room.      (See also

Reconmendat ion 32 belcw).
RECOMMENDATION 30



There is available in the police control roan at Rotherham United the

results of all closed circuit television monitoring outside and inside

the ground.



The ccmputerisBd turnstile counting system currently terminates in the

Secretary’'s office at Rotherham United.     A link, frcm this system, to

the police control rocm, is sought.     The approximate cost of installing

such a link would be £700.


Police officers who perform duty in the control rocm are skilled in the

use and interpretation of the results of CC TV filming.       Officers will

attend a CC TV Operator's Course run by the Greater Manchester Police.




 RECOMMENDATION 31



 There are sufficient operators employed in the police control room

 to   deal   with   radio communications.   New police canmunications

 equipment has been commissioned, and is about to be installed at

 Rotherham United's ground.



The equipment consists of a two-bay radio set with a spare station

 in case     of radio failure on the primary station.     It also has

 battery back-up in case of power failure.     This system also gives

 operators in the control roan priority over, and the capacity to

 override, others using the same channel.



The police ground cciTtrancer has the cpticn of utilising, wher. he
feels    it necessary,        an additional            radio channel which provides

exclusive        communication              between        himself      and     other     sector

carrmanders.        This     executive            channel    would      be     utilised   in   an

emergency when the primary channel may become overcrowded.



The     police    control    rocm          at     Rotherham United           PC is    adequately

sound-proofed.        The club propose to extend the police control roam

and this proposal is welcomed by the South Yorkshire Police.



RECOMMENDATION 32



A survev of Rotherham United's ground has identified fifteen key

points where        the    police          would wish to see dedicated telephone

points to enable direct communication with the police control rocm



Attached, at document (4) , is a plan showing the location of tncse

points, tcaether with an equipment specification prepared by tne

South Yorkshire Police Communications Department.                               The Certifying

Authority are asked to oversee the installation of this telephone

system.


                                      «




 RECOMMENDATION 33



 There    is     in existence at                Rotherham United PC a public address

 system.       The police have carried out a survey of this system and

 have     identified       the    requirements             for    at   least    two   additional

 speakers,       both of which could be utilised to address spectators

 awaiting        admission       to       the    ground.         The   police    recommend     one

 additional speaker to address spectators in Masbrough Street and
one   additional    speaker to address         spectators     in MilLrccr Lane.

(See plan attached at document (5).



 The Certifying Authority are asked tc oversee the installation of

an acecuate public address system tc ensure that it complies with

this recommendation and that it is effective.                    In so doing, the

Certifying Authority will wish to pay regard, also, tc paragraph

194    (iii) of the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds - 'The Green

Guide'    -    which lists    the requirements of an effective public

address system.



The police have asked the club to install the facility to precede

P.A. messages with a loud signal and, when installed, tc advertise

this facility in the club's programmes.



RECOMMENDATION 34

There     is   nc   illuminated      advertising score       beard   at   Rotherham

United's ground.



A     series   of   hand   signals    for    use   by   police    officers   in   an

emeraencv is presentlv being formulated, nationally, by a worxing

group of the Association of Chief Police Ofricers.                    The results

are awaited.



RBCCWENDATION 35



The South Yorkshire Police maintain regular liaison with the South

Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service and the South Yorkshire

Fire     Service     concerning      crowd   safety     at   Rotherham     United's

football ground.
At   a   force    level,       the    Chief   Superintendent         (Operations) has

regular meetings with senior officers frcm ether services.                           At a

local level the police match ccntrar.der meets with the ambulance

liaison officer at mcst if not every match.                  The fire service have

also had a liaison officer at at least one match this season where

he met with the police match commander.



RECOMMENDATION 36



In advance of each match at Rotherham United's ground, the South

Yorkshire Police forward tc the Scuth Yorkshire Fire and Ambulance

Services full details about the forthcoming event.



RECCM4ENDATION 37



Contingency plans        for the arrival cf emergency police,                 fire and

ambulance     vehicles      at       Rotherham    United's     ground,       have    been

reviewed and prepared.               The contingency plan forms part of the

police operational order.



The Certifying Authority will wish to consider whether the club

have taken adequate account of paragraph 29(v) of the Guide to

Safety   at   Sports     Grounds       -   'The   Green    Guide 1    -   which     tasks

management       with    the     responsibility      for     preparing       emergency

contingency      plans     in    consultation      with     the      three   emergency

services.
RECOMMENDATION 38



The police ocera-ional order fcr any event held at Rotherham United's

ground ccntairS information, for officers ceploved to entrances to the

ground, as to the contingency plans fcr the arrival of the emergency

services.



RECOMMENDATIONS 39 - 43



These recommendations concern First Aid and Medical facilities and, as

such, are outside any police remit.   Under Recommendation 41, however,

the police control at Rotherham. United's ground is told the icentitv

and whereabouts of the 'club' doctor before each match.   He is readilv

contactable.
           ACTION TAKEN BY

     THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

RESPECT OF DONCASTER ROVERS FOOTBALL CLUB

   FOLLOWING THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF

          THE INTERIM REPORT

                  OF

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR
 This document is a written agreement between South Yorkshire Police (hereafter

 referred to as 'The     Police’)     and Doncaster Rovers     Football      Club (hereafter

 referred to as   'The   Club').




 This agreement signed on behalf of both parties is created in pursuance of

 recommendation four     of the Interim Report of the Inquiry held by     The Rt Hon

 Lord Justice Taylor     into the     Hillsborough      Stadium     Disaster       of        15April 1989




 The agreement between The Police and The Club is as follows




 Maximum Capacities for Terraces

^ ^ h e Club will be responsible for limiting the number of spectators entering

 each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity figure assessed in

 accordance with recommendation two of the Interim Report.




 The Club will do this by means of a ticketing arrangement which will record

 the number of persons passing through each turnstile.       Each of the four banks

 of turnstiles will be monitored by a steward aware of the maximum capacities

 for each of the individual areas.




^^ie Club will inform the police control room when a particular pen or area is

 approaching capacity.     The Ciub will be responsible for closing off further

 access to a pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.             The

 Police accept The Club may on occasions have difficulties in this regard,

 therefore. The Police will provide assistance if necessary.




 The Police accept that denial of access to any part of the ground may create

 public order problems in respect of spectators so excluded and The Police will

 prepare contingency plans to deal with such situations.
Filling and Monitoring Terraces

The Club will provide on the perimeter track a steward for each pen or

terraced area during such times that there are spectators in that pen or

terraced area.    The sole duty of these stewards, who will be in addition to

any other stewards employed by The Club, will be to check crowd conditions in

the pen or terraced area to which they are assigned for possible overcrowding

or distress.     The Club will provide The Police with a plan of the ground

showing where the stewards with this responsibility will be situated.




The Police will provide in respect of each gate in the perimeter fence (or

group of gates if they are close together) police officers authorised to

decide whether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve

overcrowding.




All police officers deployed at perimeter gates which will be kept fully open

at all times when spectators are on the terraces, will be authorised as above.

Each will be in possession of a police radio in direct contact with police

ground control and will be identifiable by a distinctive coloured tabard.




The stewards checking the crowd for overcrowding or distress will not be

issued with police radios but the police officers on the gates and perimeter

track will communicate to police ground control any relevant matter brought to

their attention by these stewards.




Cutting Eouipment

The Club will provide and make readily available suitable and sufficient

cutting equipment to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release

numbers of spectators if necessary.     This cutting equipment will be operated

by employees of The Club who will be trained in its use.     The use of such

equipment will be at the discretion of the nominated senior police officer who

will be the officer in charge of policing the event.
Before each match both parties to this agreement will liaise in respect of the

following matters:-

       i)    the anticipated number of spectators expected having regard

             to the separate supporter groups;




      ii)    the method of crowd segregation (if any) intended to be used;




     iii)    any information in relation to crowd problems;




       iv)   -the number and location of turnstiles to be made available

^            to   each group;



        v)   an estimation of the time it will take each group    to pass

              through the turnstiles;




       vi)    where tickets are used, that the information on those tickets

              corresponds with the planned arrangements for admitting

              spectators to the ground.




^Postponement     of kick-off is at the discretion of the police officer in command

 at the ground.       It is therefore essential The Club provide a telephone link

 between the referee's room and the police control room.




    The Police have prepared contingency plans for the event of emergency services

    being called to the ground.    These include routes of access, rendezvous

    points, accessibility within the ground and routes of egress.    The Police will

    liaise with The Club concerning these arrangements whenever these plans are

    amended or as otherwise appropriate.
The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police has nominated his Deputy.

Mr Peter Hayes QPM LLB MA, as the Chief Officer with responsibility for

liaison with the management of each football club and local authority

concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.




Any variation of this agreement in respect of a particular match will be

agreed by the parties in advance in writing.




SIGNED                            on behalf of Doncaster Rovers Football Club




 SIGNED                           on behalf of South Yorkshire Police



          \h>
 DATE
KBOOM>ffiKDftTICN 1


Doncaster Rovers Football Club has several viewing terraces at its ground

which are each self-contained with fixed capacities.     The existing safety

certificate does not, at this time, reflect the maximum capacities.

RBCXMflBIDftTICN 2



The calculation for maximum capacities, proposed by this reccnmendation, has

been followed in determining a figure for each self-contained terraced area

as follows:-

Main Stand Terrace         2125       Rossington End Terrace    1700

Popular Stand Terrace      1700       Town End Terrace           510

KBOCMMENEftTICN 3



 (a) There are currently two systems of counting spectators into the various

     sections of Doncaster Rovers' ground.   At the Rossington Road End (the

     visitors end) a physical counting system exists whereby the number of

     spectators entering that section is contemporaneously recorded by a

     steward.    This system is experimental and may replace the system that

     pertains throughout the remainder of the ground whereby spectators are

      issued with a ticket upon entering an individual turnstile.      The number

      of tickets issued is collated by a steward from all the turnstiles at

      intervals to monitor ths total number of spectators entering any

      particular section   of the ground.

      (When the club decide on a standard counting method, the written

      agreement - document (6 ) will be amended to reflect this).   In any event,

      the club has undertaken to limit the nunber of spectators entering any

      self-contained area to ths maximum capacity figure assessed in accordance

      with Recormendation 2 above.
b) The    club   will    achieve   this   by    the    steward,   who    is   counting

   spectators into the ground, causing the relevant turnstiles to be

   closed thereby preventing further access to such an area when its

   maximum capacity is about to be reached.             The police have agreed to

   assist the club in this regard,             if requested so to do.         The club

   will inform the police by means of the club radio system when the

   turnstiles are tc      be closed.




RBOOMENDftTICW 4



A written agreement, setting out their respective responsibilities for

crowd     safety   and     control,    has      been   approved    and    signed    by

representatives of South Yorkshire Police and Doncaster Rovers PC.                   A

copy of that agreement is attached at document

RBOOMElPftTION 5



At each match at Doncaster Rovers ground there are eight stewards (four

to the Rossington End Terrace, two to the Popular Stand Terrace and one

each to the Main Stand Terrace and Tcwn End Terrace respectively) whose

sole duty is to check crcwd conditions in those areas for possible

overcrowding or distress.          The    stewards     regularly perform the same

duties,    as do the police officers authorised under Recarmendation 9

below.     The parties are therefore            familiar to each other,        and the

stewards have ready access to these police officers who each have a

radio giving them contact with the police control room.                   Four of the

stewards, being senior stewards, are also equipped with a club radio

giving them direct ccmnunication with the club control roan and the

police control roan.
KBCXSMEHDATICH       6




All    police   officers       and        stewards     (not    just those authorised        under

Reccmrendat ions         5   and     9)    are   fully        briefed   with    regard     to    the

recognition     of       crowd densities         and    to    the   recognition of       signs of

distress.       All      officers and         stewards have been issued,            as an aide

nemoire, with a laminated card which identifies the signs of distress.



Stewards are each issued with a copy of written instructions, by the

club, which detail their duties.                     The chief stewards axe each briefed

by a police inspector, before each match, on the responsibilities of

stewards    for crowd safety and control                      and their duties       in case of

energency evacuation.              The chief steward is expected to brief the other

stewards.



Police    officers axe briefed by a Senior police officer before each

match on their canplementary responsibilities and duties.



The    South    Yorkshire          Police     are presently         preparing     visual        aids,

designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise different crcwd

densities, to recognise signs of distress, and to understand a little

more    about   crowd dynamics.              Ite aids will consist of a)              Albums of

photographs depicting the various sections of Doncaster                           Rovers    ground

with different numbers of spectators therein, and b) A video tape film

which     highlights         crowd    densities,         distress       and    dynamics.         When

completed these photographs and film will be shown to the Safety of

Sports Ground Advisory Group.
The Certifying Authority are asked to ensure that the club undertakes

and continues to undertake its own reponsibilities for staff training

as set out in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds - 'The Green Guide'

- paras, 26, 177, 195 and Annex B to the Guide.



RB0CM4EH»TI0N 7



All gateways in radial or perimeter fences at Doncaster Rovers PC are

painted white which is a different colour fran the rest of the fence.

Each is clearly identified by a sign which proclaims 'Emergency Exit'.




KECCM4ENDATI0N 8



All perineter fence gates to the pitch are kept fully open during the

period when spectators are on the terraces.



 RECX>MENDftTiaN 9



 There is, in respect of each gateway in the perimeter fence, or group

 of gates   where they are close together and where there is only a small

 number of spectators occupying the terrace behind the gates, at least

 one police officer^ whose sole duty, whenever spectators are on the

 terraces, is to decide whether or not to allow spectators through the

 gateway    to   relieve   overcrowding.   Such police   officers    are   to be

 identified by means of a lime green tabard.      The officer is familiar to

 all stewards in that area        (see Recommendation 5 above),     is known by

 them to be authorised        to relieve overcrowding, and is able to make
     radio contact with the police control roan.



rbcomhoation        10




Metal cutting equipment has been provided by Doncaster Rovers PC.                  It

has been agreed that, in case of need, employees of the club trained in

its    use   will   be   readily available    to    operate   the   equipment.     An

operative is deployed to the Rossington Road End of the ground and is

in    radio contact,     via the   club's radio system, with both the club

safety officer and the police control roan.



KBOOM<EHDBTICmS 11 AND 12



It is understood that Doncaster Borough Council representatives on the

Safety of Sports Ground Advisory Group have carried out an inspection

of all crush barriers.



RBOCMMEMDATIONS 13 - 17



Safety       Certification   is   obviously   a    matter   for   Doncaster   Borough

Council.       In respect of Recommendation 17, the South Yorkshire Police

await notification of the constitution of the Advisory Group.                    It is

the Police view, however, that this group should supplement, and not

 replace, the existing Officer Working Group.
RECX*MENDAnCNS 18 AND 19



It is understood that each turnstile has been inspected and its

potential rate of flow measured and that the maximum capacities

of   each   viewing   area   can be   admitted via      the    representative

turnstiles in less than one hour.



RECOMElOftTION 20



(See Recommendation 3b above).        When the capacity of any viewing

area is about to be reached,          the club have an arrangement to

close   down   the    relevant   turnstiles   that   service    that   viewing

area.   The Police will be informed at this time by club radio or

by telephone to police control.



RBOCMMEUDftTION 21



Doncaster Rovers PC currently have two CC TV cameras installed at

the ground.      A survey of the installation was carried out by a

trained police CC TV operator( no expert knowledge is professed),

and his report is attached at document          (3) .



Fbr your further information the General Purposes Ccrmittee of

the Association pf Chief Etoliae QEfioershas convened a working group

to   consider,   nationally,     the use   of   CC TV to pranote public

safety at football grounds.         The group anticipate that it may be

possible to provide a        'package' of equipment for use as a test

for a cannon minimum standard of performance.             They will report
back in due course.



RBCCM4ENDRTI0N 22



Signposting for spectators both inside and outside the ground has

been reviewed by the Doncaster            Borough Council Safety of Sports

Grounds   Advisory     Group.      The    police   are   satisfied with      the

signposting.



KBOOmENDATICmS 23 AND 24



The South Yorkshire Police have had liaison with the club on the

quest ion of ticketed matches.           The police are satisfied with the

arrangements and will ensure that the information on any ticket

corresponds     with   their     plans    for admitting   spectators to      the

ground.



RBCXM4Qg»TI0N 25



At Doncaster Rovers PC there is no pre match entertainment.                  The

police have no knowledge of any discussions between the club and

 a recognised supporters club on this matter.



  RBOC*MEM»TION 26



 The South Yorkshire Police Chief Constable nominated his Deputy,

 Mr Peter Hayes, QPM, LLB, MA, to liaise with the management of

 each football club and local authority concerned in respect of

 the   safety   and    control    of     crowds.   Mr    Hayes   has   met   with
Directors and Secretaries of all five football league clubs in

the county,   including Mr .Chappell end Mrs         Oldale of Doncaster

Rovers PC, on 24 August 1989.       He net with representatives of the

four   relevant   local    authorities,      including Messrs     Paxton   and

Harvey of Doncaster Borough Council on 18 September 1989.             A copy

of the minutes of that meeting are attached at document                .



RECXJM aPftTION 27



Both the Operational Order and the pre match briefing of all

officers   on duty    at   each match at Doncaster Rovers           PC alert

officers to the dangers of overcrowding, and if any should be

detected, of taking irmediate and appropriate steps to remedy it.



The    proposed   training   by   way   of    photographs   and   video    (see

Recaimendation 6 above) will further emphasise these messages.



 RE0CM4ENDflTI0N 28



 The operational planning for each match at Doncaster Rovers PC is

 intended to enable the police to cope with forseeable patterns in

 the arrival at, and departure from, any match by spectators.



 The following scenarios are each catered for by way of police

 contingency plans at Doncaster Rovers PC:—



 a) All ticket, or otherwise restricted, matches.

 b) Early arrival of spectators.
c) Unexpected and joint arrival of large numbers of spectators.

d) Individual section of ground approaching capacity.

e) Whole ground approaching capacity.

f) Late arrival of spectators.

g) Hnergency opening of external gates           (or forcing of external

   gates), thereby allowing an influx of spectators.

h) Early departure of spectators fran ground.

i) Emergency evacuation.



The police retain a reserve of         officers at the groundto enable

rapid deployment     to    any difficulty which may       arise   inside or

outside the ground.



The certifying authority may, however, wish to satisfy themselves

that   the   club   have   made   contingency    plans   to   deal   with   a

situation where the available entrances might prove insufficient

to stop unduly large crowds gathering outside the ground.              Such

contingency plans are required        by paragraph 46 of the Guide to

Safety at Sports Grounds - 'The Green Guide'.



REOQWEUDftTION 29



The police officer in catmand at Doncaster Rovers PC is aware of

the option to delay kick-off, and discusses this matter, before

each game, with the match officials.            To enable instant contact

with the match referee when considering kick-off delay, the club

have installed a direct telephone link between the police control

room and the referee's room.
 RBDOWENDATION 30



 There is available in the police control roan at Doncaster Rovers

 FC,    the    results       of    all   closed     circuit      television monitoring

 outside and inside the ground. The stewards also pass, by means

 of    club    radio,     regular        updates    on    the    numbers of      spectators

 entering the          ground.      Police   officers who perform duty in the

 control roan are skilled in the use and interpretation of the

 results       of    CC   TV      filming,   and    are    due     to   attend   a   CC   TV

 operators course which is run by the Greater Manchester Police.




KEXXMMBPaTION 31



There are sufficient operators employed in the police control roan

to    deal    with radio carmunications.                  New police ccrmunications

equipment has been carmissioned, and is about to be installed at

Doncaster Rovers's ground.



The equipment consists of a two-bay radio set with a spare station

in case       of radio failure on the primary station.                       It also has

battery back-up in case of pcwer failure.                        This system also gives

operators in the control room priority over, and the capacity to

override, others using the same channel.



The police ground conmander has the option of utilising, when he

feels    it necessary,            an additional radio channel which provides

exclusive           catmunication         between    himself        and    other     sector

Germanders.           This     executive     channel       would    be    utilised   in an

 emergency when the primary channel may becctne overcrowded.
The    police       control   room     at   Doncaster     Rovers   PC    is adequately

sound-proof.



RBOOM BCftTION 32



A   survey     of    Doncaster       Rovers's    ground   has   identified       six key

points where         the   police would wish to see dedicated telephone

points    to    enable direct         carmunication with        the     police   control

room.



Attached, at document (4) , is a plan shewing the location of those

points, together with an equipment specification prepared by the

South Yorkshire Police Ccmuunications Department.                       The Certifying

Authority are asked to oversee its installation.



EBOGMME1PATION 33



There    is in existence at            Doncaster Rovers PC a public address

system of six loud speakers.                    The police survey of the system

identifies the need for at least four additional speakers in the

following locations:-



a) Popular Side/Town End C o m e r

b) Popular Side/Rossington End C o m e r

c) Between Gates 2 and 3 facing out of the ground towards the car

      park.

d) Between Gates 5 and           6   facing out of the ground towards the car

      park.
The    public      address    system      at    Doncaster       Rovers     ground    is    not

adequately       zoned.       There     is     no    facility to precede           important

messages with a loud signal.                 (Eventually,           w h e n this    facility     is

a v a i l a b l e , the club should be asked to advertise the fact in the cM)'s pcograrrrrn

Hie Certifying Authority are asked to oversee the installation of

an adequate public address system to ensure that it complies with

this reccninendation and that it is effective.                           In so doing, the

Certifying Authority will wish to pay regard, also, to paragraph

194    (iii) of the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds - 'The Green

Guide'     -    which     list    the    requirements          of   an   effective    public

address system.



RECCM^EMDATION 34

There is no illuminated advertising board at Doncaster Rovers.



A     series    of   hand     signals     for       use   by    police    officers    in    an

emergency is presently being forumulated, nationally, by a working

group of the Association of Chief Police Officers.                             The results

are awaited.


RECXmaCftTION 35

The South Yorkshire Police maintain regular liaison with the South

Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service and the South Yorkshire

Fire Service concerning crowd safety at Doncaster Rovers stadium.



At     a   force     level,      the    Chief       Superintendent       (Operations)      has

regular meetings with senior officers from the other services.                              At

a local level the police match commander has met with the local

ambulance liaison officer.



The attendance figures at Doncaster Rovers PC have not been
sufficient, so far this season, to warrant the attendance of an

ambulance.



REOOWIBNDftTION 36



In advance of each natch at D o t caster Rovers ground, the South

Yorkshire Police forward to the South Yorkshire Fire and Ambulance

Services full details about the forthcoming event.



RBOOMEMDBTICIl 37



Contingency plans for the arrival of emergency police, fire and

ambulance vehicles at Doncaster Rovers ground have been reviewed

and    prepared.        The   contingency     plan   forms part of the               police

operational order.



The Certifying Authority will wish to consider whether the club

have taken adequate account of paragraph 29(v) of the Guide to

Safety    at    Sports     Grounds     -    'The   Green       Guide'    -   which    tasks

management       with      the     responsibility        for     preparing      emergency

contingency        plans      in   consultation      with       the     three   emergency

 services.



 RBOCMMBPATICW 38



 Hie   police    operational        order   for    any   event        held at Doncaster

 Rovers's       ground contains information, for officers deployed to

 entrances      to the     ground,    as    to the   contingency plans           for the
arrival of the emergency services.



RBOttMENDftTION 39 - 43



These    reccrmendations   concern   First   Aid and Medical   facilities

and, as such, are outside any police remit.         Under Reccrmendation

41, however, the police control at Doncaster Rovers's ground is

told the identity and whereabouts of the 'club' doctor before each

match.    He is readily contactable.
